Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACTS
ADB
ADBL
ADS
AIMS
AKC
Annual Cluster Tracking Surveys (VITA)
Asian Development Bank
Agriculture Development Bank Ltd.
Agricultural Development Strategy (2015-2035)
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (IFAD - Cambodia)
Agricultural Knowledge Centres
ASDP
Agriculture Sector Development Project (IFAD)
B2B
BFI
BSF
Business to business
Bank and financial institution
Business Skills Facilitators (VITA)
CARD
Contribution to Agriculture and Rural Development project (EU)
CC
CEO
Climate Change
Chief Executive Officer
CEPD
Capacity enhancement and policy development facility (VITA)
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CI
COI
CSPE
DADO
Core Indicators (IFAD)
Core Outcome Indicators (IFAD)
Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation (IFAD)
District Agriculture Development Offices (discontinued)
DANIDA
Danish Agency for International Development
DCGF
DfID
DLSO
EIRR
EoI
EU
FAO
FI
Deposit Credit Guarantee Fund
UK Department for International Development
District Livestock Service Offices (discontinued)
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Expressions of Interest
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
Financial Institution
FINGOs
Financial non-governmental organizations
FY
GALS
GDP
GII
GIZ
GLOF
GON
HVAP
ICT
IFAD
IFI
Financial Year
Gender Action Learning System
Gross Domestic Production
Gender Inequality Index
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH
Glacial lake outburst flood
Government of Nepal
High Value Agriculture Project (IFAD)
Information and communication technology
International Fund for Agriculture Development
International financial institution
IFPRI
International Food Policy Research Institute
IRMF
IMF
ISFP
JICA
Integrated Risk Management Framework (IFAD)
International Monetary Fund
Improved Seed for Farmers Programme (IFAD) – also known as KUBK (see below)
Japan International Cooperation Agency
KFAED
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development
KMC
KUBK
LAPA
LPA
LPED
LSIP
M&E
Knowledge management and communications
Kisankalagi Unnat Biu-Bijan Karyakram project (IFAD) – also known as ISFP (above)
Local Adaptation Plan of Action
Lead Programme Agency (VITA)
Local and Provincial Economic Development project (GIZ)
Livestock Sector Innovation Programme (World Bank)
Monitoring and evaluation
MAPS
Medicinal and aromatic plant products
MFI
MIS
Micro finance institution
Management information system
MoALD
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (feral)
MOF
Ministry of Finance (federal)
MoFAGA
Federal Affairs and General Administration (federal)
MOFE
Ministry of Forestry and Environment (federal)
MoLMAC
Ministry of Land Management, Agriculture and Cooperatives (state)
MOPE
MoU
Ministry of Population and Environment (discontinued, now MOFE)
Memorandum of understanding
MSMEs
Micro, small and medium sized enterprise
MSP
NAPA
NGO
NPC
NPL
NRB
ODA
OFID
PFI
PIM
Multi-stakeholder platforms
National Adaptation Programme of Action
Non-governmental organization
National Planning Commission (federal)
Non-performing loan
Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank)
Official Development Assistance
OPEC Fund for International Development
Partner financial institutions
Programme Implementation Manual
PMAMP
Prime Minister Agricultural Modernization Project (MoALD)
PMU
PO
PPI
Pro-
WEAI
RERP
Programme management unit
Producer organization
Poverty Probability Index
Project Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index
Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project (IFAD)
SAARC
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
SACCO
Savings and credit cooperatives
SDC
SDF
SDG
Swiss Development Cooperation
Supply chain Development Facility (VITA)
Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (IFAD)
SEM
SFD
Socio-economic mobilizer (VITA)
Saudi Fund for Development
SKBBL
Sana Kisan Bikas Laghubitta Bittyasanstha (formerly Smallholder Development Bank)
SLVC
SME
SO
SPC
SPS
ToR
ToT
Strengthening Smallholder Enterprises of Livestock Value Chains (Heifer)
Small and medium sized enterprise
Strategic Objectives
State Planning Commission (state)
Sanitary and phytosanitary
Terms of reference
Training of trainers
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
VHLSSC
Veterinary Hospital and Livestock Services Specialist Centres
VITA
WB
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture Programme (IFAD)
World Bank
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/34
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$74,265,000
N/A
$74,265,000
Overview: The Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) Programme is a scaling-up of the successful models
of inclusive rural growth now being adopted across the IFAD country programme that have delivered substantial impacts on net farm
incomes for small-scale producers (+37% versus control group), have been recognized for their strong performance in targeting
benefits to women and youth alongside facilitating the growth of sustainable local supply chains. VITA advances these best practices
by bringing in the largest financier of agriculture in Nepal to the core of the programme, Agriculture Development Bank Ltd (ADBL), to
remove the critical constraints of access to finance for agriculture, while building climate resilience into public and private investment
practices and accelerating development of digital rural financial services. It expands on the previous partnership with Heifer, who will
be a key implementing partner using their proven field approaches to further strengthen the empowerment of women and youth and
focus on nutrition without additional complexity.
Implementation and financing arrangements are tailored to the current institutional and fiscal context in the transition to federalism. As
a nationwide state-owned commercial bank, ADBL is ideally placed to work effectively with producers, the private sector and the three
tiers of government – federal, state and municipal. The programme leverages a high level of domestic co-financing (47%), a majority
of which is from banks (primarily ADBL) and the private sector. Importantly, the internal financing arrangements and move away from
widespread grant financing to producers reduces the fiscal burden from the programme, with the use of a subsidiary loan of around
US$81 million from the government to ADBL to finance programme operations (82% of total IFAD financing of US$97.7 million). Only
the investments in supply chain infrastructure will be retain a majority share of public financing.
In the context of COVID-19, VITA is a timely major new investment programme that will make a valuable contribution to the recovery
from the pandemic as well as building resilience of rural communities to future shocks. It will create new profitable opportunities for
small-scale producers including the large numbers of returning migrants. Its strong focus on expanding supply chains for high
nutritional value foods will further contribute to both local and national food security and reducing reliance on imported foods. Its
internal financing structure means that it will achieve this without creating fiscal burden on the government. More generally, the roll-out
plans to the programme districts have been accelerated so the activities will launch in all 28 focus districts within the first 15 months of
the programme. Such adjustment have been achieved without creating additional costs.
Economic and social context. The 2015 constitution introduced federalism with three tiers of government – federal, state and
municipal – each with assigned powers. Together with the 2017 elections at federal, state and municipal level, this ushered in a period
of much needed stability and growth. In Financial Year (FY) 2019, Nepal achieved its third consecutive year of +6% growth for the first
time in more than 50 years. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, GDP growth was projected to average 6.5% over the medium-term. Most
recent World Bank projections (April 2020) are for growth to slow to 2.8% in FY2020 and remain subdued in FY2021 reflecting lower
remittances, trade and tourism, and broader disruptions caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. Consequently, the fiscal and current
account deficits are likely to increase significantly. Risks to the outlook stem primarily from a large-scale domestic transmission of
COVID-19 and limited capacity of government to implement emergency relief and recovery measures.
In 2019, the poverty headcount ratio at the USD 1.90/day line is estimated at 8% (from 15% in 2010). At the national poverty line, it is
estimated at 18.7% (from 25.2% in 2010). However around a further 31.2% of the population live between USD 1.90 and USD 3.20 a
day and face significant risks of falling into extreme poverty, primarily due to reduced remittances, loss of earnings of potential
migrants, job losses in the informal sector, and rising prices for essential commodities as a result of COVID-19.
The Agricultural Sector remains the 2nd biggest sector in the economy (after services), contributing 29.3% to GDP in 2018, though
declining in share reflecting ongoing structural transformation of the economy. The sector is domestically focused, with exports only
2.7% of sector value added. Agricultural growth averaged 2.9% between 2008 and 2018 compared to 4.7% GDP growth. In FY2019,
agriculture growth is estimated at 5.0% versus 7.1% GDP growth. There is a large and growing trade deficit in food and agricultural
products. Agricultural import growth is far higher than growth in domestic agricultural output. Despite low growth and labour
productivity, 11.7 million working age people (56.5%) are involved in agriculture to some degree – with 97% living in farm households.
Among farm households, 52% now sell to the market and almost three quarters of these sell a majority of their produce. (Central
Bureau of Statistics, 2019).
Nepal has a comparative advantage for a range of agriculture products, though not generally lowland field crops. Varied agro-climatic
zones allow tropical, sub-tropical and temperate crops to be produced and counter-seasonal production. There are therefore
numerous opportunities for higher return on agriculture from a range of crops and livestock in different locations to meet market
demand.
Lessons are drawn from the 2019 Nepal Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation, the High Value Agriculture Project (HVAP)
and other programmes as well as the corporate-level evaluation of IFAD’s global experience in pro-poor value chain projects. Lesson
incorporated into the programme design include: the need to support the implementation of federalisms; continuing support to
agricultural value chain development and financing with renewed emphasis on inclusiveness; reintroducing investment in basic
infrastructure and services as a preparatory step for further economic opportunities; integrating sustainable natural resources
management and climate change adaptation; strengthening partnerships for specialized technical support and co-financing, with the
ADBL as the Lead Programme Agency (LPA) and major co-financier and Heifer Nepal as the key implementing partner and also co-
financier. The programme also adopts a market-first cluster-based approach alongside clear graduation strategies, which were central
to driving inclusive growth in HVAP – with local networks of multiple competing buyers and service providers dealing with multiple
independent producer organizations (POs) through a mix of formal and ad hoc trading relationships to meet market demand.
2/34
Rationale. The core problem the programme addresses is that small-scale producers’ incomes in traditional farming are low and
uncertain, yet there are multiple profitable market opportunities for modern small-scale farming to serve confirmed domestic and
export demand. Uncertain returns are a key factor in holding back private investment, especially by small-scale producers. Women,
while dominating the agricultural workforce, need greater prominence in leading local industries and more opportunities in products
that give higher returns and more efficient use of their time. Many youth are also seeking opportunities for higher returns on their
labours in their own communities as an alternative to migration, but need support to become professional modern small-scale
producers and overcome specific problems in access to key resources including land and finance. VITA scales-up the market-driven
best practices from HVAP that address many of these issues. ADBL is the leading agricultural financier in Nepal and will substantially
increase access to finance among small-scale producers, women and youth working in the agricultural sector through the programme,
especially for medium-term investment finance. Heifer brings a proven track record of inclusive smallholder and producer group
development with increasing market orientation. Such measures are even more important in the context of COVID-19, where many
migrant households will see immediate increases in household labour but face longer term loss of remittances. Finding gainful work
and opportunities as small-scale producers is a priority for individual households and the country as a whole.
Mainstreaming strategy. VITA contributes to all four of IFAD’s mainstreaming priorities. The programme will produce gender
transformative outcomes as it strengthens women’s agency and economic empowerment by supporting them to take leading roles in
their supply chains and facilitating a combination of efficient production technology and methods (such as labor saving technologies
including drip irrigation, mulching, stall feeding), easy access to credit and other financial services, market access, a comprehensive
package of financial and business skills (covers business skills, financial knowledge, aspects of the Gender Action Learning Systems
(GALS) – ‘GALS’-lite; nutrition and balanced diet, climate change). Nutrition promotion will be mainstreamed through the same
comprehensive packages such as promoting availability and utilization of knowledge on nutritious food through GALS “lite” as well as
increased access to high nutrient value foods through a focus on the supply chains for such items. VITA is youth sensitive and will
work with older adults and community leaders to take action towards providing better opportunities for their young adult children –
especially those under 25 years - for example, local arrangements to increase opportunities to rent land for production and the
provision of institutional guarantees from the municipality to facilitate access to finance for investment. VITA is attracting youth to
agriculture through many measures such as identification and promotion of successful young producers as role models for modern
farming, especially young women, use of social media and other channels to specifically market opportunities to youth, support
mechanisms to address youth’s limited access to land and finance for production.
VITA is a climate focused programme with estimated climate financing of US$74.3 million, equivalent to 76% of total IFAD financing.
Climate trends and future projections for Nepal indicate that seasonal variations in temperature and precipitation will increase,
resulting into more frequent and intensified extreme weather events and likely impacts such as i) increased incidences of new and
existing diseases, pest and insects, especially in higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in rainfall patterns within the year with
increased water demand leading to higher risks of temporary water shortages for rainfed agricultural production; iii) increased heat
stress to livestock from a small increase in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season, leads to reduced milk production
and reduced growth in poultry. In addressing these risks, VITA will adopt a series of measures including: selection of climate resilient
commodities to be promoted in different locations and agro-climatic conditions; promote and train small-scale producers and MSMEs
on tools to help them factor in climate change considerations into their investment and production plans; promotion of climate smart
agriculture technologies and services through strengthening of local support markets and with partner financial institutions for
screening of climate risks in their loan appraisal and strengthening the capacity of staff in the area of climate change. VITA will help to
reduce climate related risks and impacts by: improving farmers’ understanding of climate risks to their farm business (Sub-component
1.1); increase availability and access to climate resilient technologies and advice to implement climate adaptation measures (through
Support Market Development under Sub-component 1.2); providing loans to finance climate adaptation investments (Component 2.1);
investing in multi-use water system and small scale irrigation to reduce the risks from temporary water shortages, and upgrade farm
access roads for year round access to farms particularly during periods of heavy rain (Component 3). The programme areas are
moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
Goal and development objectives of VITA are “Improved livelihoods, climate resilience and nutrition of poor and vulnerable people“
(goal) and that “Farm enterprises of poor and vulnerable rural people are more resilient to climate change, increasingly profitable and
sustainable, strengthen their market linkages and use appropriate financial services.” (development objective).
Outreachand impacts: The programme expects to directly benefit 120,000 small-scale producers, in around 111,000 distinct
households with around 530,000 household members in total. Among these small-scale producers, 70,000 are expected to increase
total real net farm income by at least 60% and a further 50,000 by at least 40%.
Programme area. VITA will focus intensive activities in 28 districts in States 2, 3 and 5. State 5 and State 2 have strong agricultural
potential combined with highest numbers of people living in poverty. In State 3, the programme is more focused, working in districts
with good agricultural potential that were the most severely impacted by the 2015 earthquake. VITA will also extend financial services
only to targeted bankable beneficiaries of IFAD supported Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project (RERP) in State 1 and State 2
and Agriculture Sector Development Programme (ASDP) in State 6 in partnership with these ongoing projects providing similar
business-focussed support to that provided under VITA Component 1.
Target groups will be small-scale producers, including landowners and landless, and labourers involved in supported supply chains.
VITA will have at least 60% women beneficiaries and 30% youth. Disadvantaged individuals including Dalits, Janjatis and other
disadvantaged groups will also be specifically targeted. Targeting will involve, among other measures, selection of crops and livestock
of particular interest to the target groups with high returns on labour and technologies that are labour saving and help reducing
drudgery of women. A secondary target group will be micro-, small- and medium-enterprises (MSMEs) in the supported supply chains.
Components. VITA is organized into three closely related components:
3/34
Component 1: Inclusive Supply Chain Development targets high potential commodity supply chains. It provides intensive training
in foundational business skills to farmers and producer groups, so they are more confident and able to engage in the supply chains
and manage their farming as a business. It encourages like-minded farmers to organize themselves into producer organizations
(POs) to achieve the necessary scale to better interact with buyers and service providers and increase efficiencies and
competitiveness of their local supply chains. It builds awareness of climate risk and practical adaptation measures for producers. It
establishes rolling cycles of multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs) to build networks and business relationships, facilitate market
linkages and stimulate investment opportunities for producers and MSMEs. It provides sustained mentoring to producer groups so
they can take advantages of the opportunities that emerge through the MSP processes. It promotes complementary investments by
small and larger commercial service providers and co-operatives serving the clusters with direct or embedded services, including on
climate smart agriculture technologies and practices. The MSPs are open platforms that provide a practical mechanism for financial
service providers (FSPs) to better understand local demand and opportunities for them in offering financial services to various supply
chain actors. Similarly, the MSPs provide a mechanism for local, state and federal government to understand specific needs for
enabling public infrastructure and services to complement private investment. The expected close collaboration with municipal
authorities, as seen in the RERP project, is also important in achieving complementary public and private investment in technical
services, which now fall under their mandate but for which they have limited financial and human resources of their own.
In the context of COVID-19 and the potential prolonged need for safe social distancing practices, the substantial increase in collective
marketing of farm produce through POs, with trucks collecting produce in bulk directly from the village, will dramatically reduce the
number of small-scale producers having to regularly go to the market to sell their produce one by one. Greater use of electronic
payments between buyers and producers will also reduce the need for face-to-face transactions. However, physical produce will still
need to be aggregated and transported along the supply chain in a safe manner. Similarly, there will still need to be some safe face-
to-face interaction, especially in the early stages as relationships are built, for example via safe MSPs. VITA will support the
widespread adoption and adherence to such safe working practices in supported supply chains.
Component 2 Expanding Financial Servicesto Agriculture tackles supply-side constraints for appropriate financial services to
agriculture, including systemic shortages of term finance, due to term mismatches between sources of funds and borrowers’
requirements. This will be via a subsidiary loan to ADBL and wholesale term loans to partner FSPs for on-lending to small-scale
producers and MSME in the supported supply chains. The component also addresses other capacity issues within partner FSPs that
are limiting their capacity to offer relevant financial services and new products at the scale required to increase rural financial inclusion.
Component 3 Supply Chain Infrastructure supports investment in critical public infrastructure at different points along the supply
chains – from upgrading of regional hub markets and establishing networks of satellite wholesale markets, to investments in
productive community level infrastructure – especially linked to water for production and multi-use systems (e.g. for domestic water,
livestock and horticulture) as well as farm access roads to help mitigate climate risks. Importantly, the priorities for infrastructure
development will be determined through the MSP processes driven by producers and MSMEs within the supply chains. The design of
new market infrastructure will also take into account the likely need for greater physical spaces as well as improved hygiene facilities
in physical markets and other changes to market operating practices to adapt to COVID-19.
Implementation arrangements. ADBL will be the LPA and co-financier and accountable to the Programme Steering Committee
(PSC) chaired by the Ministry of Finance. It will lead the implementation of all components. Heifer Nepal will be the main
implementing partner and co-financier, with particular responsibilities under Component 1 on aspects of socio-economic mobilization
and supply chain development. Heifer will coordinate its network of local NGOs to deliver farmer facing activities under the
programme. ADBL and Heifer will operate on a one programme / one team basis. State and municipal government will be closely
involved, including via local MSPs and co-ordinated investments in supply chain infrastructure and other initiatives, including co-
financing investments under Component 3. In support of federalism, VITA will provide capacity building support to state and local
government teams on the programme approaches.
Costs and financing. Total programme financing of US$ 196.9 million is comprised of IFAD funding of US$97.67 million (49.6%),
government funding of US$9.9 million (5.1%), ADBL and banks US$32.4 million (16.4%), Heifer $6.0 million (3.0%), beneficiaries
US$33.8 million (17.1%) and private sector contributions of US$16.9 million (8.6%). All beneficiary and private sector contributions
shown are in cash. There is no financing gap.
From a fiscal perspective, in terms of public sector cost per beneficiary, VITA’s costs are only around 21% of ASDP’s. Nominal
investment costs per beneficiary household for VITA of US$1,768 are around 9% lower than those for ASDP (US$1,945 per
household) – which has a broadly similar focus on inclusive supply chains, rural financial services and infrastructure in similar
communities. However, these are financed on a very different basis. In VITA, around USD163 million (83% of the US$197 million
total) is ultimately financed by banks, private sector and beneficiaries. Only US$34 million is born by the public sector (of which
US$27 million is for infrastructure). The cost to the public sector is therefore US$302 per beneficiary household for VITA. On a
comparable basis for ASDP, around US$10 million are financed by the private sector and beneficiaries and US$8.3 million in taxes
and duties, leaving a public sector cost of USD50 million – equivalent to USD1,417 per beneficiary household.
Financial and economic analysis. The base case scenario for 20 years period of analysis shows an Economic Internal Rate of
Return of around 27%. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the effect of variations in (i) 10% and 20% decrease in
benefits; (ii) 10% and 20% increase in costs, (iii) 1 and 2 years delay on incremental income accrual. In all scenarios, EIRR is above
19%.
Risks. There is a high inherent risk of institutional capacity for programme implementation in Nepal, as evident from recent
performance of the country programme. The programme implementation arrangements and choice of partners are explicitly designed
to remedy this challenge, by involving ADBL and Heifer as lead partners, as well as by creating State Programme Coordination
Forums in each state to coordinate among stakeholders. In addition, there are around USD 2 million of institutional capacity building
programmes planned for ADBL and programme partners across the three Components. Technical risks are low as the programme
scales-up proven good practice in all its main activities.
4/34
The COVID-19 pandemic potential impacts are currently highly uncertain. The extent and duration of the epidemic domestically are
not yet known. It will have impacts on demand, through reduced spending capacity of households, but also the availability of rural
labour. Returning migrants may bring money and a determination to try to build livelihoods in their home communities but could also
create extra burdens if they cannot find gainful work to replace lost remittances incomes. VITA’s focus on high return commodities,
mostly of food for domestic markets, combined with affordable investment pathways should enable large numbers of supported
households and returnee migrants to make gradual investments in their farm businesses, including starting with smaller collateral free
loans, to increase their incomes and food supply and also provide gainful work for migrants returning to their communities. The risks
to programme financing from the expected increased fiscal pressure on government is mitigated against by the programme’s internal
financing arrangements, with around US$81 million being provided as a subsidiary loan to ADBL which will then finance programme
operations – both lending and non-lending activities other than infrastructure.
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment procedures (SECAP). The social and environmental category for VITA is B. The
climate risk classification is moderate. A costed Environmental and Social Management plan has been included in the design.
Financial Management. The LPA, a state-owned registered commercial bank, will manage the resources made available under the
programme under a financing agreement with government. The LPA’s Programme Management Unit will report to the Programme
Director and be accountable to the PSC for the overall financial management, preparation of AWPB, procurement plan, M&E and MIS,
withdrawal applications and financial reports, and compliance requirement of internal and external audit. The financial management
risk assessment of ADBL is assessed as substantial as it is the first IFAD funded programme in an extended period and should
reduce to moderate with implementation of mitigating measures.
Procurement. The LPA will apply its own approved procurement procedures where these are consistent with IFAD procurement
guidelines and apply accepted IFAD/government procurement procedures and thresholds where its own procedures do not meet
IFAD requirements. It is noted that no major procurement packages are currently envisaged under Component 1 and 2. For
infrastructure works under Component 3, all sub-project implementers will apply accepted IFAD/government procurement procedures
and thresholds.
Sustainability of the programme benefits is substantially linked to the entire programme being private sector led. Sustainability is
achieved at three levels:
Farm level. At the small-scale producer level, the programme will support a portfolio of crops and livestock that both have market
demand and are suitable to local agro-ecological zones and climatic conditions. Environmental management, resource use efficiency
and climatic adaptation will be enhanced in the messages and investment support to farmers. At the same time, the long-term
approach to mentoring and training in business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve small-scale producers’
potential to sustain the benefits even when programme support ends.
Producer organization (PO) level. Significant resources of the programme focus on building the capacity of POs to become successful
and reliable actors in their local supply chains. Heifer will use their proven methodologies in this, with sustained mentoring over 3-4
years for each PO.
Supply chain level (including support markets). Where the supply chains have achieved competitiveness, they are highly likely to
continue – as the producers and businesses will be making money. In addition, where producers, businesses and technical and
financial service providers have established regular processes of mutually beneficial networking, including via the MSPs, then such
process are likely to be continued in some form. In established clusters and supply chains such functions should have minimal costs
and be readily taken on by the supply chain actors themselves – as has been the case in State 6 for commodities such as
vegetables, ginger, turmeric and apples, initially supported by HVAP but now continued jointly by the agribusinesses and POs.
Exit strategy. The focus on sustainable results and on independent, profitable institutions and private sector-based partnerships
forms the core exit strategy. By moving away from a predominantly grant-based to a loan-based system, the programme helps
expand the agricultural credit system and thereby enhance access of farmers, POs, co-operatives and entrepreneurs (MSMEs) to
financial resources on a continuing basis. By ensuring reflow of a large proportion of financial resources borrowed by the government
from IFAD, this approach also helps improving the government’s financial position in these demanding times.
Scaling up. The programme is itself a scaling-up programme, expanding best practices from the recent Nepal country programme on
inclusive market development – especially those from HVAP as well as substantially advancing best practices in new areas including
agricultural finance (to replace grant financing) and institutional implementation arrangements adapted to the new federal system.
Together with the ongoing IFAD supported projects, this will mean these approaches are being implemented by major investment
programme in 5 of 7 states across the country. As the LPA is a nationwide bank, with branches in all districts there remains clear
scope for it to replicate these approaches across the entire country. Similarly, the expected partnerships with other FSPs is also
expected to contribute to crowding-in, especially for increased agriculture finance to commercial small-scale producers. In addition, as
state and municipal governments become more familiar with the practical tools and approaches of the program, they will likely want to
start incorporating aspects of them into their own plans and activities.
Policy engagement through VITA is expected to have two major focus areas. Firstly, the policy framework, strategies and regulations
to accelerate the expansion of agricultural finance and rural digital financial services. Secondly, policy development processes and
capacities at state and municipal level, especially concerning local economic development strategies and investment plans.
Innovation in the programme is principally in four areas: i) the transition to predominantly loans-based financing for private
investments by small-scale producers and MSMEs in upgrading their farms and businesses; ii) the associated large scale mobilization
of domestic private co-financing from banks, businesses and beneficiaries, iii) information and communication technology (ICT)
enabled product and service innovations, which play an increasingly important role for both ADBL as well as the programme
participating FSPs, which will be supported and brought to scale through VITA; and iv) the innovative institutional arrangements of
having a state-owned commercial bank as the lead programme agency for an inclusive market development programme in
partnership with a leading NGO bringing specific technical expertise. This innovation is highly relevant to the current Nepali context as
a mechanism to better institutionalize the core capacities of facilitating inclusive supply chain development and also providing
complementary implementation mechanisms for public investment in economic development that can work alongside the new three
tiers of government.
5/34
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Overview: Nepal’s varied agro-climatic zones, abundant water resources and proximity to large and growing markets create a
rich tapestry of opportunities for competitive commercial smallholder agriculture – for meat, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, tea and
more. Yet the structural and growing agricultural trade deficit illustrates a lack of competitiveness in some major commodities
such as cereals, oil seeds and sugar. The agricultural sector is highly fragmented and not realizing its potential - even in locations
and for commodities in which there are potential comparative advantages, with millions of small farms and thousands of small
agribusinesses contributing to high transaction costs and a lack of competitiveness. In terms of government support to the sector,
in the five years to 2016 there was increasing momentum in reforms and modernization towards market-driven approaches –
reflected in the Agricultural Development Strategy (ADS) approved in 2015. However, in the past three years much of this
momentum has been overwhelmed by the restructuring to three tiers of government under the new federal constitution.
Assignment of many powers in the sector to state and local government, as exclusive or concurrent powers, offers the potential
for more responsive and accountable investment in public goods and services to the sector. However, this potential has yet to be
realized and there remain substantial questions on the detail of how the three tiers will work together for the sector.
Extreme poverty has been declining steadily yet large numbers remain vulnerable to falling back into extreme poverty. In 2019,
the poverty headcount ratio at the USD 1.90/day line is estimated at 8% (from 15% in 2010). At the national poverty line, it is
estimated at 18.7% (from 25.2% in 2010). However around a further 31.2% of the population live between USD 1.90 and USD
3.20 a day and face significant risks of falling into extreme poverty, primarily due to reduced remittances, loss of earnings of
potential migrants, job losses in the informal sector, and rising prices for essential commodities as a result of COVID-19.
Economic and fiscal context: The 2015 constitution introduced federalism with three tiers of government – federal, state and
municipal – each with assigned powers. Together with the 2017 elections at federal, state and municipal level this ushered in a
period of much needed stability and growth. In Financial Year (FY) 2019, Nepal achieved its third consecutive year of +6%
growth for the first time in more than 50 years. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, GDP growth was projected to average 6.5% over
the medium term. Most recent World Bank projections (April 2020 - (World Bank, 2020)) are for growth to slow to 2.8% in FY2020
and remain subdued in FY2021 reflecting lower remittances, trade and tourism, and broader disruptions caused by the COVID-19
outbreak. Consequently, the fiscal and current account deficits are likely to increase significantly. Risks to the outlook stem
primarily from a large-scale domestic transmission of COVID-19 and limited capacity of government to implement emergency
relief and recovery measures.
The transition to fiscal federalism, alongside ongoing reconstruction spending, increased expenditure substantially leading to a
sharply wider fiscal deficit in 2018. However, robust revenue growth coupled with persistent underspending of the budget
reduced the fiscal deficit from 6.7% of GDP in FY2018 to 1.9% in FY2019 (World Bank, 2019). For FY2019/20, the budget
allocation for agriculture, forestry and fisheries was NR 79.8 billion (approx. US$715 million), around 5.2% of the total national
budget allocation. In the sector, expenditure continues to be dominated by the federal level representing 82.5%, states’ share at
15.2% and local level government just 2.1%. Continuing dominance of federal level expenditure contrasts with the substantially
devolved nature of the sector in the constitution and the principle of subsidiarity for the multiple concurrent powers.
Remittances reached an estimated US$8.06 billion in 2018 – equivalent to 28.0% of Nepal’s GDP (World Bank, 2019).
Remittances have continued to grow strongly – more than doubling since 2010 – and now represent a similar share of GDP to
agriculture (and substantially more than manufacturing). However, it is notable that the number of Nepali migrant workers taking
up jobs abroad has slowed since 2016 (IMF, 2019). The scale and widespread distribution of remittances makes them a
potentially important resources for productive investment, especially in rural areas. However, over 70% of remittances is spent on
consumption (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2012). COVID-19 is likely to have significant impacts on remittances – both in the
short term as migrants return home, but also potentially over the medium-term if there is a prolonged global economic slowdown,
with many fewer jobs in key overseas employment sectors, such as the oil sector in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
countries. In May 2020, the Foreign Employment Board estimated that around 407,000 migrant workers may return in the long
run from GCC countries and Malaysia where there were around 1.5 million Nepali migrant workers (Kathmandu Post, 2020).
The financial sector remains stable, but a rising trend in non-performing loans point to some emerging vulnerabilities. This is
likely to be exacerbated by the impacts of COVID-19. Non-performing loans (NPLs) remain low but increased by 25% in 7 of the
25 private commercial banks, as elevated lending rates pushed some borrowers into default. All banks and financial institutions
(BFIs) are well capitalized and meet the capital adequacy ratio requirement of 11%. However, capital adequacy ratios have
declined over the past year, with development banks recording the largest decline. The Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) has been
encouraging mergers and acquisitions to further strengthen the financial system and curb unhealthy competition (World Bank,
2019).
7.
NRB already has in place a progressive framework of interest subsidies and other measures to increase lending to deprived and
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
priority sectors – including interest subsidies of 6% for women borrowers and 5% for agriculture and youth. Additional measures
and interest subsidies are expected in the budget for FY2020/21 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
6/34
Performance of the agricultural sector remains important as the second biggest sector in the economy (after services),
contributing 29.3% to GDP in 2018, though declining in share reflecting the ongoing structural transformation of the economy.
The sector is domestically focused (exports are 2.7% of sector value added) and remains an important consumer of labour.
Agricultural growth averaged 2.9% between 2008-2018 compared to overall GDP growth of 4.7%. Agricultural growth is
estimated as 5.0% in FY 2018/19 versus GDP growth of 7.1%. (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2019). There is a large and growing
trade deficit in food and agricultural products. Agricultural import growth is far higher than growth in domestic agricultural output.
Imports are growing strongly, up 84% in the 5 years to NRs198 billion in 2017/18, while exports remained flat with growth of 11%
in the same period to NRs 22.7 billion in FY2017/18. India’s share of imports is stable at 52-53% (Department of Customs, 2018).
Despite low growth, 11.7 million working age people (56.5%) are involved in agriculture to some degree – with 97% living in farm
households. Among farm households, 52% now sell to the market and almost three quarters of whom sell a majority of their
produce. Among the 11.7 million people, there are 1.52 million employed – 94% in informal sector, 6% in formal sector –
representing 21.5% of all people employed in Nepal (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2019). Labour productivity in agriculture was
39%[1] of that in the overall economy in 2018 down from 43% in 2008. (World Bank)
Opportunities. Nepal has a comparative advantage for a range of agriculture products, though not generally lowland field crops.
Varied agro-climatic zones allow tropical, sub-tropical and temperate crops to be produced and counter-seasonal production.
There are varied opportunities for market-driven growth: spices, fruit juices, and tea are the largest export-generating and fastest-
growing agribusiness subsectors. Nepal is the global market leader in large cardamom in terms of production and value. Fresh
apples, coffee, honey, and cut flowers have the potential to leverage agri-climatic conditions and build on the perceived
uniqueness of Nepalese products. Ginger is an export earner but volatile prices and an inability to comply with phytosanitary
standards is constraining growth. Vegetables, a smallholder crop, are grown for the domestic market and has growth potential.
Strengthening the supply chain from farm to retail is needed, but first-mover costs will be high. Poultry has been a growth sub-
sector, for meat and eggs, benefiting from rising incomes and lower costs of poultry versus other meat, but there are signs of
market saturation especially for commercial broilers and eggs. Other kinds of meat are also growing, particularly goat. Fresh
meat dominates the industry, keeping it localized, with few larger players outside of poultry. Dairy also has opportunities for
growth but must better manage natural differences in seasonal supply and demand. Rice and maize comprise the two largest
cereal crops in terms of production and participation of small-scale producers. However, production of each crop is characterized
by low yields and high costs of production. In cereals, access to reliable irrigation is likely to be a key factor in raising
competitiveness. On the processing side, despite the presence of larger business houses with processing facilities, both
subsectors are less competitive in efficiency and quality than competitors in India with around 80% of rice mills in eastern Nepal
having shut down (World Bank, 2018).
The agribusiness sector is small and domestically focused. A few large business houses have stakes in larger traditional cereal
crops, food and beverages and fast-moving consumer goods. Other subsectors are characterized by small firms and traders.
There are only about 200 medium-sized (i.e. >US$300,000 in fixed assets) and large firms. Three-quarters of these are in
livestock, dairy, fruits, vegetables, medicinal and aromatic plant products (MAPS), coffee and tea. In recent years, several
segments have had negative growth including rice mills in the east. (World Bank, 2018)
Major Constraints to the sector include low agricultural productivity, attributable in large part to low use of fertilizer and
certified high-yielding seed, as well as limited irrigation and mechanization. The government subsidizes these inputs however
supply doesn’t meet demand, distribution is ineffective, and provision is not based on the needs of the soil or crop. Government
policy is limiting private sector participation in these markets. Limited agricultural insurance coverage and markets is also an
impediment (World Bank, 2018).
Fragmented supply chains are typical, with many small producers and traders. Transaction costs are high while market signals
and trust in the chains are low. Logistics in the chains are weak creating high access-to-market costs and increased levels of
post-harvest losses.
Finance for private investment in agriculture is highly constrained. Nepal’s financial system is relatively healthy but heavily
bank dominated with 28 public and private Commercial Banks (Class A), accounting for 87% of total assets/liabilities of the formal
financial system. The remaining assets are held by 40 Development Banks (Class B), 28 Finance Companies (Class C), 53
Microfinance Development Banks (Class D) and a large pool of savings and credit cooperatives (SACCO), financial non-
governmental organizations (FINGOs) and MFIs (Sakchyam Access to Finance Project, 2017).With the dominance of commercial
banks, agriculture accounts for only 6.4% of their total lending (at September 2019). Among commercial banks only Agriculture
Development Bank Ltd (ADBL) reported substantive share of agriculture – around 30% of its total lending. Barring few
exceptions, growths in institutions in recent decades have been private-sector-driven and most compete within the same
business segments which are traditionally served by commercial banks and in urban areas. Despite the presence of many
institutions, there are very few specialized financial institutions unlike, for example, in India or the Philippines. This lack of
specifically mandated institutions may have made the banking system more efficient and competitive in traditional segments, but
has made public policy interventions difficult, in particular in giving access to institutional credit to small farmers and rural
entrepreneurs. Currently, 9% of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) use banks while only 17% of all Nepalese have
access to banking services mostly limited to urban area and better-off enterprises (World Bank, 2018).
15.
For micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSME), the formal credit gap is estimated at US$3.9-4.4 billion out of a total
formal credit demand of US$9.5 billion (Beed Management pvt. Ltd , 2018). The agriculture sector accounts for 17% of credit
demand, implying a sector credit gap of US$0.7 billion. Government regulations on productive and deprived sector lending
requirements have helped to push credit towards the selected sectors, with the recent central bank directive requiring 10% direct
lending to agriculture in addition to 5% lending to deprived sector. However, the actual achievement is much lower. Heavy
reliance on collateralized lending (by the banks/FIs) and lack of quality security (from farmers/MSMEs) are systemic constraints
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
for lending to the sector with almost 76% of credit backed by a tangible collateral (>90% is land and/or buildings) (Sakchyam
Access to Finance Project, 2017). Currently, the Deposit Credit Guarantee Fund (DCGF) has statutory responsibility to perform
deposit and credit guarantees and its primary focus is on deposit guarantees. DCGF has a livestock insurance product and
recently developed an agriculture credit guarantee product reported to have collectively already guaranteed/insured NR 2 billion
(US$18 million) in loans. While a positive first step, this is at a very limited scale, equivalent to <2.6% of the credit gap in the
agricultural MSME sector.
7/34
An Agricultural Development Strategy (ADS) was approved in 2015 with broad donor support and reflects government
strategy for the next 20 years. Its vision is for “A self-reliant, sustainable, competitive, and inclusive agricultural sector that drives
economic growth and contributes to improved livelihoods and food and nutrition security.” This is to be achieved through
substantial growth in the sector, rising from 3% to 5% per annum, and agro-based exports and defined in four main outcomes: 1)
Improved governance, 2) Higher productivity, 3) Profitable commercialization and 4) Increased competitiveness. Alongside these
outcomes, the ADS seeks to promote: (i) inclusiveness (both social and geographic); (ii) sustainability (both natural resources
and economic); (iii) development of the private and cooperative sectors, and connectivity to market infrastructure; (iv) information
infrastructure and information and communication technology; and (v) power infrastructure. In terms of the enabling environment
created by the public sector, the ADS notes that: “In spite of frequent pronouncements in support of the agriculture sector,
policies to support the sector have either not been formulated or have not been implemented. Compounding the problem are the
frequent changes in tenure of the key leaders for policy, program, and project implementation and issues of consistency of policy
itself. The result has been a loss of credibility in policy that is responsible in part for the failure of previous programs.“ The ADS
was approved under the former unitary system. With the support of the European Union (EU) backed Contribution to Agriculture
and Rural Development (CARD) project, the federal Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (MoALD) is currently
engaging with state Ministries of Land Management, Agriculture and Cooperatives (MoLMAC) to raise understanding of the ADS
and begin to clarify a way forward for it under federalism. With the COVID-19 pandemic, agriculture is seen as increasingly
important for rural economic recovery, not only for food security but as an economic engine that can absorb the returning labour
force – especially given the expected slowdown in the service sector. Policy priorities for the agriculture sector at local and
national level are expected to evolve accordingly.
Agriculture under federalism. The Constitution authorizes different tiers of government to assume control over different policy
areas, but it is not clear what the enumerated powers mean for sector policy. Constitutionally, only a few functions are exclusively
for federal government, including major irrigations projects, land use policy, water use policy, and quarantine. Many of the
responsibilities are officially allocated across multiple tiers of government, leaving it unclear where certain powers should lie.
Typically, when there are concurrent functions, the principle of subsidiarity prevails, which means that the lowest government tier
that is capable of performing the function should be given the mandate to do so. (Kyle & Resnick, 2016)
A recent MoALD consultation (Upadhyaya, 2019) drew several key conclusions, noting an overwhelming similarity in
stakeholders’ perceptions of the issues, namely: On staff strength, the new structure looks top-heavy and bottom-weak, with large
numbers of trained and qualified agricultural manpower at federal and state levels. The municipal agricultural units are meagrely
staffed but directly face the clientele. Staff shortage is constraining agricultural programs of municipalities. The agricultural
programme activities of the three tiers lack coordination and conformity with the principle of subsidiarity. Concurrent agricultural
powers, and the direct budget flow to Municipalities are contributing to lack of coordination among the provincial and municipal
tiers. The coordination between the Prime Minister Agricultural Modernization Project (PMAMP) and state/municipal agencies is
weak, and implementation of programme activities directly through PMAMP offices is inappropriate and against the spirit of the
Constitution. The state structures (e.g. Agriculture Knowledge Centers) are not adequately oriented and structured to serve their
intended purposes. The mandate and modality of other state agricultural development agencies are unclear.
On the critical issue of technical services to farmers, prior to federalism public extension services were already over-stretched
and unable to meet the scale of demand from farmers. Now municipalities hold the primary mandate for such services, also in a
pluralistic model involving greater private delivery, yet have neither the staff nor resources to meet the demands of farmer (only
2.1% of sector budget is at municipal level). This reiterates the need to accelerate the development of pluralistic technical
services to meet farmer demand, as envisaged in the ADS.
Major Development Partners: Six major sector donors, in terms of ongoing and pipeline projects, are: IFAD, World Bank (WB),
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Department for International Development (DfID), EU, and the
Asian Development Bank (ADB). Other significant donors include Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) and Heifer
International. The Danish Agency for International Development (DANIDA) was also active but have phased out their work in
Nepal. Since 2011, there has been a strong trend among major donors toward market-oriented projects. The first generation of
such projects have been completed and the second generation are coming forward – with new market projects being financed or
planned by USAID, WB and SDC. In addition, several donors continue to invest in specific aspects including: climate change
adaptation (IFAD, USAID, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO)); livestock (WB); seed industry (USAID, IFAD);
financial services to MSMEs/agriculture (DFID, ADB). Beyond these major trends, the EU recently launched the EUR40 million
‘CARD’ project which is a policy-based instrument. ADB has also recently signed a policy-based loan for the agriculture sector of
approximately US$50 million. In irrigation sector, major donors are WB, ADB, Saudi Fund for Development (SFD), OPEC Fund
for International Development (OFID) and the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED). Japan International
Cooperation Agency (JICA) is understood to be considering investment in the irrigation sector. Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ) is supporting, inter alia, local and regional development principally in State 5, 6 and
7 covering multiple sectors, including agriculture.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
21.
Climate Change (CC) and Environment: Nepal is among the most vulnerable countries to climate change, ranked 4th in the
world-wide Climate Vulnerability Index. The country, except for some isolated pockets, is becoming warmer – most especially at
higher altitudes. It is also expected to see increasing variability in rainfall – though no dominant pattern of changes in total annual
22.
23.
24.
25.
precipitation, with a majority of locations projected to have modest aggregate increases or decreases in annual rainfall from
relatively high levels due to the monsoon. The Government prepared its National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in
2010, which led to the formulation of the Local Adaptation Plan of Action (LAPA) framework in 2011. Based on the NAPA 2010
assessment of 75 districts at the time (now 77), 50 districts were classified as having very high or high vulnerability to one or
more of the six climate related risks: rainfall / temperature; flood; drought; landslide; ecological; glacial lake outburst flooding.
Such vulnerability is longstanding and to a large extent inherent to Nepal’s topography and monsoon climate while exacerbated
by human activities. Yet, its diverse agro-climatic conditions and monsoon-driven climate mean, production practices are often
adapted to inherent climate variability.
8/34
Climate trends and future projections for Nepal indicate that seasonal variations in temperature and precipitation will increase,
resulting in more frequent and intensified extreme weather events and likely impacts such as: i) increased incidences of new and
existing diseases, pest and insects, especially in higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in rainfall patterns within the year with
increased water demand leading to higher risks of temporary water shortages for rainfed agricultural production; iii) increased
heat stress to livestock from a small increase in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season, leads to reduced milk
production and reduced growth in poultry. In addressing these risks, VITA will adopt a series of measures including: selection of
climate resilient commodities to be promoted in different locations and agro-climatic conditions; promote and train small-scale
producers and MSMEs on tools to help them factor in climate change considerations into their investment and production plans;
promotion of climate smart agriculture technologies and services through strengthening of local support markets and with partner
financial institutions to screen climate risks in their loan appraisal and strengthening the capacity of staff in the area of climate
change. VITA will help to reduce climate related risks and impacts by: i) improving farmers’ understanding of climate risks to their
farm business (Sub-component 1.1), ii) increase availability and access to climate resilient technologies and advice to implement
climate adaptation measures (through Support Market Development under Sub-component 1.2); providing loans to finance
climate adaptation investments (Component 2.1); investing in multi-use water system and small scale irrigation to reduce the risks
from temporary water shortages, and upgrade farm access roads for year round access to farms particularly during periods of
heavy rain (Component 3). The programme areas are moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
Gender and social inclusion: With a Gender Inequality Index (GII) value of 0.480 in 2017, Nepal ranks 118 of 160 countries.
However, female labour market participation is high at 82.7% versus 85.9% for men, in part due to out-migration of men from
rural areas. Women headed-households are 24% of rural households, with many more de facto women-headed households.
Despite the overall reduction in the gender gap, discrimination persists resulting in limitation to women’s equitable access to
resources such as land and capital (including credit) and markets, and the control of assets. While remittance received from
abroad supports household consumption, widespread migration has led to a feminization of agriculture, causing additional
burden of both running the farm and heading the household. The lack of substantial sources of income and absence of assets
such as land for collateral has made it difficult for women to avail larger loans that could enable them to move up the agricultural
value chain. VITA has a strong focus on targeting women’s economic empowerment strategies, to mitigate the short- and long-
term economic impact of COVID, support recovery and build resilience for the future. It will additionally promote awareness of
women’s land rights via its business skills training.
Nepal is a signatory to several human rights instruments supporting gender equality including the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) ratified in 1991 and has put in place several legal instruments to lessen
gender inequalities (FAO, 2019). This includes the establishment of the Ministry of Women Children and Social Welfare
(MoWCSW) in 1995 which is now the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior citizens (MoWCSC) and the National Women
Commission (NWC) in 2002. The 2015 constitution has further strengthened women’s rights, such as reservation of 33 percent
seats for women in federal and state parliaments, criminalization of violence against women based on any cultural, religious, or
traditional practices; equal property rights for men and women; and rights for citizens to choose non-binary gender in their
citizenship. Yet, the constitution also differentiates between women’s and men’s citizenship rights.
The analysis of the key national policies indicates scope for convergence and enabling environment for implementing VITA
interventions to produce dividends for the mainstreaming agenda. The ADS is aligned with the Multi-Sectoral Nutritional Plan
(MSNP) and the Food and Nutrition Security Plan of Action (FNSP). Its 10-year Plan of Action also includes the development of a
Gender and Social Inclusion Strategy for agriculture. The ADS activities will have impact on three groups of farmers (commercial,
subsistence and landless). Commercial farmers are directly affected by most of the ADS measures and in some cases, the
impact is direct and very strong, particularly in the area of irrigation, mechanization, value chain development, and export.
Subsistence farmers are also directly affected by most ADS measures. The direct effect is very strong in the measures related to
gender, social, and geographical inclusion; land (eg. addressing the issues of tenancy, land leasing, cooperative farming,
reversing the trend towards degraded land); access to quality and timely inputs (eg vouchers targeted to subsistence farmers,
improved resilience); and access to microfinance and agricultural insurance. Landless or near landless will benefit from the ADS
measures related to targeted food and nutrition programs; gender and social/geographic inclusion; access to forestry products;
and growth of small- and medium-enterprises.
26.
In alignment with the VITA objectives of building capacity on climate adaptation and impact mitigation, Climate Change Policy
(2011) also stresses on ensuring the participation of poor people, Dalits, marginalized indigenous communities, women, children
and youth (target groups) in the implementation of climate adaptation and climate change-related programmes. VITA is focusing
on enhancing the understanding of climate risks for farm business; increase availability and access to climate resilient
technologies and providing loans to finance climate adaptation investments. These activities have a strong gender lens and are
focused on capacity and resilience building, service delivery mechanism to strengthen the marginalised communities, youth and
rural women’s ability to adapt to climate change.
27.
The Office of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers (OPMCM) has a Gender Unit to coordinate, facilitate, and monitor
gender-based violence campaigns (FAO, 2019). There is also an inter-ministerial Gender-Responsive Budget Committee
(GRBC) established by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to design a methodology to monitor sectoral budget allocations and public
expenditures from a gender perspective. In addition to the OPMCM, GRBC and MOWCSC key government agencies include:
Ministry of Youth and Sports (MOYS); Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP); MoALD, Ministry of Forests and Environment
(MOFE), and Ministry of Industry, commerce and Supplies (MOICS).
28.
29.
9/34
Youth, between the ages of 15-29, represent approximately 33% of the total population and 52% of the working age population.
However, in rural areas they represent only 25% of the population and around 35% of the work force – due to high out migration.
Youth continue to face challenges related to education, civic engagement, political participation and unemployment. Economic
disparities and demographic changes are powerful push and pull factors affecting the movement of the youth out of rural areas.
Self-employment for youth is also constrained due to lack of business skills and financial literacy and the inability of youth to
access finance. The challenges of young women’s participation in the labour force are even more pronounced, not least as 36%
of women have their first child before the age of 18. Special measures are needed to attract youth into modern smallholder
agriculture as an attractive and rewarding career.
Nutrition (extracts from USAID Nepal Nutrition Profile, March 2018): Nepal has made impressive strides in reducing the
prevalence of stunting (chronic undernutrition) nationally, which fell from 57% in 2001, to 36% in 2016. Stunting prevalence for
children under 5 years varies by region; it is 55% in state 6 and 29% in State 4. Moreover, the chronic undernutrition rate varies
by maternal education and wealth levels - 46% of children whose mothers had no formal education are stunted versus 23% of
children whose mothers have secondary education. The high prevalence of adolescent underweight, combined with the
persistent and high adolescent pregnancy rate, is a disturbing trend. Adolescent pregnancy is associated with a 50% increased
risk of stillbirth and neonatal death, and an increased risk of low birth weight, premature birth, asphyxia, and maternal mortality.
The risk of stunting is 36% higher among first-born children of girls under 18 years in South Asia. This suggests that young
women should be a priority for the programme for unlocking issues of gender, youth and nutrition. Of relevance to VITA is a key
finding from the recent High Value Agriculture Project (HVAP) Impact Assessment (Kafle, 2018), which found a small but
statistically significant increase in dietary diversity (in particular for vegetables, fruits, milk and other dairy products) for project
supported households compared to the control group. This result corresponds with the small but growing literature that
investigates the relationship with agricultural development interventions and dietary outcomes (Zeweld, et al., 2015). (Jodlowski,
et al., 2016) (Upton, et al., 2016)
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
30.
The core problem the programme addresses is that small-scale producers’ incomes in traditional farming are low and uncertain
(risky), yet there are multiple profitable opportunities in the market from modern small-scale farming to serve domestic and export
markets. Uncertain returns are a key factor in holding back private investment, especially by small-scale producers. Obstacles
currently preventing most small-scale producers taking advantage of these opportunities fall into four domains:
1. 
1.  on their farms – and in their mindset towards agriculture, typically with very limited market orientation and business
skills which holds back essential investment;
2.  in the supply chains linking farmers products to end customers - which are highly fragmented in the “1st km” from the
farm-gate (largely due to a lack of aggregation by farmers in marketing their products), and “thin” – lacking competition
among buyers;
3.  in the support markets which are essential to any competitive agricultural sector – especially for technical and financial
services. Demand for such services has been suppressed by past development initiatives that have adopted strategies
of generous subsidies and free services, even for aspiring market-driven small farmers;
4.  in accessing finance. The aggregate scale of investment required in profitable farming and downstream businesses
means that private investment must play a major role in delivering large scale change in smallholder agriculture.
31.
For public institutions supporting the sector, three key challenges exist:
1. 
1.  Mainstreaming cost-effective and economically progressive mechanisms for the public sector to support to the sector,
moving past heavy reliance on grants and subsidies;
2.  Institutionalizing the capacity and best practice already developed in past stand-alone projects in Nepal for growing
competitive commercial smallholder-based agriculture;
3.  Establishing practical mechanism for better coordination of public and private investment into the sector, and between
the national, regional and local levels.
32.
Against these challenges, IFAD’s partnership with GoN has comparative advantages, including:
1. 
1.  A proven toolkit of field approaches to accelerate inclusive growth of smallholder-based commercial agriculture, much
of which is from the country programme. E.g. market-driven multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP); processes for
business-to-business interaction; peer-to-peer farm business skills training, and; farm business diaries;
2.  Socio-economic mobilization processes that use a ‘graduation’-type approach, with individuals with less resources
working together in the same producer groups with other more experienced producers, to ensure high levels of
inclusions;
3.  An MSP-based process that has proven effective in Nepal as a practical mechanism for coordinated public and private
investment alongside strengthening market-linkages between the primary supply chain actors, initially in HVAP and
now the Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project (RERP) and Agriculture Sector Development Project (ASDP). This
is highly relevant in the new devolved government system.
4.  A focus on affordable investment pathways and mitigation of non-financial risks which dramatically reduce the need for
subsidies and grants, opening the opportunity for mainstream financing and widespread natural scaling-up by
producers and the industry itself without ongoing need for public support;
5.  Previous financing and support for access to finance for agriculture, initially with ADBL via the Smallholder
Development Programme and recently with the private sector institution Sana Kisan Bikas Laghubitta Bittyasanstha
(SKBBL) under the KUBK project (Kisankalagi Unnat Biu-Bijan Karyakram);
6.  Growing experience of the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) in Nepal for supporting high-risk individuals to gain
more from programme opportunities;
7.  Increasing convergence of the county programme towards best practices in inclusive market development creates
opportunities for scaling-up and institutionalization of best practice i.e. with VITA, ASDP and RERP able to deliver
systemic changes in five of seven states and have far deeper influence over policy and practice.
10/34
33.
Beyond Nepal, IFAD’s experience internationally of supporting institutional capacity development of decentralized government
institutions means that it is well placed to be a valuable partner to the government as the new federal system is institutionalized.
B. Lessons learned
34.
Lessons for the programme design are drawn, among others, from three main sources:
1. 
1.  2019 Nepal Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation (CSPE);
2.  Corporate-level evaluation of IFAD global experience in pro-poor value chain projects;
3.  Implementation experiences from HVAP and other programmes, drawn from Independent Impact Assessments,
Project Completion and Supervision reports.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
Support to federalism: The CSPE recommends the focus should be to support local governments in promoting rural
development, including infrastructure, advisory services, and economic opportunities. VITA will actively support state and
municipal governments, building on positive experiences in RERP. It will work with them as key partners in developing local
supply chains including: capacity building of their staff, e.g. on supply chain development approaches; their full participation in
relevant MSPs; collaboration on identification and financing of priority public goods and services to meet needs that emerge via
the MSP processes; the development of local service markets, and; co-investment in productive small-scale community
infrastructure via Component 3
Continue support to agriculture value chain development with renewed emphasis on inclusiveness, given the good
progress made by HVAP and the priority of value chains for the ADS2015-2035. VITA will scale-up the successful HVAP
targeting process – with an even greater focus on: 1) a graduation approach to group mobilization to ensure poorer and
vulnerable households can successfully join and benefit from the programme by working with their more able neighbours; 2) use
of affordable investment pathways as a key commodity selection criteria to reduce barriers to entry for poorer households; 3)
widespread provision of affordable finance and a set of supply-side financial inclusion measures, and; 4) adoption of Heifer’s
VBHCD approach and Cornerstones tool.
Reintroduce funding support to community development, basic infrastructure and services as a preparatory step for
further economic opportunities, based on overall past positive results. VITA will 1) include support for small-scale community
infrastructure including farm access roads and productive and multi-use water infrastructure (Component 3) and 2) widespread
training on financial literacy and business skills as a vital activity to change mindsets and empower small-scale producers, using
the successful peer-to-peer models from HVAP for delivering this training.
Integrate natural resource management and climate change adaptation in all project designs, and given the portfolio’s
ubiquitous investment in livestock, environmental consequences on forests and grasslands need to be monitored systematically.
In VITA, climate change (CC) adaptation is fully mainstreamed. All candidate commodities have been screened for potential
exposure to CC-related risks (see SECAP). Technical measure and mitigation strategies for small-scale producers have been
identified and will be mainstreamed via the promotion of technical service providers in clusters. In addition, the programme will
ensure a mandatory carrying capacity assessment is completed in all potential livestock cluster locations prior to programme
interventions and will not support further development that increases production to unsustainable levels.
Strengthen partnerships for specialized technical support and co-financing, reflected in Agriculture Development Banks
Limited (ADBL) as the Lead Programme Agency (LPA) and major co-financier and Heifer Nepal as the key implementing partner
and also co-financier.
Enhance portfolio management and implementation preparedness. VITA is scaling-up programme using all the current
PBAS allocation. The full design process has been conducted by a joint team from the LPA and IFAD, under the guidance of an
assigned senior government coordination team from Ministry of Finance (MOF), MOALD and ADBL. As such it is both realistic
and practical. Similarly, it has been explicitly designed to complement the other two main ongoing projects working on inclusive
market development, ASDP and RERP, and will provide loan financing to their beneficiaries as well as sharing a substantive part
of the core cluster development approach. As such, VITA will help evolve a deeper programmatic approach for the IFAD country
programme.
Pro-poor value chain projects have frequently suffered from substantial delays, based on IFAD’s global experience, in
large part assigned to limited pre-existing capacity and familiarity with the specific approaches and, secondly, many project
managers having a background in more traditional production-focussed agriculture and little background in market-driven
approaches (IFAD, 2019). For VITA, the capacity of LPA is a central consideration. ADBL has almost 500 staff with combined
agricultural and finance backgrounds. VITA staff will be primarily mobilized from this cadre. In the field, Heifer will bring
substantial capacity in mobilization and development of producer group. VITA also includes substantial institutional capacity
building (>USD2 million) covering all three components. Senior managers likely to lead VITA have also been fully involved in the
entire design process. In addition, in Nepal, the availability of experienced domestic cadres familiar with the specific approaches
should further reduce start-up and operational risks.
42.
Market-first approach to production on a cluster basis: a prerequisite to substantially increase income of farmers.
HVAP made fundamental changes in the way it worked: (i) fixing of target for increasing the income of the farmers by NPR
30,000 per annum and continuous monitoring of results related to this; (ii) implementing a “cluster approach” to improve
economies of scale and competitiveness ; and (iii) introducing MSPs where producers and agribusinesses took decisions on what
43.
44.
45.
46.
and when to produce and what price the produce will be purchased. These three aspects brought fundamental changes in the
farmers’ attitudes to produce what the market demands and gave them confidence to invest. VITA directly replicates these three
elements, with a target threshold for return on labour benchmarked against the minimum wage.
11/34
A lead firm-based approach for inclusive market development has proved problematic in the Nepali context, such as the
‘4Ps’ (Public-Private-Producer Partnerships). HVAP spent considerable time seeking participation of big firms for linking up
POs/Cooperatives, but was able to secure only one such deal, for organic ginger processing and export. There are few suitable
lead firms in many sub-sectors in Nepal. HVAP then evolved its approach to a cluster-based model, working with a wider range
of smaller, aspiring traders and businesses – with local networks of multiple competing buyers, MSMEs and service providers
dealing with multiple independent producer organizations (POs) through a mix of formal and ad hoc trading relationships to meet
market demand. VITA will primarily use these cluster-based approaches while partnerships with larger lead firms are likely to be
relevant entry points, but only in specific supply chains and locations, likely to be dairy, cereal seeds and poultry.
Grassroots institution development is essential to successfully commercialize smallholder agriculture: The necessity of a
coherent POs focused on the market becomes evident from HVAP, KUBK and RERP. VITA will engage with existing POs where
they are ‘market ready’, i.e. a large majority of members are ready to trade together with buyers and service providers to meet
market demand. Where no such groups exist, new groups will be mobilized. Heifer will lead this process, using its Values-based
Holistic Community Development (VBHCD) approach and Cornerstones tool with additional business skills strengthening
informed by the HVAP experience.
Grants for productive smallholder investment are not necessary for inclusive growth, including among poorer individuals,
if there are credible market opportunities, specific affordable investment pathways and affordable finance available. In Nepal in
states 1 and 2 in RERP, to date around 3,000 farm households have engaged in business-to-business interaction as the first
stage in supply chain development in fish, vegetable, dairy and essential oils – many of whom have seen immediate increases in
their sales and income without any grants. (IFAD, 2019); in Cambodia in the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholder
(AIMS) project tangible results have been seen in mobilizing private investment in backyard chicken, vegetable, rice and cassava
value chains without grants. In the 12 months to October 2019, around 6,300 small-scale producers participated in local MSPs.
This has resulted in an estimated US$1.37 million in additional private investment, of which US$760,000 by small-scale
producers and US$610,000 by agricultural cooperatives and businesses. This has been financed by an around 20% from
investors own funds and 80% from loans. Inclusion rates are high – with 48% women and 27% youth - and concentrated in the
most profitable commodities (chicken and vegetables) (IFAD, 2019). VITA represents an evolution of IFAD’s approach to
smallholder investment in Nepal, being the first new programme to eschew widespread use of grants in favour of affordable loan
finance combined with a strategy of promoting affordable investment pathways and a graduation process for poorer producers.
Harmonization of free and fee-based service provision is essential to effectively support small-scale producers:
Government led free services became the norm when the service market environment was not mature. The scenario is changing
with economic expansion and also development of road corridors. Government led free/subsidized services will never be able to
service all small-scale producers efficiently. For example, MoALD recently estimated the are 6000 vacancy in the government
technical and extension system compared to current policy at local, state and federal levels. The government led free/subsidized
service competes particularly along the road corridors with the fee-based services of private service providers affecting
development of sustainable support markets. Municipal authorities are now responsible for these services for farmers, with state
government supposed to be supporting municipalities via the Agricultural Knowledge Centres (AKC) and Veterinary Hospital and
Livestock Services Specialist Centres (VHLSSC). However, AKCs and VHLSSCs do not have a mandate for direct service
delivery. At the same time, municipalities do not have the human resources to establish or sustain such services. New modalities
are evidently required, based on the pluralistic model advocated by the ADS, for example a hybrid model wherein grassroots
service provision is by private providers with government technical officials providing overall technical guidance and regulatory
oversight. Many municipal authorities are already showing interest in developing more sustainable and affordable technical
services, as seen in RERP. HVAP supported the establishment/upgrading of 108 private service providers in both crops and
livestock, with the support of the predecessors to the AKCs and VHLSSs. VITA will adopt a similar approach in promoting local
service markets, in coordination with municipal authorities for mobilizing local service providers and with state ministries for
technical backstopping from AKCs and VHLSSCs.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
47.
The programme goal, development objective and outcomes are:
Goal
Improved livelihoods, climate resilience and nutrition of poor and vulnerable people
Development
Objective
Farm enterprises of poor and vulnerable rural people are more resilient to climate change, increasingly
profitable, strengthen their market linkages and use appropriate financial services.
Outcome 1
Improved small-scale producers’ capacities to run profitable farm enterprises and establish linkages with
suppliers and buyers.
Outcome 2
Transformational increase in investment in the smallholder agricultural sector in supported programme states.
12/34
Outcome 3
Improved access by small-scale producers and clusters’ actors to productive infrastructure.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
The programme is also strongly aligned with the objectives of IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016–2025, that: "poor rural people
overcome poverty and achieve food security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods." It will directly contribute
to all three of IFAD’s Strategic Objectives (SO), namely SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; SO2: Increase
poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and SO3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities. To this end, the VITA programme derives its rationale squarely from the
conclusion of the COSOP which identifies Nepal’s ‘central challenge as facilitating the transformation of a subsistence-based
rural economy into a sustainable market driven productive sector generating equitable benefits for poor rural people and
disadvantaged groups.’
Geographical area: While the programme will have a mandate to operate nationwide as part of its scaling-up objective, it will
initially focus intensive activities within 28 districts in three states where all three programme components will operate (see Table
1 below): in State 2 in all 8 districts, in State 5 in all 12 districts, and; in State 3 in 8 of 13 districts. Within these districts, the
programme will work in specific locations linked to clusters for specific supported commodities with priority given to locations with
high agricultural potential and higher concentrations of poorer households. State 5 and State 2 have strong agricultural potential
combined with highest numbers of people living in poverty – together they are home to 55% of all people living in multi-
dimensional poverty in the country (NPC, 2018). In State 3, the programme be more focused, working in districts with good
agricultural potential that were the most severely impacted by the 2015 earthquake. VITA will also provide financial services
under Component 2 to small-scale producers in State 1 and Sate 6 in partnership with other ongoing programmes providing
business-focussed support similar to that provided under Component 1. In the IFAD portfolio, this includes the ASDP in State 6
and RERP in State 1. RERP is also already active in State 2 and VITA is designed to build-on RERP activities there.
Target groups: VITA has two target groups. Its primary target group is small-scale producers, including landowners and
landless, and labourers involved in selected supply chains. VITA will have a strong focus of women and youth – with at least 60%
women beneficiaries and 30% youth. Disadvantaged individuals including Dalits, Janjatis, landless and other disadvantaged
groups will be specifically targeted using similar approaches and to be outlined in an inclusions strategy to be included in the
Programme Implementation Manual (PIM). Inclusion of small-scale producers and poor and vulnerable rural populations will be
ensured by selecting supply chains that have promise to deliver the biggest benefits to the largest number of poor and by
propagating technologies that benefit the intended target group most. This will involve, among other measures, selection of crops
and livestock with high returns on labour and technologies that are labour saving and help reducing drudgery of women. A
secondary target group are MSMEs and producer groups active in the supported supply chains.
Within the overall target group, two specific vulnerable groups have been identified and will be supported with additional
measures to ensure they can fully participate and benefit from the programme. Firstly, young women - who often have low
nutritional status, a high level of teenage childbirth (contributing to multi-generation nutrition issues) and are typically
economically dis-empowered with limited decision-making power and access to resources to be able to start their own farm
enterprise. A second vulnerable group are married women whose husband are working overseas and who live with their
husband’s family. These women may have limited access to and control over the incomes and remittances earned by their
husbands as well as low status within their family-in-law’s household and not seen as contributing financially to the household.
Graduation in VITA. To maximize the inclusion of disadvantaged individuals and households, the programme will adopt an explicit
‘graduation’ approach among supported small-scale producers and groups, building on experience from HVAP. In the context of
VITA, this means that producer groups will be mobilized on an inclusive basis, i.e. with the voluntary participation of like-minded
small-scale producers in a community but with varying levels of individual resources and starting incomes. More able and less
risk averse small-scale producers from a community may be the first to mobilize themselves into producer groups to interact
jointly with the market. As initial linkages with buyers and service providers become more established, other interested but poorer
or risk averse individuals will then be supported by the programme and existing groups members to join these producer groups
and learn from the experience of their friends and neighbours. This natural ‘graduation-based’ growth of producer groups allows
the groups to achieve scale and so attract more buyers and services providers, hence delivering benefits to all the members and
creating a natural self-motivation within groups to support these graduation-based inclusion processes, as was seen in HVAP.  
Outreach: 120,000 small-scale producers are expected to directly benefit from programme supported services, falling into three
categories: a) around 70,000 will be in the main focus states 2, 3 and 5 where all three components will be active and receive full
package of programme support; b) around 20,000 who are already in relatively mature self-help groups and co-operatives
supported by Heifer’s SLVC2 project in 19 of the 28 project districts and will receive business capacity and market linkage
support under Component 1 and be eligible for support under component 2 and 3 on the same basis as those under category (a)
and; c) around a further 30,000 households outside these primary locations who will benefit only from financial services
supported under Component 2. In addition, many more individuals and MSMEs will benefit as users of public infrastructure
supported by the programme, such as markets and access roads.
54.
Duration of the programme will be 72 months, with the actual completion date to be the end of the financial year in which 72
months of implementation have been passed.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
55.
The programme has three closely related components that drive the inclusive supply chain development process (see Figure 1):
1) Inclusive supply chain development, 2) Expanding financial services to agriculture, and 3) Supply chain infrastructure.
56.
Figure 1: VITA's inclusive supply chain development process
13/34
57.
Table 1: Programme locations and outreach
VITA Coverage
State
Districts
by Agro-ecological zone
Terai and Siwalik
Mid and High
Mountain
Small-scale
producers under
VITA
Branches
ADBL
Newly engaged groups
Five
All - 12
Nawalparasi West
(Parasi), Banke, Bardiya,
Dang, Kapilvastu,
Rupandehi
Arghakhanchi, Palpa,
Pyuthan, Rolpa,
Gulmi, Rukum East
30,000
33
Full programme
coverage
Comp:
1, 2 & 3
Two
All - 8
Saptari, Siraha,
Dhanusha, Bara,
Mahottari, Sarlahi,
Rautahat, Parsa
25,000
37
Three
8[2] of 13
Chitwan
MakawanpurSindhuli,
Kavre, Dhading,
Dolakha
Sindhupalchok
Nuwakot
15,000
Sub-total
28
15
13
70,000
20
90
Co-ops already supported by Heifer
14/34
Finance services only, Comp 2 only - with partner projects
Total
20,000
30,000
120,000
58.
COVID-19: VITA is a major investment that will contribute to the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as building
resilience of rural communities to future shocks. Its internal financing structure means that it will achieve this without creating
fiscal burden. Several adjustments to this end are incorporated in the components as outlined below. More generally, the roll-out
plans to the programme districts have been accelerated such the activities will launch in all 28 focus districts within the first 15
months of the programme. Such adjustment have not create additional COVID-19 related costs, but rather build on what was
already planned.
a)   Component 1: Inclusive Supply Chain Development
59.
The Programme will initially focus on seven main commodities: vegetables, goats, fish, cereal seed, potato (seed), dairy and
banana. Market analysis during the design confirms these commodities meet the following selection criteria, illustrated in Error!
Reference source not found.:
60.
Clear, current market demand for the specific products - sufficient to absorb the expected increase in production;
61.
Substantial confirmed interest from:
traders and businesses to increase their sourcing from small-scale producers and producer groups in the
cluster locations;
producers, including small-scale producer, women and youth, to expand and improve their production to a
commercial basio
62.
Opportunities for competitive, profitable and sustainable small-scale production via affordable investment pathways;
63.
Practical intervention opportunities for the programme to facilitate the accelerated development of the particular supply chain and
local clusters.
64.
Commodities and smallholder-based production systems can be viable and competitive in target production areas under current
and future agro-climatic conditions, including via the adoption of climate smart agriculture practices
65.
The programme will adopt a cluster development approach. Clusters offer many advantages for small-scale producers in
competitive supply chains and enable more inclusive growth. Aggregating supply reduces transaction costs among buyers and
farmers and for financial or technical services, making them more viable. Such efficiencies are vital for small-scale producers to
66.
67.
68.
69.
become reliable suppliers in the market. They are especially important for youth and poorer households who can only make the
minimum initial investments and must expand their farm business gradually. Clustering thus improves market access for small
producers and make such investment pathways viable. In VITA, the cluster development will operate at four levels: i) regional
market level covering several road corridors, ii) road corridor level covering several clusters, and iii) cluster level covering one or
more producer groups, typically in a municipality and iv) producer group level.
15/34
Cluster development processes will be driven by primary actors themselves, principally farmers and MSMEs. Farmers
and businesses are the ones who must make their investments successful and carry the risk of failure. It is they who must drive
the process. Facilitating an ongoing process of action-oriented brokering among these key actors in each corridor is a central
element of the approach. The initial focus of these dialogue processes is grounded in immediate opportunities for actions and
improvements that build trust and momentum in the cluster. As momentum and trust begin to emerge it is feasible to jointly
consider longer-term aspirations and begin to tackle them. The brokering process among key cluster actors should establish
jointly owned, albeit informal, action plans and progress tracking for growth of their cluster. Municipality and State authorities will
be fully engaged during the cluster development processes, including via the multi-stakeholder platforms, as key supporters.
Multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) are the core of the cluster development approach. MSPs are a rolling process of action-
oriented brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the key actors in each cluster and road corridor to catalyse
investments and remove bottlenecks to increase trading and profits, and to make the most of practical growth opportunities. VITA
will organise MSPs in each commodity at two levels: road corridor and regional hub. The MSPs will facilitate: (i) primary actors to
jointly identify practical opportunities and bottlenecks for developing their supply chains and priorities for individual or joint
actions, (ii) trust among different players, (iii) common understanding of opportunities and challenges among critical suppliers,
such as research and financial institutions; and (iv) local coordination of various public investment initiatives. These are expected
to result in the realization of practical trading plans between producers and buyers. MSPs will be held regularly at the road
corridor (typically 1-2 times per year) and regional hub level (annually), initially facilitated by the programme team but later jointly
by the producers and businesses themselves. Initial handover of the facilitation role typically begins after around 3 years, once
there is momentum in the supply chain, maturing trust among actors and experience of the MSP process. MSPs for regularly
traded products (e.g. vegetables, milk, fish, bananas) tend to mature more quickly than for products with one annual crop – due
to more frequent interaction among producers, buyers and service providers.
Support market development forms a vital part of the cluster development process (e.g. technical, financial) as they are
essential for sustaining competitive clusters and for enabling other clusters to emerge to copy the initial successes (sometime
called “crowding in”). Within profitable clusters and supply chains, the costs of such services and inputs should be an affordable
routine business cost for producers and businesses and should not require external subsidy. The programme will therefore focus
on facilitating investments that develop, in a broadly harmonized manner, the demand and supply of these market-based
services and inputs in the clusters, consistent with the pluralistic framework envisaged in the ADS. This will also include suppliers
of appropriate renewable energy technologies in the supply chain.
Implementation of Component 1 will be led by the LPA through a dedicated Supply Chain team working with the Socio-
Economic Mobilization (SEM) teams of local NGO partners managed by Heifer in all districts, as is their regular practice. The
component will be coordinated centrally via the Programme Management Unit (PMU) in a single team including staff of ADBL’s
SME and Agriculture Department and Heifer. Specialist supply chain staff from both partners will be assigned to participating
branches and regional offices. The Supply Chain team will be responsible for overall delivery of Component 1 and activities under
Sub-component 1.2 (see below). The SEMs will be primarily responsible for delivery of Sub-component 1.1. ADBL and Heifer will
operate a ‘one programme’ approach with all staff working as a single team. In addition, there will be a small team of specialist
staff to provide technical leadership and capacity building of programme teams on specific areas, including a Targeting, Gender
and Inclusion Specialist; Heifer teams will also have a focus on nutrition – which is mainstreamed in their Values-based Holistic
Community Development (VBHCD) approach and Cornerstones tool.
Sub-component 1.1: Farm business capacity development
70.
71.
72.
Two major intervention areas will focus on building the business capacity of individual small-scale producers and their producer
groups to transform themselves into successful farm businesses, empowered and capable of being resilient and reliable actors in
their supply chains:
Mentoring and mobilization of small-scale producers in the clusters will be led by a team of market-oriented SEMs of local
NGO partners managed by Heifer in all districts with support from the Supply Chain teams at State and District level. This will
draw on Heifer’s successful experience in Nepal, using its VBHCD approach and Cornerstones tool. The programme will work
with newly mobilized groups where needed, including women-led groups, as well as linking with ‘market-ready’ existing producer
groups, such as the many groups supported by Heifer and other IFAD-backed projects. Mentoring and mobilization of producers
and producer organizations will enable them to make successful investments and become reliable supply chain partners for
buyers and customers.
Heifer’s Cornerstones tool is based on a set of 12 core values. All small-scale producers Component 1 will take part in training
around the Cornerstones, establishing a set of common values between them at the beginning of the partnership. The
Cornerstones include, inter alia: 1. Passing on the Gift 2. Accountability 3. Sharing and Caring 4. Sustainability and Self-Reliance
5. Improved Animal and Resource Management 6. Nutrition and Income 7. Gender and Family Focus 8. Genuine Need and
Justice 9. Improving the Environment 10. Full Participation 11. Training, Education and Communication 12. Spirituality. Several
are notable in the context of VITA: Passing the Gift embodies the expectation that the first wave of beneficiaries in the producer
organization will be expected to actively mobilize and support their less able friends and neighbours to join as soon as possible.
This gift being the know-how, market networks and mutual support (not physical or monetary inputs) – a practical graduation
approach to inclusion.
73.
On nutrition, the Cornerstones tool supports individuals within the POs to identify practical ways to improve the nutrition of their
families. In VITA this will include nutritional practices in the home and also how to better use increased incomes and increased
local supply of high nutritional value foods created by the programme. A specific focus will be on improving the nutritional status
of women, especially teenage girls, as well as early childhood nutrition.
16/34
74.
Business skills training to small-scale producers will be provided to all members of producers group on a voluntary basis.
The ‘enhanced’ business skills courses will cover: essentials of financial literacy and household finances; managing your own
farm as a business; managing a group enterprise. ‘Enhanced’ elements to the training include aspects of climate change, youth,
nutrition and elements of the Gender Action Learning System (“GALS-lite”). It will also address opportunities for more productive
use of remittances within migrant households and raise awareness of women’s lands right. The course will be approx. 60-70
hours spread over 32-36 session, over 1-2 session per week, delivered on a peer-to-peer basis by Business Skills Facilitators
(BSF) trained by the programme. BSF’s will also play an important role on the programme’s M&E and data collection through
Farm Business Diaries – building on the HVAP tools. On climate adaptation, the modules will apply the Participatory Integrated
Climate Services for Agriculture[3] (PICSA) approach to help small-scale producers identity and access relevant climate and
weather information; assess pertinent options for crops and livestock investments and adaptations; and the use of participatory
planning tools to improve and enlighten their decision-making based on their situations. These adaptation investments for all
priority commodity are summarized in the attached SECAP Report (Table 15) and will be financed under Component 2.1.
Sub-component 1.2: Brokering and investment facilitation
75.
76.
77.
78.
Brokering and cluster facilitation – to improve linkages between farmers, buyers and service providers and better exploit
market opportunities. Facilitation of rolling MSPs and associated business-to-business (B2B) follow-up is a central element of this
process. Similar experiences from Heifer Smallholder Livestock Value Chains project (SLVC2) will also be embedded in the
approach.
In the context of COVID-19 and the potential prolonged need for safe social distancing practices, the substantial increase in
collective marketing of farm produce through POs, with trucks collecting produce in bulk directly from the village, will dramatically
reduce the number of small-scale producers having to regularly go to the market to sell their producer one by one. Greater use of
electronic payments between buyers and producers will also reduce the need for face to face transaction. However, physical
produce will still need to be aggregated and transported along the supply chain in a safe manner. Similarly, there will still need to
be some safe face-to-face interaction, especially in the early stages as relationships are built, for example via safe MSPs. VITA
will support the widespread adoption and adherence to such safe working practices in supported supply chains.
Supply chain development facility (SDF) (excluding physical infrastructure) – to make small "public good" investments to
address issues that emerge from the supply chains. These will primarily be "software" type investments (e.g. market research,
varietal trials, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) protocol development, improved technology demonstration, service market
development) that cannot otherwise be financed as private investments. The facility will specifically not finance public
infrastructure – which will be addressed by collaboration with local, state and federal government investment programmes (e.g.
via the MSPs) and under Component 3. Three additional activities that will be financed via the SDF include: i) a series of
measures to accelerate the development of critical local support markets for key technical services and inputs, and ii) technical
capacity development of state and local governments working with the programme, iii) carrying capacity assessments at
municipality or ward level of proposed production clusters.
For support market development, a key focus will be to expand the network of local private technical service providers that can
provide advice to small-scale producers on appropriate climate adaptation investments and climate smart agriculture practices for
their farm enterprises – for crops, livestock and fish. VITA will partner with municipal authorities, POs and buyers to identify, train
and mentor suitable technical service providers in the municipality – operating as either embedded or independent service
providers. Similarly, VITA will partner with state MOLMACs to ensure the Agriculture Knowledge Centres (AKCs) and Veterinary
Hospital and Livestock Specialist Service Centres (VHLSSCs), who have more higher qualified staff, provide technical
backstopping to the municipalities and local service providers supported by the municipalities and the programme - which is a
stated role and justification for the AKCs/VHLSSCs.
79.
The SDF is also expected to support the greater use of information and communication technologies (ICT) in the supply chains,
based on demand. Three areas are anticipated as priorities:
1. 
1.  Agriculture Market Information System for market price discovery. Previous project supported systems have worked
well but proved financially and institutionally unstainable. ADBL will build on these previous systems to provide this key
service to the supply chain actors while addressing the sustainability issues for the system.
2.  Mobile ‘expert systems’ primarily for use by technical service provider to give better advice to farmers, building on the
successful pilot of this under HVAP as well as through collaboration with other initiatives in this area.
3.  Piloting e-market/trading tools – initially within more standardized commodities where such systems can add value and
efficiency to the supply chains, for example in goats.
Sub-component 1.3: Inclusive supply chains knowledge and policy
80.
81.
M&E within supply chains – to actively monitor the commercial development of each cluster from season to season, providing
insights back to producers and businesses as well as data for evidence-based management of activities and results, including on
targeting and inclusion.
Policy insights and development. As evidence is built, VITA will prepare a series of evidence-based policy discussion inputs
relevant to federal, state and local levels. A key policy focus under the Component will be on strengthening the processes and
capacities for local economic development policies and plans at state and municipal level, in particular to create the space for
genuine voice from women, youth and other target groups as well as MSMEs into the policy processes. The MSPs under VITA
will act as practical role models for this, often focusing on priority local sectors. The sub-component will then use evidence and
insights from these to champion the adoption of similar policy dialogue processes into other aspects of local economic
development policy and planning, including potentially into sectors other than agriculture.
17/34
Component 2: Expanding Financial Services to Agriculture
82.
83.
The component will address supply-side constraints for appropriate financial services to agriculture, especially to small-scale
producers and MSMEs – including credit, savings and investment, value chain financing, remittance payment services and
insurance among others. In addition to ADBL itself strengthening its delivery of financial service to agriculture, VITA will also
provide similar wholesale lending and capacity building support to other partner Class A and Class D financial institutions. As well
as expansion of credit, emphasis will also be given to expansion of savings and investment – for the better management of
existing incomes (including remittances) but also to increase the accumulation of household wealth and financial assets from the
significant increases in net income expected to result from the programme.
Implementation of Component 2. Overall coordination will be by the PMU. ADBL’s SME and Agriculture Department will
provide technical leadership supported by a fulltime agri-finance specialist attached to the PMU. However, as primarily a lending
operation the component will be mainstreamed in ADBL structures (costs shown as implementation support costs). As ADBL is a
wholesale lender to other financial institutions, the wholesale loans under VITA will be managed by the relevant departments in
ADBL responsible for these activities. Similarly, the specific identified capacity development sub-projects will be managed by the
relevant departments – e.g. on Digital Banking – and accountable to the PMU. For capacity building activities with external
partner financial institutions (PFI), the PMU will be responsible for coordinating these activities with the relevant PFI.
Sub-component 2.1: Private investment financing
84.
85.
The subsidiary loan to ADBL, part of which will be on-lent to PFIs (Class A and Class D financial institutions) on wholesale basis,
is specifically for increased provision of medium- and longer-term credit (>12 months term) to farmers and MSMEs in supported
supply chains. ADBL will provide such loans to partner FIs and bear the administrative responsibility and credit risk in a way that
will limit the transaction cost of GON. Short-term working capital finance expansion, to compliment the term finance above, will be
financed by ADBL and PFI from their own resources.
It is expected that a large majority of the investments by small-scale producers financed under the sub-component will be to
upgrade their farm production practices including adapting to climate risks. Such investment decisions will be informed by the
business skill training under Component 1.1, including the tools for farmers to factor in climate considerations into their
investment and production plans. For example, these include investment in poly-tunnels for vegetables, in water efficient
technologies like drip irrigation, developing in-field water catchment ponds, construction of shed and shifting to stall-fed
production systems for livestock with increased planting of fodder and forage, adaptation of fish ponds to reduce risks from
flooding, planting of wind breaks to protect from more frequent storms etc. Expected typical adaptation investments for all
commodities and which farmers will select from using a defined selection criteria are listed in the attached SECAP Report (Table
15).
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity enhancement and policy support
86.
87.
88.
Capacity enhancement and policy development facility (CEPD) - will provide for capacity enhancement across all its activities
pertaining to financial inclusion and supply of financial services to agriculture and rural communities. The programme will use this
facility for any relevant technical support during implementation, including the following: capacity development for financial
intermediaries on rural MSME and smallholder lending; improvements in digital banking operations for rural areas; internal
systems and processes improvement to reduce transaction costs and improve supply chains analysis and financing, and
integrating climate adaptation measures; development of specific value chain financing and risk assessment manuals;
improvement of remittance related products and services; capacity for the design of new financial products more suitable to rural
MSMEs and small-scale producers, including micro-insurance; relevant financial market research, thematic studies, sectoral
assessment and analysis. Amongst others, priorities will be to support further business enhancement of ADBL and digital
innovation. On insurance, the programme will harmonize its support with the proposed new project on insurance between ADBL
and GIZ, to be coordinated by the same PMU.
Expansion of rural digital financial services by ADBL and others, for example including electronic payment systems as well as
savings and loans products, will be an important focus for the sub-component. To increase youth access to finance for farm
investment, specific measures and instruments will be developed to address the current obstacles – including piloting of
arrangements for institutional guarantees provided by the local municipality and or POs.
On policy, the priority will be to generate high quality evidence to contribute to improvements in the policies, regulations and
strategies for expanding agricultural finances, especially to small-scale producers and MSME, as well as digital rural financial
services. A related area for policy engagement will be to demonstrate the viability and practical policies and strategies to use loan
finance to support productive investments by small-scale producers and MSME instead of through grants and subsidies. Where
feasible, the programme will seek to collaborate with others economic research institutions to enhance the quality of the evidence
and analysis generated through the programme to feed into this policy dialogue.
Component 3: Supply Chain Infrastructure
89.
To improve supply chain efficiency, the enabling environment, and reduce the risks and impacts of changing weather patterns
and climate conditions, VITA will invest in critical supply chain infrastructure prioritized via the MSP processes at corridor and
regional level (which includes climate risk assessments and integration of measures to strengthen the infrastructure against
changing weather patterns and climate conditions). Three types of infrastructure to be supported include:
18/34
1. 
1.  Regional wholesale markets serving the wider supply chain of supported commodities across multiple districts and the
state. The programme will support up to 1 such market in each of states 2, 3 and 5. Sub-project implementors will be
the state authorities.
2.  Satellite wholesale markets serving one or more municipalities in a supported road corridor to improve the aggregation
and sale of products from clusters out to larger regional and wholesale markets. The programme expects to support
networks of 5-8 satellite markets in each of states 2, 3 and 5. Sub-project implementors will be individual municipal
authorities or consortia of municipal authorities in programme districts.
3.  Small-scale community infrastructure, including small-scale productive and mutli-use water and irrigation schemes for
crops and livestock (< 5 Ha. each) and upgrading farm access roads (under 10 km each). The number and mix of
community infrastructure will be based on the needs identified through the various corridor-level MSP processes. Sub-
project implementors will be registered producer groups or co-operatives participating in the MSP or the host
municipality authorities on their behalf.
All infrastructure will apply locally relevant climate smart design principles and practices. Furthermore, due to COVID-19, the
design of new market infrastructure will also take into account the likely need for greater physical spaces, introduce health and
safety protocols and as well as provide water and sanitation facilities in physical markets to reduce the risk of markets becoming
centres of transmission.
Increased variability of rainfall due to climate change has been identified as a specific risk to small-scale producers. Investments
in multi-use water systems for livestock and domestic purposes, and small-scale irrigation for crops are specially intended to
mitigate these risks by reducing reliance on purely rainfed production systems. Similarly, climate proofed farm access roads will
further reduce risks from periods of more intensive rainfall disrupting the ability to get produce to market, especially during the
monsoon season.
The Component will operate as a financing facility available to eligible sub-project implementers. Sub-project implementers
awarded works will be fully responsible for the implementation of all aspects of the works. The programme will hire appropriate
technical staff to conduct site inspections to supervise works and for payment release purposes. In the case of municipal
authorities, the programme will additionally offer capacity building support as necessary to raise the permanent capacity of the
local authorities and their staff to implement such works.
For regional and satellite wholesale markets, VITA will finance up to 75% of approved costs with the balance financed by sub-
project implementers or other sources. Financing will be on a reimbursement basis with verified physical and financial progress
against payment milestones. For small-scale community infrastructure VITA will finance up to 85% of the approved costs.
Implementation of component 3. The LPA will appoint a small team of technical advisors, including engineers, overseers and
procurement specialists to oversee the component. They will coordinate the evaluation of all Expressions of Interest (EoI) and
technical review of the detailed designs and proposal. The Component team will include staff at both PMU and state level who will
carry out site inspection of the proposed sites and actual works to authorize payment release.
Eligible sub-project implementers may submit EoIs for sub-projects to the LPA. EoIs meeting the eligibility criteria will be ranked
against an agreed set of criteria, linked to their contribution to the programme’s development objectives and key performance
indicators. Within the limits of available funding for each round, the highest ranked EoIs for each category of infrastructure will be
invited to submit fully costed technical designs alongside a clear business case and rationale for the sub-project. The programme
will contribute to the costs of necessary technical assistance to the sub-project implementers to develop the detailed proposals to
the required standard. Detailed design will be evaluated by the LPA, with evaluation sub-contracted out as necessary, and those
confirmed as meeting the agreed criteria will then be approved by the LPA for full implementation by the respective sub-project
implementer. All procurement and contracting of design and works will be the responsibility of the assigned sub-project
implementer.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
E. Theory of Change
96.
97.
The core problem the programme addresses is that Nepalese small-scale producers’ incomes in traditional farming are low and
uncertain (risky), yet there are multiple profitable opportunities in the market from modern small-scale farming to serve both
domestic and export markets. In response the programme will: i) builds trust and networks among primary actors (farmers,
buyers, suppliers) and facilitates them to develop their own priorities for their local market development; ii) enable other
stakeholders and support programmes to identify and respond to the priorities raised by the primary actors, especially for
investment in public goods; iii) mentor individuals and producer groups to transition to farming as a business, equipping them with
the skills and confidence to make successful climate-smart farm investments and access the necessary suppliers and services;
and iv) address the supply-side constraints on rural financial services, especially for longer-term investment finance.
Component 1 will target high potential commodity supply chains of interest to poor and vulnerable small-scale producer, mostly
those of high nutritional value foods. It will build the capacities of small-scale producers to run sustainable, profitable farm
enterprises and establish linkages with suppliers and buyers in these supply chains. This will be achieved through providing
intensive training in foundational business skills to farmers and producer groups, so they are more confident and able to engage
in the supply chains and manage their farming as a business. It will provide addition training on key issues, including: how to
assess climate risks and integrate adaptation measures into their investment and production plans; good nutritional practices,
and; women’s land rights. It will mobilize like-minded farmers to organize themselves into POs to achieve the necessary scale to
interact with buyers and service providers and increase efficiencies and competitiveness of their local supply chains. It will ensure
women take genuine leadership roles in these groups and other high-status roles, including business skills facilitators, to have
greater voice in their communities, supply chains and policy dialogue with local and state authorities. It will establish rolling cycles
98.
99.
of MSPs to build networks and relationships, facilitate market linkages and stimulate investment opportunities for producers and
MSMEs as well as giving greater voice to women in local policy processes. It will provide sustained mentoring to producer
organizations so they can take advantages of the opportunities that emerge through the MSP processes. To ensure farmers have
good access to climate smart production technologies and practices, the programme will support complementary investments by
small and larger commercial service providers serving small-scale producers – as direct or embedded services. This will be done
in collaboration with municipal and state authorities to achieve the pluralistic service models envisaged in the ADS – as currently
seen under RERP.
19/34
Through their participation in the MSP, the programme will improve the understanding of financial services provider of specific
local demand and opportunities for them in offering financial services to various supply chain actors. Similarly from a policy and
public investment perspective, the MSPs will provide a mechanism for local, state and federal government to understand specific
needs for enabling public infrastructure, services and policies to complement private investment and, importantly, for women,
youth and poor to have a greater voice in these processes.
Component 2 will deliver a transformational increase in investment in the smallholder agricultural sector in supported programme
states by tackling the supply-side constraints for appropriate financial services to agriculture. Through the provision of the
subsidiary loan, it will reduce the systemic shortages of term finance in the sector. It will address other capacity issues within
partner financial institutions to increase their capacity to offer relevant financial services at the scale required and to increase rural
financial inclusion. The loans provided to small-scale producers will be used to upgrade farm production practices including
adopting more climate resilient practices, for example, investment in poly-tunnels for vegetables, use of water efficient
technologies like drip irrigation, developing in-field water catchment ponds, construction of shed and shifting to stall-fed
production systems for livestock with increased planting of fodder and forage, adaptation of fish ponds to reduce risks from
flooding, planting of wind breaks to protect from more frequent storms etc.
100.
Component 3 will improve access by small-scale producers and clusters’ actors to productive infrastructure through investment in
critical public infrastructure along the supply chains. This will include upgrading of regional hub markets and establishing
networks of satellite wholesale markets to increase market access for small-scale producers, POs and MSMEs. The programme
will invest in productive community level infrastructure to raise agricultural productivity and reduce risks and impacts associated
with changing weather patterns and climate conditions – through multi-use water systems (e.g. for domestic water, livestock and
horticulture), small-scale irrigation as well as upgrading farm access roads to facilitate efficient and reliable transport of produce
from the field to market all year round. Importantly, the priorities for infrastructure development will be determined through the
MSP processes driven by producers and MSMEs within the supply chains to ensure beneficiaries determine these priorities.
101.
102.
VITA contributes to all four of IFAD’s mainstreaming priorities. The programme will produce gender transformative outcomes as it
strengthens women’s agency and economic empowerment by supporting them to take leading roles in their supply chains and
facilitating a combination of efficient production technology and methods (such as labor saving technologies including drip
irrigation, mulching, stall feeding), easy access to credit and other financial services, market access, a comprehensive package
of financial and business skills (covers business skills, financial knowledge, aspects of the Gender Action Learning Systems
(GALS) – ‘GALS-lite’; nutrition and balanced diet, climate change). Nutrition promotion will be mainstreamed through the same
comprehensive packages such as promoting availability and utilization of knowledge on nutritious food through ‘GALS-lite’ as
well as increased access to high nutrient value foods through a focus on the supply chains for such items. VITA is youth sensitive
and will work with older adults and community leaders to take action towards providing better opportunities for their young adult
children – especially those under 25 years - for example, local arrangements to increase opportunities to rent land for production
and the provision of institutional guarantees from the municipality to facilitate access to finance for investment. VITA will attract
youth to agriculture through many measures such as identification and promotion of successful young producers as role models
for modern farming, especially young women, use of social media and other channels to specifically market opportunities to
youth, support mechanisms to address youth’s limited access to land and finance for production.
Climate trends and future projections for Nepal indicate that seasonal variations in temperature and precipitation will increase,
resulting into more frequent and intensified extreme weather events and likely impacts such as: i) increased incidences of new
and existing diseases, pest and insects, especially in higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in rainfall patterns within the year with
increased water demand leading to higher risks of temporary water shortages for rainfed production; iii) increased heat stress to
livestock from a small increase in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season, to reduced milk production and
reduced growth in poultry. In addressing these risks, VITA will adopt a series of measures including: selection of climate resilient
commodities to be promoted in different locations and agro-climatic condition, including via carrying capacity assessments;
promote and train small-scale producers and MSMEs on tools to help them factor in climate change considerations into their
investment and production plans; promotion of climate smart agriculture technologies and services through strengthening of local
support markets and with partner financial institutions to strengthen the consideration of these issues in their loan appraisal and
risk assessment systems and strengthen the capacity of their staff in these areas. VITA will help to reduce climate related risks
and impacts by, inter alia: i) improving farmers’ understanding of climate risks to their farm business (Sub-component 1.1), ii)
increase availability and access to climate resilient technologies and advice to implement climate adaptation measures (through
Support Market Development under Sub-component 1.2); providing loans to finance climate adaptation investments (Component
2.1); investing in multi-use water system and small scale irrigation to reduce the risks from temporary water shortages, and
upgrade farm access roads for year round access to farms even in periods of heavy rain (Component 3). The programme areas
are moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
103.
National priorities: The programme is fully aligned with Nepal’s current 14th 3-years Plan (2017/18-2019/20) which calls for
sustained and inclusive growth to allow poor, marginalized and climate vulnerable communities to benefit more substantially from
economic growth and socio-economic development. It is strongly aligned with both the objectives of the ADS and also the
continuing efforts to increase lending to agriculture being led by NRB through its deprived and priority sector lending policies and
the 2016 financial inclusion road map.
104.
Country ownership of the programme is high. The original concept was developed by ADBL in close consultation with the
leadership of Nepal Rastra Bank, MoF and MoALD. There is wide recognition of the need to evolve government support to
agriculture away from subsidies and towards more privately financed and market-based approaches. Under federalism,
implementation modalities for investment programme with development partners also need to evolve. VITA seeks to provide a
practical model for tackling these various issues and so has strong country ownership. In ADBL, the recently appointed CEO has
won support of the Board and staff for a new strategy to revitalize the banks leading role in inclusive modern agricultural
development. VITA is seen as a key pillar to that strategy and so has strong commitment across the ADBL leadership team,
evident from their commitment of around USD30 million in co-financing from their own resources.
20/34
105.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) VITA is aligned to are: no poverty (Goal1), zero hunger (Goal2), gender equality
(Goal5), economic growth (Goal8) and climate action (Goal13).
106.
COSOP 2013-2020 Strategic Objectives are fully reflected, including SO1: Promote rural income diversification and stimulate
employment; SO2: Strengthen food security and resilience to climatic and other risks, and; SO3: Promote inclusive, accountable
and sustainable rural institutions.
107.
Harmonization and partnerships: Heifer are proposed to be a full implementing partner and co-financier for the programme.
More broadly, IFAD supported the development of the ADS along with other donors, especially ADB, and have continued a close
dialogue since. ADB recently approved a new US$40 million agri-finance project to fund SKBBL which will primarily support 50
co-operative agri-enterprises. As ADBL was SKBBL’s original parent bank and is a major shareholder, the two continue to have a
close relationship (including ADBL providing wholesale funding to SKBBL). This is expected to further deepen through the two
respective investment programmes, especially with the sharing of experience on inclusive market development practices. At the
same time ADBL, with retail and wholesale operations, has a far larger agricultural staff and technical capacity than SKBBL –
which is purely a wholesale financial institution. It is noted that the two programmes combined will mobilise approximately
US$100 million in capital for credit operations across the two institutions. This compares to the estimated MSME credit gap in
agriculture of around US$700 million, so the programmes are complementary and not competing.
108.
In addition, other donors in the sector are understood to be developing new investment projects – including USAID, DfID, SDC
and the World Bank, with whom IFAD are in discussion about co-financing. There are also other specialist projects of relevance
to build working collaboration with during implementation, such as GIZ Local and Provincial Economic Development project
(LPED) running on States 5, 6 and 7 from 2019-2022. In the case of the GIZ’s LPED, there are clear complementarities in the
approaches and scope of LPED and VITA – with both using similar modalities of private-public dialogues and capacity building of
local authorities on these approaches to inclusive economic development. LPED deals with all economic sectors in the locality
while VITA has a deeper focus and greater resources only in agriculture. Thus, in the municipalities in which LPED is working, it
has been agreed with the GIZ country team that VITA will specifically seek to collaborate and build on the work already done via
LPED to identify opportunities in the agriculture sector that can then be further developed through VITA.
109.
The World Food Programme has extensive expertise on nutrition – especially in Karnali State (6). VITA will build on their
information, education and communication (IEC) materials and expertise in behavior change for nutrition when developing the
nutrition modules/ToT for its enhanced business skills training courses.
110.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) began implementation of the GCF-funded “Building a Resilient Churia
Region in Nepal (BRCRN)” in May 2020 and will last 7 years. The project will be implemented in 26 river systems within States 1,
2, and 3 and there is expected to be substantial geographical overlap with VITA. BRCRN will work with around 750 community-
based organization (CBO) to promote a range of climate smart agriculture (CSA) and climate-resilient sustainable natural
resource management practices, including agro-forestry/livestock system. In locations and supply chains where the two projects
overlap, the CBO’s that also pursue links with the market (equivalent to the producer groups under VITA), are expected to be
eligible for support under VITA – both on the business capacity development and MSP under Component 1 and also for financial
services under Component 2. This is expected to be a similar arrangement to the collaboration with Heifer’s SLVC2 project
supported groups. In addition, there are also expected to be opportunities for collaboration between VITA and BRCRN in the
development of local service providers for CSA-related technologies and advice in these locations.
111.
IFAD Policies and Priorities: The programme will directly contribute to all three of IFAD’s Strategic Objectives. Furthermore, it
seeks to fully mainstream all four of IFAD’s current mainstreaming priorities, including being gender transformational.
112.
IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities within the programme
113.
Climate Change. VITA is a climate focused programme with estimated climate financing of US$74.3 million, equivalent to 76% of
total IFAD financing. Climate trends and future projections for Nepal indicate that seasonal variations in temperature and
precipitation will increase, resulting into more frequent and intensified extreme weather events and likely impacts such as i)
increased incidences of new and existing diseases, pest and insects, especially in higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in rainfall
patterns within the year with increased water demand leading to higher risks of temporary water shortages for rainfed agricultural
production; iii) increased heat stress to livestock from a small increase in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season,
leads to reduced milk production and reduced growth in poultry. In addressing these risks, VITA will adopt a series of measures
including: selection of climate resilient commodities to be promoted in different locations and agro-climatic condition,; promote
and train small-scale producers and MSMEs on tools to help them factor in climate change considerations into their investment
and production plans; promotion of climate smart agriculture technologies and services through strengthening of local support
markets and with partner financial institutions to screening of climate risks in their loan appraisal and strengthening the capacity
of staff in the area of climate change. VITA will help to reduce climate related risks and impacts by: i) improving farmers’
understanding of climate risks to their farm business (Sub-component 1.1), ii) increase availability and access to climate resilient
technologies and advice to implement climate adaptation measures (through Support Market Development under Sub-component
1.2); providing loans to finance climate adaptation investments (Component 2.1); investing in multi-use water system and small
scale irrigation to reduce the risks from temporary water shortages, and upgrade farm access roads for year round access to
21/34
farms particularly during periods of heavy rain (Component 3). The programme areas are moderately vulnerable to the effects of
climate change. Gender and social inclusion: Agriculture is heavily feminized in much of Nepal, yet women are under-
represented in leadership roles in agriculture and often along the supply chains. Social exclusion, for Dalits and Janajati, also
remains a major issue. VITA will build on the strong mainstreaming performance of HVAP to be a gender transformation
programme. It will implement a series of measures through its mobilization activities to ensure full and equitable participation of
women and disadvantaged groups including in leadership and high-status roles (e.g business skills facilitators). This will include
the promotion of existing government policies to encourage their involvement (e.g. 6% interest subsidy to women vs 5% for
agriculture in general) as well as actively supporting them to form their own producer groups to participate in the MSPs where
there are sufficient numbers and interest to do so. Heifer has a strong track record of ensuring women are the genuine leaders in
producer groups. Such producer groups would not exclude male members, but would ensure that women hold leadership roles
and are the majority of members and would represent their own interest in the MSP and supply chain development processes.
Achieving a critical mass of such groups and powerful women’s voice within in a road corridor will lead to deeper transformative
effects on women’s role in the local economy and more broadly. A focus on increasing labour productivity, and returns of labour,
is also a key strategy that will benefit rural women. This is achieved through a combination of a focus on high return on labour
crops/livestock production systems, such as fish ponds, stall-base goat raising, horticulture, and promotion of labour-saving
technologies (e.g. drip irrigation to reduce watering time, mulch sheets to reduce weeding, poly-tunnels to reduce the need for
spraying). Support to multi-use water systems, for example designed for use for domestic as well as productive purposes, will
also significantly reduce workload for women using such schemes. These measures are especially important to young working
women in rural areas given the multiple demands on their time, not least as more than one in three (36%) of Nepali women
currently have their first child before the age of 18.
114.
As well as specific targets and routine reporting on women’s programme participation and share of benefits, the programme will
conduct an IFAD’ empowerment indicator surveys to monitor its performance on women’s empowerment against a specific
logical framework target.
115.
In addition, individuals from some communities are vulnerable to key social risks within households and in local communities
undermining efforts to improve livelihoods. High-risk households are considered migrant households, especially in the Terai,
where the husband is overseas and the wife is living in their own household or with her husband’s relatives. These will be a
priority through the Corner Stones process, so progress on economic opportunities and social issues goes hand in hand. Social
mentoring will be integrated with the larger mentoring package, which will include financial and business skills education building
and producer group mentoring.
116.
Youth. Nepal has a long history of out-migration of youth from rural areas, especially young men. Low and uncertain incomes
from farming, hard and un-glamourous work, low social status of agriculture (affecting prospect of finding a wife/husband) are all
factors pushing youth to leave their homes in search of a better life. Yet many would be happy to return, or not leave at all, if
there were decent prospect for them closer to home. An income of round NRs 15,000 per month is widely anecdotally reported by
communities to be at a level that would be attractive for youth to stay. Modern smallholder farming as a business offers credible
opportunities to achieve this as well as transforming the social status of agriculture, to a skilled profession – farming with the
head not just the hands. But to be attractive, such opportunities must offer reasonably quick results – to build confidence and
belief among youth that they have real prospects.
117.
A key aspect of targeting youth in the programme is therefore in the selection of the commodities themselves – being those that,
as well as having good market potential, offer good returns on labour, short payback periods as well as credible affordable
investment pathways to deliver further growth. Beyond the commodity selection, active participation of youth in the producer
groups and along the supply chain (for example as service providers) will be a specific target, addressed through the mobilization
activities. The government’s interest subsidies and policies on collateral free credit to youth will be leveraged (similarly for women
and disadvantaged groups). Through the Corner Stones approach and GALS-like elements of the wider business skills training,
VITA will facilitate older adults and community leaders take action towards providing better opportunities for their young adult
children – especially those under 25 years - for example, local arrangements to increase opportunities to rent land for production
and the provision of institutional guarantees from the municipality and/or co-op to facilitate access to finance for investment.
118.
Similarly, the programme will seek opportunities to collaborate with youth-focused agriculture programmes, such as the Israeli
‘Learn and Earn’ youth agricultural training programme that has trained >2,000 young Nepalis since 2013. Furthermore, VITA will
emphasise digital communication with and among programme participants through mainstream media, social media and digital
platforms specifically designed to appeal to youth, promoting youth role models as well. Logframe targets have been set for youth
participation and benefits in the programme.
119.
Nutrition. As individuals, especially women, and groups become more empowered, economically and socially through their
participation in the programme, the programme will use its mobilization teams to facilitate discussion and action plans among
group member on how they can more actively improve the nutrition and health of their children and families. Nutrition is one of the
12 elements of the Corner Stone approach to be used. In addition, this will also draw on techniques inspired by household
mentoring approaches, such as GALS, to encourage individual women and their families to set out their visions for their families
and then progressively take steps themselves to achieve these objectives, including healthy well-nourished children. For families
with teenage children, a particular emphasis will be on improving the nutritional status of teenage girls, given the high prevalence
of teenage childbearing and the consequential impacts on early childhood nutrition and development. The extra financial and
social capital created by the programme will be important resources for households to draw on for this process. In parallel, the
programme is prioritising a majority of high-nutrition value crops and livestock. This will substantially increase the availability and
accessibility of these foods within households and their wider communities. Accordingly, VITA interventions will contribute to the
nutrition agenda through improving: (a) availability, affordability and awareness for direct beneficiaries, and (b) availability
dimension (increased production/supply) for consumers who are not direct beneficiaries of the VITA. The programme will monitor
performance against a women’s minimum dietary diversity logical framework target using a survey module in-line with IFAD’s
Core Outcome Indicator methodology and guidelines.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
22/34
120.
Total programme costs are estimated as around US$196.9 million over the six years implementation period as summarized in
below.
121.
Programme Component 1: Inclusive supply chain development, Component 2: Expanding financial services to Agriculture), and
Component 3: Supply chain infrastructure are partially counted as climate finance. As per the Multilateral Development Banks
Methodologies for Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance, the total amount of IFAD climate finance for this
programme is preliminarily calculated as US$74.3 million.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
122.
Total programme financing of US$ 196.9 million is comprised of IFAD funding of US$97.67 million (49.6%), government funding
of US$9.9 million (5.1%), ADBL and banks US$32.4 million (16.4%), Heifer $6.0 million (3.0%), beneficiaries US$33.8 million
(17.1%) and private sector contributions of US$16.9 million (8.6%). All beneficiary and private sector contributions shown are in
cash. There is no financing gap.
23/34
123.
Of the funds set aside for line of credit, while IFAD funds will be used exclusively for meeting medium term credit needs of farmer
and MSME borrowers, ADBL and PFIs will finance the associated short-term credit in entirety using their internal resources. Of
the government and ADBL financing US$ 2.6 million and US$ 1.98 million, respectively are estimated to be the amount for taxes.
ADBL will meet the tax expenditure from the income which will be generated from the interest spread that the GON will provide
on the subsidiary loan for the purpose.
124.
The taxes and duties to be paid on expenses incurred for the project will be funded from the counterpart funds provided by the
state and local government for the infrastructure construction expenses and by ADBL for the inclusive supply chain development
of component 1; capacity enhancement and policy development facility of component 2; and project management expenses. In
case of private investment financing, the private sector and beneficiaries will cover the taxes and duties from their equity, cash
contribution and bank loan while Heifer will provide funds for expenses inclusive of taxes and duties. Because of above funding
modality, the federal government will not provide counterpart funds for this project. The resources it will allocate for the use of
provincial and local government may be used for the meeting the expenditures thus incurred, however.
125.
The proposed funding modality follows the principle of fiscal devolution befitting a federal system of governance and has several
advantages. Firstly, by putting tax burden of productive infrastructure on state and local governments, it enhances transparency
with respect to the total financial cost of investment proposals which will encourage these governments to consider the proposals
with due care and diligence. Secondly, it also makes ADBL and PFIs independent of the governmental annual budget allocation
and release system and also helps reducing the transaction cost by eliminating expenditure settlement process.
c. Disbursement
126.
The withdrawal and use of funds by VITA out of its Loan will be governed by the IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (LDH) and
Financing Agreement between IFAD and the Government of Nepal. The procedures of disbursement, financial reporting and
maintenance of appropriate project records will be described in details in a Letter to the Borrower (LTB) subsequently after
signing the Financing Agreement between IFAD and the Government of Nepal. Three standard disbursement procedures are
available for IFAD financing:
Advance withdrawal
Direct payment
Reimbursement
127.
Advance withdrawal.  This modality is used to advance and/or replenish funds to a bank account as designated by the
borrower. IFAD places a limit on the amount to be advanced and/or replenished. Relevant details on the modality – which is
project specific – are to be agreed between the borrower and the Fund, and be detailed in the LTB.
128.
The ceiling amount will be a reasonable limit, sufficient enough to cover average projected eligible expenditures of VITA for a
period of six months. VITA will need to submit a withdrawal application (WA) to IFAD for the advance withdrawal. The ceiling
amount may be set depending on the level of expenditures as to be incurred based on (i) the approved AWPB; and (ii) the
project’s specific reporting of actual and projected expenditures foreseen within that AWPB period. IFAD will ascertain and certify
clearance of the figure to be advanced, which may vary during the implementation of the project, depending on the projected
expenditure requirements. Should it be found necessary to revisit the ceiling figure considered a reasonable limit at any time
during project implementation, this shall be subject to prior agreement between the borrower and the IFAD, with communication
by IFAD to the borrower through modification of the LTB.
129.
The advance withdrawal is foreseen to be the principal method to be used for the disbursement of VITA. The main conditions
precedent to withdrawal the initial advance from the Loan to the respective Designated Accounts (DAs) of the Project are: (i)
evidence that the respective DAs have been opened; (ii) authenticated specimen signatures of each authorised person that will
operate the DAs; and (iii) sufficient evidence of the authority of the persons who will sign the withdrawal applications on behalf of
VITA.
24/34
130.
Supporting documentation and records of the expenditures claimed should be maintained and be readily available for review by
IFAD's supervision missions or any other review team assigned by IFAD and external auditors. The PMU will be responsible to
ensure the SOEs are elaborated in accordance with IFAD requirements.
131.
Direct payments.  This modality is used for eligible project expenditures to be paid directly by IFAD as per the request of the
PMU, generally for large contracts, to suppliers, contractors, consultants or third parties, as authorized by the borrower. This
procedure is generally suitable for payment of large civil works, consultant fees (when these are of substantial), import of goods
for which a letter of credit is not practical, and when exchange rate control regulations are present in the country. The minimum
value threshold for direct payments is specified in the LTB. Under this procedure, VITA will request IFAD to pay the supplier
directly on its behalf from the loan or grant account of IFAD. VITA must indicate in the WA the date on which payment becomes
due to the supplier. The WA will need to be accompanied by a signed copy of the contract and relevant supporting documents
evidencing the eligibility of the expenditure.
132.
Reimbursement.  This is applicable when eligible project expenditures, reimbursable under the financing, have been pre-
financed by the project or incurred (that is, the suppliers of goods, works, consulting or other services has already been paid by
the project from its own funds). This reimbursement procedure is generally suitable for payment of: (i) local currency costs; (ii)
petty cash or small purchases; and (iii) the borrower’s provision of financial resources to the project when, for example, requests
for advance replenishment to the designated account have not been submitted promptly, thus enabling the project to continue
uninterrupted implementation. Usually, IFAD will reimburse the project in the currency of payment as affected by the borrower.
Nevertheless, the borrower may request reimbursement to be made in the currency of the Financing Agreement. However, the
amount to be paid will be determined by IFAD using the rate of exchange determined by IFAD Treasury. This methodology is
used as a safeguarding principle. Requests for reimbursement are to be submitted to IFAD within ninety calendar days from the
date of payment by the project. Should special circumstances prevail for the loan, these will be described in the agreed-on,
project-specific LTB.
133.
Flow of Funds. The ADBL, on receipt of authorized signatories from the MoF, shall open a designated bank account in USD at
Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) for the loan to be provided by government in which IFAD will disburse initial advance as specified in
the letter to the borrower and thereafter reimburse eligible expenditures on submission of withdrawal application. The ADBL will
open separate project bank account in local currency in which the advance amount of as specified in the letter to the borrower
will be transferred from designated account on imprest system. The amounts received from the federal government as grant and
ADBL from corporate social responsibility fund for non-lending project activities will also be deposited in the project bank account.
The ADBL will make payments from the project bank account for incremental operating cost, capacity building expenses, other
project related expenses and infrastructure construction expenses to the respective payees. The payment to the local
government will be made as per memorandum of understanding entered between the ADBL and local government. The ADBL
will provide wholesale loan to other partner financial institutions and ADBL for loan provided to the borrowers based on the
statements of loan from the project bank account. The ADBL will request next advance when 75% of the previous advance
amount has been spent but not exceeding threshold of advance. The Heifer International will incur expenses for the activities as
specified in the districts not directly covered by own funded activities and request for reimbursement. The PMU will submit WA to
IFAD for direct reimbursement of the expenses based on the statement of expenses to Heifer. The PMU will be directly
responsible for the management, maintenance and reconciliation of the DA and project bank accounts.
134.
The local government or other implementing agencies will open separate bank account for construction of market and other
infrastructure in which the counterpart fund and project loan/grant will be deposited. The local government or other implementing
agencies and sub-project implementers will incur expenses and request for reimbursement of instalment of loan/grant as agreed
in the memorandum of understanding. The sub-project implementers (private sector/beneficiaries) will deposit their contribution in
the separate bank account of the implementers in which ADBL and other partner financial institutions will disburse the loan to the
borrowers for approved sub-project activities.
135.
The PMU will prepare withdrawal applications for advance amount and eligible expenditures already paid and submit to IFAD
along with the supporting documents required for IFAD disbursements. The IFAD will disburse the advance and eligible
expenditures to the designated bank account maintained by the ADBL. The disbursement arrangements and budget release
process are detailed in the PIM.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
136.
Benefits. The primary benefit streams will be through increased net incomes from household farm enterprises for the various
commodities supported by the programme.As the basis for the economic analysis, eight enterprise models were prepared to
illustratepotential income for VITA-supported supply chain. Investments are financed by beneficiaries’ contribution, and short to
medium term loans from ADBL and other partner financial institutions. Incremental annual net benefits vary widely across
activities, ranging from USD 499 from dairy production to USD 971 from fish farming. These enterprises have potentials in
employment generation, both for family members and hired labourers. All the models demonstrate satisfactory Benefit/Cost ratios
and Financial Internal Rates of Return and positive net present value. This demonstrates the attractiveness of such investments
from financial perspectives and for individual farmers.
137.
Economic analysis. The base case scenario for 20 years period of analysis shows an Economic Internal Rate of Return of
around 27%. The estimated Net Present Value (NPV) for a 9% discount rate is NPR 303,693 million (USD 302.69 million) and
the Benefit:Cost Ratio is 2.92. A positive NPV under the current opportunity cost of capital of 9% indicates that the programme
investments were sound. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the effect of variations in (i) 10% and 20% decrease in
benefits; (ii) 10% and 20% increase in costs, (iii) one year and two year delay on incremental income accrual, and (iv) 10% and
20% decrease in adoption rate. In all these scenarios, EIRR was above 19%. Result of sensitivity analysis revealed that the
programme is highly sensitive to delay in benefit accrual by one and two year compared to decrease on programme benefits and
cost.
25/34
138.
From a fiscal perspective, in terms of public sector cost per beneficiary, VITA’s costs are only around 21% of ASDPs. Nominal
investment costs per beneficiary household for VITA of US$1,768 are around 9% lower than those for ASDP (US$1,945 per
household) – which has a broadly similar focus on inclusive supply chains, rural financial services and infrastructure in similar
communities. However, these are financed on a very different basis. In VITA, around USD163 million (83% of the US$197 million
total) is ultimately financed by banks, private sector and beneficiaries. Only US$34 million is born by the public sector (of which
US$27 million is for infrastructure). The cost to the public sector is therefore US$302 per beneficiary household for VITA. On a
comparable basis for ASDP, around US$10 million are financed by the private sector and beneficiaries and US$8.3 million in
taxes and duties, leaving a public sector cost of USD50 million – equivalent to USD1,417 per beneficiary household.
139.
In calculating the cost per beneficiary and EIRR, only the beneficiaries served in the first cycle have been included. By recycling
repayments received on loans in second and subsequent cycles, VITA will serve far larger number of beneficiaries in its
economic life of about 25 years. VITA's nominal cost per beneficiary is therefore far lower and its economic and social returns
substantially higher if the actual impact of the way its financing instruments works is taken into account.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
140.
Sustainability of the programme benefits and results can be approached at three different levels: the individual farm, the
producer group/cooperative and the supply chain. The exit strategy and its success is closely linked to results achieved at each of
these levels. In total, the combination of the programme impact on farmers, producer organizations and the whole supply chain,
as well as the private sector focus of the programme, is expected to ensure favourable results on sustainability of the programme
benefits.
141.
Farm level. At the smallholder farmer level, the programme will support a portfolio of crops and livestock that both have market
demand and are suitable to local agro-ecological zones and climatic conditions. Environmental management, resource use
efficiency and climatic adaptation will be enhanced in the messages and investment support to farmers. At the same time the
long-term approach to mentoring and training in business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve small-scale
producers’ potential to sustain the benefits from programme interventions even when programme support ends.
142.
Producer organization level. A key focus, and significant resources of the programme, is on building the capacity of producer
organization to become successful and reliable actors in their local supply chains. The PO will receive focused capacity building
and training as well as sustained mentoring over a 3-4 year period. The objective is that all producer groups in supported
clusters should graduate to being fully independent, financially robust and self-managing within four years of programme
engagement. Success in this area will be a decisive factor for the whole sustainability of programme results and benefits.
143.
Supply chain level (including support markets). Where the supply chains have achieved genuine competitiveness, they are
highly likely to continue – as the producers and businesses will be making money. In addition, where the producers and
businesses have established regular processes of mutually beneficial dialogue and networking, including via the MSPs, then
such process are likely to be continued by their members in some form. Key service providers that also profit from these
processes, such as the banks and FIs, are also expected to have an interest in supporting the continuation of the MSP-type
functions in the supply chain to help sustain competitiveness and continued investment and growth. The programme will therefore
explicitly explore practical arrangements with supply chain actors for sustaining key networking functions initiated by the
programme where these are considered important to the cluster and supply chain. In established clusters and supply chains such
functions may have minimal costs and be readily taken on by the supply chain actors themselves.
144.
Beyond the specific supply chains, there is expected to be a systemic and lasting increase in ADBL's capacity to reach and
finance small-scale farm enterprises and also in the capacity of state institutions and municipalities in delivering inclusive rural
local economic development. Similarly, VITA is expected to result in a better balancing of public and private sector led delivery of
agricultural services to increase their sustainability and relevance to producers.
145.
The programme will invest in a range of public and productive infrastructure. Arrangements for management, operation and
maintenance of these will be a mandatory requirement prior to approval of each sub-project. These will follow established best
practice in the country – including the market management committee arrangements seen in Bulbule wholesale market in
Surkhet (supported by HVAP) recently recognized by MOALD as one of the two best run markets in the country. For community-
level irrigation this will follow best practices, for example those of ADB’s Community Irrigation Project.
146.
Exit strategy. The focus on sustainable results and on independent, profitable institutions and private sector-based partnerships
forms the core exit strategy. Similarly, development of local service markets will help rebalance the provision of technical and
advisory services to producers between public and private provision. By moving away from a predominantly grant-based to a
loan-based system, the programme helps expanding the agricultural credit system and thereby enhance access of farmers and
entrepreneurs to financial resources on continuing basis. By ensuring reflow of a large proportion of financial resources borrowed
by GON from IFAD, this approach also helps improving GON’s financial position.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
26/34
147.
Of the funds set aside for line of credit, while IFAD funds will be used exclusively for meeting medium term credit needs of farmer
and MSME borrowers, ADBL and PFIs will finance the associated short-term credit in entirety using their internal resources. Of
the government and ADBL financing US$ 2.6 million and US$ 1.98 million, respectively are estimated to be the amount for taxes.
ADBL will meet the tax expenditure from the income which will be generated from the interest spread that the GON will provide
on the subsidiary loan for the purpose.
148.
Overall political and governance risks is low to moderate. Following a general election in 2017 elected governments with
substantial majority of ruling parties have been functioning for over 2 years at the federal as well as in 7 states creating much
needed political stability. Overall macro-economic risks are moderate to high, reflecting the economic and fiscal position of the
country. While there are weaknesses, the economy recorded its third consecutive year of +6% growth in 2018/19 accompanied
by substantial revenue growth. However, the COVID19 pandemic is expected to substantially reduce growth for the next two
years. From a governance perspective, ADBL is a regulated commercial bank with both government and private shareholders,
with an established and functioning board and supervised by Nepal Rastra Bank. It is a well governed and supervised institution.
Governance risks within the programme are therefore low.
149.
Risks stemming from political pressure on infrastructure investment decisions are moderate and can be mitigated against to limit
negative impacts. Mitigation measures include transparent processes for selection and prioritization of infrastructure works to be
financed, including that they are endorsed by a majority of participants at the relevant MSPs. In addition, wholesale market
infrastructure should only happen in Year 3 onwards to allow time for both the current high political pressures to normalize and
the MSPs to become more established and able to drive the infrastructure priorities. For Window 3 on small-scale community-
level infrastructure, the programme will support the municipal authorities to developed productive infrastructure master plans for
the sector to increase alignment with overall strategic priorities in the municipality.
150.
COVID-19 pandemic related risks appear to be high but also highly uncertain. There is likely to be a substantial slowing of
economic growth for at least the next 2 years, with disruption to key sector including tourism and remittances. This will create
fiscal pressures and foreign exchanges risks for the government. At the same time there may be an increase in the number of
migrant workers returning from overseas, potentially bringing skills and resources with them while also needing to find gainful
work but also a loss in remittance income. There may also be disruption to import supply chains, creating opportunities for
domestic suppliers. Specific risks to the programme appear to be three-fold: i) availability of government funds to meet financing
obligations – considered to be low after mitigation through the design of the internal financing arrangement for the programme, ii)
disruption to market demand and supply chains – considered to be moderate, given focus on food crops and mostly short and
domestic supply chains, and iii) increased financial or other pressures within beneficiary households that reduce their appetite or
capacity to invest in their farming – considered moderate to low after mitigation, given emphasis on affordable investment
pathways, accessible financing and also the needs of households themselves to find gainful work including for returning migrant
workers.
151.
There are substantial risks to the implementation schedule for the programme if there is a prolonged domestic outbreak and
associated movement restrictions into 2021 or significant future domestic waves of the disease. Pre-effectiveness preparation for
the programme can proceed with only minor disruption, even under the strict movement restrictions in place (as in May 2020).
However, field activities in programme districts and municipalities can take place with safe social distancing and other measures
only when strict movement restrictions are eased. As of May 2020, the number of domestic cases was still increasing yet there
remains considerable uncertainty regarding the future scale and duration of the domestic outbreak and the extent to which this
may continue into 2021 causing disruption to the programme.
152.
Liquidity for term finance in the wider financial sectoris a moderate risk to the ambitions of the programme to help transform
agricultural lending. Term liquidity issues are closely related to the structure of sources of funds in the sector. Mitigation within the
programme is via the provision of wholesale term financing to PFI accompanied by continued engagement the NRB on policy to
increase of financing to the sector, especially from among the Class A banks.
153.
Technical service and support market development risks are moderate to low and can be mitigated against. The mandate
for such services is fully devolved to municipalities. Experience from RERP shows a majority of rural municipal authorities are
actively seeking better alternatives than purely public service model. The opportunity and mitigation measures for VITA are to
partner with the municipal authorities, with technical backstopping from AKCs and VHLSSC, to develop a pool of local private
technical service providers offering affordable good quality advice and services to local farmers. Specifically, VITA will partner
with municipal authorities to identify, train and mentor suitable technical service providers in their municipality. Similarly, VITA will
partner with state MOLMACs to ensure the AKCs and VHLSSCs, who have more higher qualified staff, provide technical
backstopping to the municipalities and local service providers supported by the municipalities and the programme - which is a
stated role and justification for the AKCs/VHLSSCs.
154.
Generous grants and subsidies to small-scale producers and MSMEs have been a widely used tool in the sector over the
last decade, with mixed results. MOF is strongly advocating moving away from the use of grants and MOALD’s new ‘5 Pillar’
focus for agriculture from March 2020 also specifically state a move away from competitive grants. The risks are therefore
primarily in relation to large legacy programmes that will continue to operate such grants. The three large programmes still using
or planning to use such grant in VITA areas are: ASDP (IFAD-supported); Livestock Sector Innovation Programme (LSIP, World
Bank), and: PMAMP of MOALD. PMAMP is by far the largest of these and currently under review by MOALD including against
the 5 pillars. Given VITA is well aligned with MOFs and MOALs reform agenda in this area, the mitigation strategy within the
programme includes the following parallel strands:
1. 
1.  Intensive business skills capacity development of producers and producer groups to empower them to approach their
farming as a business. This provides them with the know-how and confidence to make their own investments without
relying on grants.
2.  ADBL to pro-actively engage with ASDP and LSIP to offer to provide loan financing to their supported farmers (via
Component 2) but subject to a reduced grant contribution from their project, for example of a target level of not more
than 30%, to reduce market distortion and reduce reliance and expectations of grants and subsidies.
27/34
3.  Pro-active policy engagement with MOF and MOALD, as well as at state and municipality level, with emphasis is on
building confidence and understanding of MOALD and MOLMACs that loan financing is a credible, affordable and more
effective alternative to grants. ADBL has already signed MOUs with several state government to provide such loans
instead of grant programmes.
155.
Technical risks are generally low. As VITA is principally a scaling-up programme of proven best practice from within Nepal,
technical design risks are generally low. However, specific risks do exist in the wider use of loans to finance smallholder
producer investment. Specifically, heavy reliance in the financial sector on collateral-based lending limits ability for credible
clients to access investment loans. Mitigation measures include: Promotion by ADBL and partner FIs of non-collateral lending for
small loans up to NRP200,000, as per NRB regulations, especially linked to livestock and crops guarantees e.g. from the Deposit
and Credit Guarantee Fund; A focus on commodities where production can be started with small initial investments as a first step
on affordable investment pathways below this level of NRP200,000 for collateral free loans; Promotion of institutional guarantees
from municipal authorities and POs for farmers, especially for youth; Promotion of value chains financing instruments, as
appropriate to specific supply chains, with ADBL and other PFI as the financing partner within these arrangements. This also
includes working with NRB, as necessary, on appropriate regulations, guidance and policies for the expansion of such financing
instruments.
156.
Institutional capacity risks are inherently high in Nepal but can be mitigated against. The programme implementation
arrangements and choice of partners are explicitly designed to remedy this challenge, by involving ADBL and Heifer as lead
partners, as well as by creating State Programme Coordination Forums in each state to coordinate among stakeholders as well
as municipality-level coordination groups. ADBL as the LPA reduces institutional capacity risks due to its large and capable agri-
business staff and strong management. Heifer brings valuable additional capacity on market-oriented socio-economic
mobilization and producer group development. In addition, there are around USD 2 million of institutional capacity building
programmes planned for ADBL and programme partners across the three Components.
157.
Specific capacity areas of ADBL that will be strengthened include:
1. 
1.  Component 2: upgrading the systems and processes required for ADBL’s operational capacity to cost-effectively
extend its coverage and outreach to larger numbers of smallholder producer in more remote areas. The risks here
could be significant if there are large delays in upgrading the required systems and processes, as without these
systems it will be difficult for the ADBL branches to adequately serve the required numbers of programme
beneficiaries. There is a substantial capacity building programme of around $1.5 million in Sub-component 2.2 to
address these risks.
2.  Component 3, the management of the infrastructure financing facility in Component 3, where specialist infrastructure
professionals will be contracted to manage this facility.
158.
Programme leadership in the LPA is always critical. ADBL currently have a strong senior management team which should
provide stability during the critical first 3 years as will mainstreaming VITA in ADBL structures.
159.
Coordination within and between the three tiers of government has emerged as a critical issue across multiple sectors. The
choice of ADBL as the LPA substantially reduces the programmes direct exposure to these difficulties – as it is a parastatal
institution with a right to work equally with all branches of government. ADBL regional and branch managers have good working
relationship with government officials in their area, not least as ADBL has long been an important partner for agriculture
development. Heifer also brings strong networks in many locations. Notwithstanding this, an important element of the programme
will be effective and practical coordination with state and local authorities. The recent experience from RERP and Heifer has
been that local and state authorities are well motived to participate with similar programmes. Additional mitigation measure for
coordination risks include: establishing a State Programme Coordination Forum in each state to coordinate among programme
stakeholders within the state and similar Municipality coordination forum in each municipality; signing MoUs between ADBL and
each State and municipal government for collaboration on the programme, setting out expected contributions and roles; routine
participation of relevant government staff in the MSPs at corridor and hub level for each commodity, and; providing capacity
building training to state and municipality staff on key programme approaches for inclusive supply chain development to raise
understanding.
160.
Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
161.
Debt sustainability analysis (DSA). The IMF team conducted the 2018 Article IV consultation, External debt remains low (17
percent of GDP) and Nepal has a positive International Investment Position (10.6 percent of GDP) Public debt ticked up in
2017/18, to 30 percent of GDP, but remains well below other low-income countries. The joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability
Analysis indicates that Nepal’s risk of debt distress remains low.
162.
Inherent risk. The Transparency International Corruption Perception Index had rose from 27 in 2015 to 34 in to 2019, positioning
Nepal as 113 out of 183 countries. The RSP score is 3.2, a slight movement from 3.0 in previous years. The inherent FM risk is
assessed as substantial. Latest Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report in May 2015 discloses, “the
commitment to change and reform to public financial management systems and process by the Government of Nepal has
produced results. Among 28 performance indicators (PI), 16 indicators improved, 10 indicators remained unchanged, and 2
indicators deteriorated. However, compared to 2008 with improved systems, data availability has assisted to fine-tune the
assessment and downgrade the rating of an indicator to reflect the current system. The absence of the parliament during the
assessment period added to the downgrading of another indicator.” PEFA indicates weakness for Nepal in budget execution,
accounting and reporting, Audit.
163.
Financial Management. The initial financial management risk assessment of ADBL programme is assessed as substantial due
to first IFAD project, lack of experience in preparing AWPB, implementation of IFAD funded project, accounting and reporting
requirement of IFAD, working with the local government and beneficiaries on grant basis, newly established PMU for the project,
and separate funds flow. Heifer has experience in implementing the IFAD Improved Seed for Farmers Programme (ISFP) funded
project. However, the FM risk would reduce to moderate with the implementation of mitigating measures.
28/34
I. Environment and Social category
164.
The environmental and social category for the Programme is B. VITA will not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss
of natural habitat and biodiversity and intervention will be confined to existing farmlands. The Programme is designed to promote
environmentally sustainable agriculture and livestock practices while priority is given to multiple use water system, water use
efficiency and effective water management. Use of fertilizers and pesticides will be under the guidance of trained service
providers, including services to small-scale producers for regular test of soils to inform application and reduce over usage.
Renewable technology will be promoted as part of the support market development activities. Carrying capacity assessments will
be conducted before and during implementation to ensure a minimum environmental footprint. Finally, VITA will actively engage
and benefit the vulnerable and socially marginalized communities in all programme activities hence social risks are minimal.
Climate Risk classification
J. Climate Risk classification
165.
The climate risk category is Moderate. Detailed analysis of the climate scenario and resulting risks and response measures to
the main investment activities of the programmed indicate that VITA is expected to be moderately sensitive to climate risks and
an integration of climate issues has been undertaken as part of the detailed design. This process has resulted in practical
adjustments under the programme to reduce losses and damages from climate hazards to target beneficiaries and will also
strengthen local risk-management capacities. The analysis highlights risks and benefits from climate change. Principal risks are:
i) increase incidence of new and existing diseases, pest and insects, especially to higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in rainfall
patterns within the year with increased water demand leading to higher risks of temporary water shortages for purely rainfed
production; iii) increased heat stress to livestock from a small increase in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season,
to cattle reducing the milk production and to poultry impacting on growth during these periods. Benefits from climate change
include opportunities for new crop varieties in higher altitudes and increasing yields and extended production seasons of
vegetables, crops and for honeybees.
166.
Notwithstanding the above, the general programme areas at the district level encompass a diverse set of locations and climatic
zones which are subject to the annual monsoons, and a range of flood, drought, landslide, GLOF, rainfall / temperature and
ecological risks. Programme area ranges from plain Terai area to the mid-mountain and some parts of high-mountain. Two thirds
of all districts in Nepal are rated as high or very high risk against one or more of these events (MOPE, Climate Change
Vulnerability Mapping for Nepal 2010). However, such periodic events are an inherent part of the climate and production and
livelihood systems are broadly adapted to them. Projected climate change scenarios are not expected to change the level of risk
to these events to such a degree as to significantly affect the impacts or sustainability of the programme.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
167.
Figure 2: Programme Implementation Arrangements
a)   Programme management and coordination
168.
A Programme Steering Committee will provide overall policy guidance, coordination and supervision. Members of the Steering
Committee will include representatives of: i) Federal level: MoF – Chair, National Planning Commission (NPC), NRB, MoALD,
Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration (MoFAGA), Farmers Commission, ADBL. In addition, the Programme
Coordinator (ADBL PMU) will be member secretary; ii) Heifer Nepal. Members by invitation may include: iii) State level:
government representatives from supported States, from State MoLMACs and/or State Planning Commissions, and; iv) Financial
sector representatives: Nepal Bankers Association, Nepal Microfinance Banker's Association. The VITA PMU will act as the
secretariat.
169.
The Lead Programme Agency (LPA) will be the ADBL, on behalf of the GON, responsible for achievement of the programme
development objectives and overall performance of the programme. The LPA will lead implementation of all aspects of the
Component 1 and 2. For Component 3, LPA will provide overall coordination, monitoring and reporting while infrastructure sub-
projects will be implemented by sub-project implementers (see below).
29/34
170.
The ADBL Chief Executive Officer (CEO) will acts as the VITA Programme Director. The dedicated Programme Management
Unit (PMU) of ADBL will be responsible for all aspects of programme management and reporting on behalf of the LPA. The PMU
will work closely with the heads of the relevant departments in ADBL Head Office and the Regional Directors in the five regional
offices overseeing VITA field activities. Within ADBL, programme implementation will be mainstreamed in its organizational
structures, supplemented where necessary with targeted technical assistance and additional human resources. The PMU will be
managed by the VITA Programme Coordinator – who will be the ADBL PMU Director. Staff of ADBL and Heifer will work together
in a single PMU. The core of the PMU is already in place and, together with the Heads of Departments, have worked closely with
the design team throughout the VITA design process to ensure a high degree of readiness and feasibility for all aspects of the
design.
171.
Key staff in the PMU include: VITA Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director); Programme Chief Finance Officer (deputed
from ADBL); Accounts Assistant; Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist; Planning, M&E officer (Heifer); Targeting, Gender and
Inclusion Specialist (also with responsibilities for nutrition); Socio-economic Mobilization Expert (Heifer); Supply Chain Focal
Person Coordinator at HO (in ADBL MSME Department); Supply Chain Focal Person Officer at HO (in ADBL MSME
Department); Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert; Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist; Assistant Finance Officer;
Infrastructure Specialist; Infrastructure Procurement Specialist
172.
The PMU will be supported by the following senior staff in Heifer on a part time basis including: Program Directors (x2); Finance
Director; Senior Manager PM&E, and Knowledge management manager.
173.
The Co-implementing partner will be Heifer Nepal, with funding from Heifer International as co-financier, with particular
responsibilities under Component 1 on aspects of socio-economic mobilization and supply chain development as well providing
parallel financing towards the costs of their activities in VITA. In the field, Heifer will oversee a network of local NGOs to deliver
the farmer facing activities, as its regular practice. The recent partnership under the KUBK and Heifer saw positive results and
ADBL have recently independently signed a Memorandum of Understanding to increase finance to the large number of Heifer
supported producer groups.
174.
Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs), including Class A and Class D institutions regulated by NRB, will be eligible to apply for
wholesale loans under the programme, to increase availability of term financing to small farmers and MSMEs. PFIs will be
expected to be active participants in the MSPs in each supply chain. PFIs will also be eligible to receive capacity building support
for building their competence in offering appropriate rural financial services (Component 2).
175.
State and municipal governments will be key partners to the programme, both for overall coordination within programme
locations and, importantly, in coordinated investment in supply chain infrastructure in support of local supply chain development,
including co-financing Component 3 sub-projects. State and municipal-level coordination forum will be established between the
programme and local stakeholders and meet at least annually. These will be established by the VITA teams at state and branch
level, respectively, building on the existing relationships between ADBL, Heifer and the respective government bodies at each
level. The LPA will sign MoUs with the relevant government bodies. In addition, representatives from State and Municipal
authorities will be active participants of the MSP processes in each supply chain. The MSPs will be a key mechanism for practical
coordination and harmonization of public support. The programme will provide capacity building support to municipal authorities
so they can internalize the VITA approach. For Component 3, State and Municipal government will be eligible sub-project
implementers.
30/34
176.
Sub-project implementers for infrastructure sub-projects (Comp 3) will sign agreements with the LPA to implement the
approved sub-projects. Procurement and contracting of design and works for each sub-project will be the responsibility of the
assigned sub-project implementer. Sub-project implementers for each of the three types of infrastructure will be: i) State
authorities for regional wholesale market infrastructure, ii) Municipal authorities, and/or consortia of Municipal authorities
governments, for satellite market infrastructure, and iii) Municipal authorities and registered producer groups/co-operatives for
small-scale community infrastructure, including small-scale irrigation and water infrastructure and upgrading of farm access road.
VITA staff at both PMU and state level will carry out site inspection of proposed sites and actual works to approve designs and
authorize payment release.
177.
Partnerships with other projects and organizations. Federal government programmes, especially those of MoALD focused on
market and value chain development (including ASDP (State 6)) and RERP (States 1 and 2), will be key partners to ensure
coordinated investments in supported supply chains. Similarly, partnerships with other programmes and organizations beyond
government will also be developed, as appropriate. As open rolling platforms, the MSPs in each supply chain are a key
mechanism for practical coordination among the numerous federal and local investment programmes in support of the priorities
of the supply chain actors themselves. 
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
178.
Financial Management: The PMU will report to the Programme Director and accountable to the PSC for the overall financial
management, preparation of AWPB, procurement plan, M&E and MIS, withdrawal applications and financial reports, and
compliance requirement of internal and external audit. The concerned departments, provincial and branch offices of the ADBL
and Heifer will be responsible and accountable for the implementation of programme activities of their sector, planning of their
annual work plan, preparation of budget and safeguard of programme assets and resources and preparation and submission of
financial reports. The initial financial management risk assessment of ADBL programme is assessed as substantial due to first
IFAD programme, lack of experience in preparing AWPB, implementation of IFAD funded programme, accounting and reporting
requirement of IFAD, working with the local government and beneficiaries on grant basis, newly established PMU for the
programme, and separate funds flow. The Heifer has experience in implementing the IFAD Improved Seed for Farmers
Programme (ISFP) funded project. However, the risk would reduce to Moderate with the implementation of mitigating measures.
179.
Finance unit organization: The PMU shall have one Programme Chief Finance Officer (FO), deputed by the ADBL, and one
Account Assistant (AA) recruited for the programme, one Account Officer and one Account Assistant in the provincial and A, B
and C class branch offices and Account Assistant in D class branch offices will be designated from the existing account staff for
maintaining accounts and preparing reports of the programme. The job description of the FO and AA is given in the PIM.
180.
181.
Budgeting: The province and branch offices shall prepare their budget and submit the AWPB finalized in the workshop held in
provincial level to PMU. The PMU will review the AWPB received from province and branch offices and consolidate with its
budget and submit to Program and Budget Section of Planning and Research Department which, in consultation with PMU, will
finalize annual work plan and budget (AWPB) of the programme including co-financing by the Heifer and counterpart funds of the
State and Local Government, ADBL and beneficiaries and loan to be received from bank and financial institutions based on the
implementation schedule of the programme activities, cost table, subsidiary loan and financing agreement and prevailing market
price for submission to the ADBL Board and Programme Steering Committee. The ADBL will provide funds including the
corporate social responsibility (CSR) fund. After PSC approval, the AWPB will be submitted to IFAD for no objection before 15
May of each year and MoF for entering in the line Ministry Budget Information System (LMBIS) for budget provision in the federal
budget by creating a separate budget line for the loan to be provided to ADBL for programme implementation. The MoF will
provide loan for the lending activities signing subsidiary loan agreement with ADBL. The MoF will release budget to the ADBL
after approval of the budget by Parliament. The PMU will allocate and release annual budget to the province and branch offices
specifying the activities. The PMU will monitor physical and financial performance on a quarterly basis. The budget allocated to
the province and branch offices can be revised by the ADBL not exceeding the approved annual budget.
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds: The ADBL, on receipt of authorized signatories from the MoF, shall open a
designated bank account in USD at Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) for the loan to be provided by government in which IFAD will
disburse initial advance as specified in the letter to the borrower and thereafter reimburse eligible expenditures on submission of
withdrawal application. The government and ADBL will not pre-finance the programme expenditures to be funded from IFAD
source. The ADBL will open separate programme bank account in which the advance amount of USD 10 million or as specified
in the letter to the borrower will be transferred from designated account on imprest system. The amounts received from the ADBL
from corporate social responsibility fund for non-lending programme activities will also be deposited in the programme bank
account. The ADBL will make payments from the programme bank account for incremental operating cost, capacity building
expenses, other programme related expenses and infrastructure construction expenses to the respective payees. The payment
to the local government will be made as per memorandum of understanding entered between the ADBL and local government.
The ADBL will provide wholesale loan to other partner financial institutions and ADBL for loan provided to the borrowers based
on the statements of loan from the programme bank account. The ADBL will request next advance when 75% of the previous
advance amount has been spent but not exceeding threshold of advance. The Heifer will incur expenses for the activities as
specified in the districts not directly covered by own funded activities and request for reimbursement. The PMU will submit WA to
IFAD for direct reimbursement of the expenses based on the statement of expenses to Heifer. The PMU will be directly
responsible for the management, maintenance and reconciliation of the DA and programme bank accounts.
182.
The local government or other implementing agencies will open separate bank account for construction of market and other
infrastructure in which the counterpart fund and programme loan/grant will be deposited. The local government or other
implementing agencies and sub-project implementers will incur expenses and request for reimbursement of instalment of
loan/grant as agreed in the memorandum of understanding. The sub-project implementers (private sector/beneficiaries) will
deposit their contribution in the separate bank account of the implementers in which ADBL and other partner financial institutions
will disburse the loan to the borrowers for approved sub-project activities.
31/34
183.
The PMU will prepare withdrawal applications for advance amount and eligible expenditures already paid and submit to IFAD
along with the supporting documents required for IFAD disbursements. The IFAD will disburse the advance and eligible
expenditures to the designated bank account maintained by the ADBL. The disbursement arrangements and budget release
process are detailed in the PIM.
184.
Retroactive Financing. A sum of USD 500,000 has been provisioned for retroactive financing for the expenses to be incurred
between February 2020 and the date of Financing Agreement signature ("Entry into Force") to facilitate smooth start-up.
Retroactive financing shall be used for the expenditures incurred for: (i) recruitment of programme staff and training of staff; (ii)
purchase of furniture and office equipment for PMU; (iii) conducting baseline surveys and customization of existing MIS software;
(iv) Any other activities to be conducted before start of the programme. These expenditures would be reimbursed on submission
of a separate withdrawal application when the conditions precedent to first withdrawal application stipulated in the financing
agreement have been met
185.
Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting: The PMU, province and branch offices of the will
maintain separate accounts of the programme following double entry accrual basis of accounting system using existing core
banking and accounting software. The existing chart of accounts will be used after incorporating features in charts of accounts to
account expenses by categories, components, sub-components, activities, commodity, funding sources, geographical region to
monitor expenses and meet accounting and reporting requirement of IFAD. The Heifer will also maintain accounts for the
expenses incurred for the programme. The contribution made by the provincial government, municipalities and beneficiaries shall
be recorded to expenditures based on statement of expenditures. In-kind contributions will be quantified based on fair market
value and accounted to expenses and income disclosing in the notes to accounts.
186.
The province and branch offices and Heifer will submit monthly financial statements to the PMU within first week from the end of
the month. The PMU will prepare consolidated monthly financial statements and submit to the Programme Director. PMU will
prepare quarterly interim financial reports in the prescribed format within 45 days of the end of each quarter and annual
Programme financial statements in the prescribed format within four months of the end of each financial year for submission to
IFAD.
187.
Internal Audit: The Internal Audit Department of the ADBL will conduct internal audit of the programme in accordance with the
Standards on Internal Audit (SIA) on quarterly basis. The draft internal audit reports are to be submitted to the respective cost
centres copied to the Programme Director of the PMU. The final internal audit report after receipt of response on the draft internal
audit report will be submitted to the Audit Committee of the ADBL. The Audit Committee will review the internal audit report and
recommends for the remedial action to resolve the observations and avoid recurrence. The internal audit report along with the
actions taken to resolve audit observations shall be submitted to the Board, Audit Committee and Programme Director and made
available to IFAD missions upon request.
188.
External Financial Audit: The ADBL shall hire a chartered accountant firm appointed to conduct audit of the ADBL on
recommendation of the Office of the Auditor General to carry out the audit of the programme in accordance with Nepal Standards
of Auditing and IFAD’s General Conditions and the IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed
projects, which, inter alia, requires public disclosure. The audit report shall be submitted to the Programme Director and Board for
review the audit report and audit observations reported in the management letter. The audited programme financial statements
including the designated account and management letter along with management response have to be submitted to the IFAD
within six months of the end of each financial year during the programme implementation period and by the financing closing
date for the last year of the programme to comply with the deadline for submission of the audit report. The Heifer will also submit
the audit report of the programme expenditures within six months of the end of each fiscal year.
189.
Procurement: The LPA will apply its own approved procurement procedures where these are consistent with IFAD procurement
guidelines and apply accepted IFAD/GoN procurement procedures and thresholds where its own procedures do not meet IFAD
requirements. It is noted that no major procurement packages are currently envisaged under Component 1 and 2. For on-lending
under Component 2, ADBL’s sub-loaning process is considered to be generally sound. Capacity building support for ADBL and
PFIs will be provided under the programme for closely aligning individual sub-loan identification and assessment process duly
considering backward and forward linkages within the relevant supply chains. For infrastructure works under Component 3, all
sub-project implementers will apply accepted IFAD/GoN procurement procedures and thresholds.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
190.
Planning: There will be a single annual work plan and budget (AWPB) developed by the PMU with active consultation and
contributions by ADBL and Heifer covering all activities under the programme of both partners and using the template provided in
the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM). The LPA will be responsible for submitting and obtaining approval of the AWPB
from the MOF and IFAD. Such AWPB will identify all agencies, including PFIs and infrastructure sub-project implementers,
implementing the detailed activities proposed and estimated financial outlays for the year including the detailed resources these
agencies will mobilise internally. The AWPB will also estimate loan resources that will be required in supporting end-user
borrowers who have or will receive supply chain development support by other projects such as ASDP/RERP. Whenever
implementing partners will identify the need to change, adopt and adjust the working modality and annual work plans, they may
propose such changes to the PMU, to be ultimately endorsed by the PSC and IFAD. The single annual workplan will be managed
via local monthly work plans prepared by the various implementing teams at national, state and local level, including PMU staff.
32/34
191.
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The M&E system developed and run by the PMU M&E team will cover (i) monitoring of
implementation performance, execution of the AWPB, outreach and effectiveness of the targeting strategy, and (ii) periodic
measurement of programme results (outputs, outcomes and impact) versus agreed targets. Both ADBL and Heifer will contribute
to a single VITA M&E system and have access to the data generated. There will be a single M&E unit which will meet the
information requirements of the PMU, ADBL, Heifer or any other partner financial institutions or implementing agencies. The PMU
M&E team will include two fulltime M&E staff – one from each of ADBL and Heifer - supported by the related permanent teams
and departments in ADBL and Heifer.
192.
Management Information system (MIS): A key focus for the M&E will be to build a highly effective MIS (online and offline,
internet and mobile devices) that provides programme managers and teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each of the priority supply chains so that the intervention plans can be managed for impacts. The programme
MIS will, to the extent feasible, be aligned with ADBL’s own ICT systems, including for lending activities under Component 2.
ADBL is currently upgrading its own ICT systems and careful consideration will be given to maximize alignment of the VITA MIS
and minimize duplication with ADBL own systems.
193.
Data collection: Under Component 1, data will be chiefly collected through Farm Business diaries, as well as Business Skills
Facilitators (BSF) and Socio-economic Mobilizers’ records. The programme will make extensive use of tablets and online
databases to enable direct data collection and entry into the programme MIS by the BSF, who will be provided with tablets and
smartphones and paid a small fee to gather household production and business data once per season. Under Component 2, data
will be collected as per standard ADBL practices, with few adaptations brought to the standard loan application template and
ADBL central MIS (see PIM).
194.
At programme start in each location, a baseline survey will be conducted among a representative sample of initial selected
beneficiaries in order to collect quantitative and qualitative information on the socio-economic conditions of these households
prior to project interventions. The same exercise will be repeated at mid-term and completion (in time to inform the MTR and
PCR preparation processes), in order to measure and appreciate changes since baseline. The baseline survey will use a
questionnaire comprised of three modules, as follows:
195.
(a)      Module A – IFAD empowerment indicator questionnaire: This is a new survey-based index for measuring empowerment,
capacity to act and inclusion of women in the agriculture. It will also include the module to measure Minimum Dietary Diversity –
Women (MDD-W).
196.
(b)      Module B - PPI questionnaire: The Poverty Probability Index (PPI) is a tool to measure targeting effectiveness and track
beneficiaries’ poverty levels over time.
197.
(c)      Module C: Additional questionnaire will measure all the impact- and outcome-level indicators in the extended logframe not
covered by Module A or B.
198.
For the tracking of the various supply chains, VITA will also follow a system of "rolling baselines" in which baseline data on each
cluster is collected at the time that interventions begin in the specific cluster among smaller samples. These will include
households and trader/agri-business surveys, while use of secondary data sources will also be made. Annual Cluster Tracking
Surveys (ACTS) will also be organized from Year 2 onwards to regularly assess the development and performance of each
cluster and corridor and to assess the level of satisfaction of the various clusters’ actors, including farmers, with programme
implementation.
199.
VITA will include targets for 9 of IFAD’s Core Outcome Indicators (COIs) within its logical framework. In addition, it is expected to
be able to report on a further 7 COIs beyond its main logical framework. In total it will report on 30 of IFAD’s core indicators (CIs):
1 outreach, 15 outcomes, 14 outputs. Data collection for these will be in-line with IFAD’s standard definitions and tools for these
indicators.
200.
Reporting: The PMU will be responsible for the preparation of monthly, quarterly, 6-monthly and annual progress report). The 6-
monthly and annual progress reports will be sent to IFAD for information. Towards the end of the project implementation period,
the PMU will also be required to prepare a Project Completion Review report.
201.
Knowledge management, learning and strategic communication. As a ‘next generation’ inclusive market development
programme, VITA is expected to scale-up recent successful models, notably from the HVAP and KUBK, and at the same time
advance good practice in several critical areas, including: i) market-based private investment; ii) strengthening sustainability of
the MSP functions, iii) deepening tools for inclusion of poor and marginalized individuals within market-driven development
approaches, iv) mainstreaming climate considerations, including developing practical tools for use by key stakeholders, v)
mainstreaming coordination with investment programmes of local, state and federal governments. Accordingly, the programme
will invest in good quality, evidence-based knowledge management to contribute to policy development processes. For example,
ADBL’s SME and Agriculture Department will analyse and document the actual financial and commercial performance of
investments supported and share this knowledge and insights widely among the partner financial institutions and other
prospective investors from farmers to agri-businesses. It is expected that such types of knowledge and analysis will also feed into
ADBL own strategic development and operational priorities.
202.
An effective Knowledge Management and Communications (KMC) strategy will be integrated into the management of the
programme. The initial priority will be aimed at the primary supply chains actors themselves (farmers, traders, processors,
suppliers etc) to build momentum in the target clusters. This will document and promote through multiple channels, credible
business opportunities in the priority supply chains, including real role-model farmers and businesses. This communication will
have a strong youth focus. The second priority, in the first 2 years, will be to disseminate practical tools and good practice
examples among VITA teams at head office, state, branch and field level. This is to rapidly establish a large cadre across the
programme with practical skills and confidence to drive programme delivery. Finally, on policy and strategic communications, the
programme will seek to contribute to public policy development and initiatives in support of inclusive rural growth. A policy
engagement plan developed prior to implementation will be outlined, identifying the priority policy areas and issues of relevance.
This will then be used to ensure the programme is collecting sufficiently robust data on these issues to provide evidence-based
policy inputs. For communication activities, the Knowledge Management Expert will be supported by ADBL Communication
Department and a part-time Communication Expert.
33/34
b. Innovation and scaling up
1.  The programme itself a scaling-up programme, expanding best practices from the recent Nepal country programme on
inclusive market development – especially those from HVAP and, to some extent, from KUBK - as well as substantially
advancing best practices in new areas including agricultural finance (to replace grant financing) and institutional
implementation arrangements adapted to the new federal system. Together with the ongoing ASDP and RERP programmes,
this will mean these approaches are being implemented by major investment programme in 5 of 7 states across the country.
As the LPA is a nationwide bank, with branches in all districts there remains clear scope for it to replicate these approaches
across the entire country. Similarly, the expected partnerships with other financial institutions is also expected to contribute to
crowding-in, especially for increased agriculture finance to commercial small-scale producers.
2.  Innovation in the programme is principally in four areas: i) the transition to predominantly loans-based financing for private
investments by small-scale producers and MSMEs in upgrading their farms and businesses; ii) the associated large scale
mobilization of domestic private co-financing from banks, businesses and beneficiaries, iii) information and communication
technology (ICT) enabled product and service innovations, which play an increasingly important role for both ADBL as well as
the programme participating FSPs, which will be supported and brought to scale through VITA; and iv) the innovative
institutional arrangements of having a state-owned commercial bank as the lead programme agency for an inclusive market
development programme in partnership with a leading NGO bringing specific technical expertise. This innovation is highly
relevant to the current Nepali context as a mechanism to better institutionalize the core capacities of facilitating inclusive
supply chain development and also providing complementary implementation mechanisms for public investment in economic
development that can work alongside the new three tiers of government.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
203.
The core of the PMU and heads of key departments are already in place and have been actively involved in the detailed design.
This team will lead the advanced preparation and rapid start-up of the programme, drawing on ADBL and Heifer’s substantial
capacity as well as the rich experience of the programme’s approaches available within Nepal. With the programme being
mainstreamed in ADBL, it is planned the following will be in place at or before start-up:
204.
Programme Management
1. 
1.  Nomination of Programme Steering Committee and drafting of its Terms of Reference;
2.  Finalization of PIM, and guidelines for other instruments including the SDF, subsidiary and wholesale loans, ready for
immediate formal approval;
3.  Finalization of first AWPB and procurement plan ready for immediate approval;
4.  Programme orientation and technical training materials for programme staff and key stakeholder to be fully prepared
and tested;
5.  Draft MoU prepared and discussed with all states and municipalities in which the programme will be working and begin
informal discussion;
6.  Agree detailed cooperation arrangements and procedures with ASDP and RERP and sign MOU.
7.  MIS systems and key data collection tools developed and tested.
205.
Component 1
1. 
1.  Supply chain teams at regional provincial office and district branch level in place. All assigned staff of ADBL and Heifer
to have been identified and completed initial programme orientation and technical training the VITA supply chain
development processes and key tools;
2.  Socio-economic mobilizer teams: Selection and screening process initiated for all local NGOs expected to be
contracted in Year 1. Where the selected NGOs are current partners of Heifer, initial orientation on VITA should also
be completed.
3.  Business skills training –ToT and end training modules and materials to be finalized;
4.  Mapping of existing ‘market ready’ producer groups linked to partner programmes and previous project in all target
districts and commodities to define initial starting cluster locations; Priority projects to map include: SLVC2, KUBK,
RISM-FP, LSIP (WB),
206.
Component 2
1. 
1.  Orientation of branch and credit officers in 5 programme states on the VITA approaches, modalities and objectives;
2.  Initiation of priority elements of the strategic capacity enhancement programme for ADBL, which are closely related to
its own corporate strategic development efforts, including:
34/34
Financial product adaptation and efficiency enhancement of loan processing through: (a) IT strategy
development; (b) credit and other financial products review and adaptation; and (c) development of a portal-
based automated and standardized system for loan processing;
Financial systems development through: (a) hardware and software development support for branchless
banking that will help ADBL to extend its outreach in a cost-effective manner; (b) digitization of participating co-
operative societies and micro-finance institutions in project clusters; and (c) support to co-operatives for
providing debit card services to their members;
207.
Component 3
1. 
1.  Finalization of detailed procedures for operation of the infrastructure financing facility, reflecting best practice for such
arrangements in devolved government systems drawing on experience from other leading donors in this area
208.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
1.  Supervision will be directly by IFAD with annual supervision missions, and initially by follow-up missions as needed,
organised jointly with the GoN and Heifer. Continuous implementation support will be provided to the programme from ICO-
based staff and, as required, by staff from IFAD’s technical divisions. Supervision will be used as an opportunity to assess
achievements and lessons jointly, and to reflect on ways to improve the implementation and impacts. The focus of these
missions will be on: (i) development impact based on progress measured against agreed indicators; (ii) joint identification of
implementation challenges and solutions with implementers and beneficiaries, and agreement on actions to achieve project
objectives; and, (iii) ensuring compliance with loan covenants, procurement and efficient use of project funds.
2.  Mid-term Review (MTR). As a six-year programme, an MTR will be undertaken at the end of year three of implementation.
The MTR will be jointly organised by the GoN and IFAD in close collaboration with the other stakeholders.
3.  Programme Completion Report (PCR). At the end of project implementation period, the GoN in collaboration with IFAD will
undertake a project completion review exercise, in order to report on the results, impacts achieved and lessons learned.
Collection of data for the PCR will be undertaken immediately after the last supervision mission. It will include collection of data
for the end-line survey as well as for the ex-post EFA. The PCR will be finalised before the programme closing date, which will
be six months after the completion date. As part of the completion activities, a Beneficiary Impact Assessment will be
undertaken and findings used to inform the PCR.
Footnotes
[1] Calculated as % agriculture share of GDP versus % share of agriculture in total employment.
[2] Severely affected district from 2015 earthquake - see National Planning commission (2015) Nepal Earthquake 2015, Post Disaster
Needs Assessment
[3]https://cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/68687
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Logical Framework
1/10
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous people
Non-Indigenous people
72000
48000
36000
30000
Total number of persons receiving
services
15000
90000 120000
Male
Female
Young
60
30
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
82800 110400
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Household members
397000 530000
Results Hierarchy
Project Goal 
Improved livelihoods, climate
resilience and nutrition of poor and
vulnerable people
Name
Indicators
2/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Number of individual small-scale producers directly benefitting
from programme services increasing their real net farm income
(c) >40% if via partnership with
SLVC2
(a) >60% if receiving full
programme services;
10000
20000
15000
70000
(b) >40% if receiving ‘finance only’
6000
30000
Base/Mid/ End
Surveys Annual
Cluster Tracking
Survey (ACTS)
Baseline, Mid term, End
line, Annual
PMU
(A) Continued
social, political and
economic stability in
the country. (B) No
prolonged collapses
in export/local
demand or prices
for agricultural
products.
Appropriate
technologies exist
suited to target
commodities in
Nepal.
Development Objective 
Sustainable farm enterprises of poor
and vulnerable rural people are more
resilient to climate change,
increasingly profitable, strengthen
their market linkages and use
appropriate financial services
Number of beneficiaries' receiving full programme services
achieving return on labour of >125% of official minimum wage .
Base/Mid/End line
Survey ACTS
Base/Mid/End Line
Annual
PMU
Number of People
12000
56000
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
RIMS
Annual
PMU
Households
40
50
Total number of household
members
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
3/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making
of local authorities and project-supported service providers
Base/ Mid/ End
Surveys
Baseline / mid term /
end line
PMU
Household members
Indigenous households
Non-women-headed households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
Outcome 
Improved small-scale producers’
capacities to run profitable farm
enterprises and establish linkages with
suppliers and buyers
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Base/ Mid/ End
Surveys
Baseline / Mid term /
End line
PMU
Household members
Indigenous households
Non-women-headed households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
60
80
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Base/ Mid/ End
Surveys
Base/ Mid/ End
Surveys
PMU
75
90
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
Indigenous
Women-headed households
No prolonged
collapses in export
/local demand or
prices for agri-
products.
Development of
commercial services
is not undermined
by the provision of
free or heavily
subsidized services
by others.
Participating
smallholders want to
improve their
business skills.
External socio-
political factors do
not disrupt MSP
processes.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
4/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Non-women-headed households
Percentage increase in the aggregate value of priority products
sold by targeted smallholder producers in real terms.
Base/Mid/ End line
Survey ACTS
Baseline / Mid Term /
End Line / Annual
PMU
% increase value
15
40
Percentage of small-scale producers in supported groups who
have paid for or received embedded technical services from
commercial service providers, agribusinesses or producer
organization in last 12 months.
% Smallholder producers - crops
% Smallholder producers -
livestock
% Smallholder producers - fish
ACTS
Annual
PMU
Number of small-scale producers regularly keeping farm
enterprise records.
Program MIS Farm
business diaries
Seasonal (semi annual) PMU
Number of people
59000
72000
Percentage of established multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs)
that are functional and self-sustaining .
Programme reports;
MSP surveys
Annual
PMU
% MSPs established
70
90
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in
empowerment
Baseline / mid and
endline
baseline/midline/endline PMU
Indigenous people
Indigenous people
Young
Young
Total persons
Total persons
Results Hierarchy
Females
Females
Males
Males
Name
Indicators
5/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
0
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
1.2.1 Households reporting improved access to land, forests,
water or water bodies for production purposes
Annual Reports/
Farm business
diaries
Annual
PMU
Households reporting improved
access to land
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved
access to water
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Total no. of households reporting
improved access to land
Total no. of households reporting
improved access to water
Output 
2.1.4 Supported rural producers that are members of a rural
producers' organization
Groups record
Seasonal (semi-annual) PMU
Total number of persons
70000
90000
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
6/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women in leadership position
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or
use of financial products and services
Training records
Quarterly
PMU
Females
Males
Young
Indigenous people
Persons in rural areas trained in
FL and/or use of FProd and
Services (total)
70000
90000
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business
management
Training records
Quarterly
PMU
Females
Males
Indigenous people
Young
Persons trained in IGAs or BM
(total)
70000
90000
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their
nutrition
Programme MIS
Annual
PMU
Household members benefitted
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
7/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Total persons participating
70000
70000
Males
Households
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Outcome 
Transformational increase in
investment in the smallholder
agricultural sector in supported
programme states.
Total private investment in priority clusters and supply chains by
smallholder producers, MSMEs and other actors (in cumulative
US$ million).
US$ Currency in million
70
200
1.2.6 Partner financial service providers with portfolio-at-risk ≥30
days below 5%
Percentage
100
100
ACTS/ADBL/PFI/MIS Annual
PMU
ADBL + PFI MIS
Annual
ADBL/ PFIs
Percentage of small-scale producers who own an active savings
account with ADBL or other PFI after completed business skills
training
ACTS/ADBL/PFI
reports
Quarterly
PMU
% smallholder producers
40
50
60
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment
Number
2
Official documents
(laws, acts,
regulatations,
policies etc)
Annual
PMU
Output 
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
ADBL / PFIs / MIS
Quarterly
ADBL / PFI
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Sufficient numbers
of FIs continue to
show commitment
to expand lending to
smallholders and
MSME sectors. No
major external
shocks stop PFI
clients to repay their
loans on time.
Sufficient number of
PFIs continue to
show commercial
commitment to
expand rural
savings portfolio.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
8/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Indigenous people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Indigenous people in rural areas
accessing financial services-credit
Total persons accessing financial
services - savings
Total persons accessing financial
services - credit
20000
50000
26000
35000
40000 100000
Amount of funds on-lent by ADBL from the programme window
(in US$), Disaggregated by: women, youth, DAG and poor
households (in US$ million)
ADBL / MIS
Quarterly
ADBL
US$ in million
Females
Youth
45
120
Results Hierarchy
Outcome 
Improved access by small-scale
producers and clusters’ actors to
productive infrastructure
Name
Indicators
9/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to markets,
processing and storage facilities
Base/Mid/End line
Survey
Baseline Mid Term
Endline
PMU
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Size of households
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to processing
facilities
Size of households
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to storage
facilities
Size of households
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
10/10
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Households reporting improved
physical access to processing
facilities
Households reporting improved
physical access to storage
facilities
22500
45000
Output 
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or
rehabilitated
Contractors' record
and reports
Quarterly
PMU
7
33
Total number of facilities
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure
constructed/rehabilitated
Contractors' record
and reports
Quarterly
PMU
Hectares of land
300
900
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
Ultimate Goal 
Improved livelihoods and nutrition of poor and vulnerable people.  
THEORY OF CHANGE  
d
e
d
n
e
t
n
I
s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
l
i
a
r
o
v
a
h
e
B
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
P
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
.
t
v
d
y
e
K
s
e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
s
e
s
u
a
C
Development Objective 
Sustainable farm enterprises of poor and vulnerable rural people are increasingly profitable, 
strengthen their market linkages and use appropriate financial services  
Improved capacities of small-scale producers to 
run profitable farm enterprises and establish 
linkages with suppliers and buyers. 
Enhanced access to essential 
productive and market 
infrastructure by SC actors and 
Small farmers and PO 
adopt climate-smart 
agriculture technologies 
and practices. 
Competitiveness of 
smallholder-based 
supply chains 
increases. Production 
Small farmers 
improve their 
technical, 
marketing and 
Small farmers have 
capacity & networks to 
profitably engage in 
market-driven supply 
More enabling 
 public 
investment & 
policy framework 
Enhanced policy 
processes for local 
economic 
development & 
Substantial increase in the 
private investment in priority 
clusters and supply chains 
from small-scale producers 
Enhanced national 
capacity to deliver 
inclusive cluster 
development and financial 
Strengthen 
Support Markets 
to promote 
climate-smart 
agriculture 
practices and 
technologies  
Mobilizing and 
mentoring 
like-minded 
small farmers 
into 
commercially 
oriented POs 
Ultimate problem 
Construct 
multi-use 
water 
/irrigation 
systems to 
Building 
busines
s skills 
of 
produce
rs and 
POs 
Brokering 
market 
linkages 
along 
supply 
Brokering 
linkages between 
smallholders and 
private inputs 
and technical 
advice service 
providers 
Poverty, food insecurity and child malnutrition 
Constructing 
essential 
market, CC-
resilient 
infrastructure 
PROBLEM TREE  
Strengthen 
public-
producer-
private 
policy 
dialogue via 
Facilitating 
private 
investment in 
sustainable 
SC and farm 
models 
Enhancing FIs’ 
capacity to 
increase supply of 
appropriate 
financial services 
to farmers and 
MSME 
Core problem 
Small farmer incomes in traditional farming are low and uncertain (risky) 
Production levels and on-farm productivity 
are low. Increasing risk of negative impact of 
CC on agriculture. 
Production does not 
respond to market 
demand 
Supply chains are inefficient, 
especially in ‘1st kilometer’, 
with low competitiveness 
Agricultur
e is 
vulnerabl
e to 
climate 
change 
Public extension 
services are 
weak; Farmers 
lack 
knowledge/acces
s to CC-resilient 
technologies 
Farmers 
have 
traditional, 
production- 
oriented 
mind-set to 
farming 
Farmers have 
little knowledge 
of market 
requirements 
and 
opportunities 
Linkages and 
trust between 
farmers and 
buyers are 
weak. Erratic 
input supply for 
farmers 
Weak POs’ 
institutional 
capacities. 
Farmers 
produce and 
sell 
individually  
High post-harvest losses by 
farmers. High transaction 
costs for traders, suppliers 
and FIs.  
Financial institutions 
are cautious in 
lending to 
agriculture. They 
lack adequate 
products and 
services for small-
scale producers 
Insufficien
t market, 
storage, 
processin
g and 
road 
infras. 
On-farm 
investme
nt is low 
Weak enabling 
environment for 
small-scale 
Lending to 
agriculture 
is very 
short-term 
dominated 
Public policy and 
investment are 
fragmented and 
not well linked to 
producers’ and 
business 
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
EXPECTED 
IMPACT 
d
e
d
n
e
t
n
I
s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
t
c
e
j
o
r
P
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
Social and economic empowerment and improved nutrition security for poor or marginalized households, poor women and the rural youth 
Enhanced self-esteem and 
confidence by women from 
marginalized groups and 
increased ability to influence 
intra-household’s decisions 
Enhanced capacities of poor 
women to voice their concerns 
and needs and influence the 
local/state policy and planning 
process and POs’ decisions 
Enhanced mutual 
understanding and 
balanced workload 
between rural women 
and men 
Enhanced access by 
female-headed 
households, youth and 
marginalized groups to 
investment capital 
Enhanced production 
capacity and incomes 
and economic 
empowerment 
Improved consumption 
behaviors towards 
nutritious and balanced 
diet 
Corner Stones tool for 
women from most 
vulnerable HHs and 
marginalized groups 
GALS ‘Lite’ 
module included 
in Business Skills 
training for all 
beneficiaries 
Promoting 
women’s 
genuine 
leadership in 
POs’  
Promoting labor saving 
technologies (drip 
irrigation, stall feeding, 
storage facilities, etc.) 
Expanded use of collateral free 
financial products by ADBL and 
partner FIs, including 
alternative guarantee 
mechanisms 
Promoting availability and 
utilization of knowledge on 
nutritious food through GALS “lite” 
and selecting commodities with 
high nutrition value 
CORE PROBLEM 
Low social and economic empowerment of poor rural women, female-headed households and the youth; and low nutritional status of members of poor and vulnerable 
households 
Women have little 
decision-making power 
and control over the use 
of household’s income 
Women have little say 
in community-level 
issues or local 
development planning 
process 
Women have 
little say or 
decision-making 
power within 
POs 
Low incomes and labor 
productivity of women, 
youth and marginalized 
casts/ethnic groups 
Limited capacity by 
female-headed 
households to engage 
in profitable 
IGAs/enterprises 
Limited capacity by the 
youth, women and 
ethnic groups to access 
collateral-based loans 
Insufficient nutrition security 
in poor families, and low 
nutritional status of lactating 
mothers, pregnant girls and 
children 
s
e
s
u
a
C
Local norms and 
traditions limit the 
ability of poor 
women from 
marginalized castes 
or ethnic groups to 
influence intra-
household’s 
decisions 
In very 
conservative 
communities, 
poor women lack 
self-esteem and 
confidence to 
engage in non-
traditional 
activities 
Low women’s 
confidence to speak 
and represent their 
views/voices in local 
foras despite their 
high representation 
in municipal-level 
elected bodies (as 
per law) 
Although 33% of the 
members of POs’ 
Management 
Committees are 
women (as per law), 
they have 
insufficient 
capacities or self-
confidence to 
influence POs’ 
decisions 
Women whose 
husband has migrated 
tend to use 
remittances mostly for 
consumption; Widows 
are the most 
vulnerable and least 
influential in their 
communities; All lack 
ideas of investment 
opportunities 
(a) Women and youth 
have no land titles; (b) 
Married women with 
migrating husband are 
not trusted by parents-
in-law to make sensible 
economic decisions; (c) 
Members of Dalits or 
ethnic groups have no 
land titles and no 
citizenship cards 
Lack of knowledge 
on nutritious and 
balanced food by 
poor women and 
insufficient 
availability of 
nutritious food 
during the spring 
and rainy seasons 
Insufficient 
knowledge on 
nutritious food and 
balanced diet during 
pregnancy or 
lactation by poor 
women and young 
girls and high rates 
of early marriage 
and pregnancy 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Programme cost and financing 
Total programme costs are estimated as around US$196.9 million over the six years implementation period as summarized in below. 
Table 1: Programme costs by component and financier  
IFAD Loan 
% 
Amount 
Heifer 
Amount  % 
ADBL 
CSR 
Amount  % 
Private 
sector 
Amount  % 
Benef-
iciaries  
Amount  % 
Banks 
Amount  % 
Government: 
State / local  
% 
Amount 
Total 
Amount 
% 
(US$ '000) 
Component 
1: Inclusive supply chain development 
1.1 Farm Business Capacity Development 
1.2 Brokering and Investment Facilitation  
1.3 Supply Chain Knowledge and Policy 
Subtotal 
2: Expanding financial service to agriculture 
2.1 Private Investment Financing 
2.2 Capacity enhancement and policy support 
 Component Implementation Support (by banks) 
Subtotal 
3: Supply chain infrastructure 
Programme Management 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Programme Management Office 
Subtotal 
Total 
4,418  
7,105  
276  
11,799  
63,563  
1,458  
439  
65,459  
17,335  
1,083  
1,995  
3,078  
97,671  
61  
75  
75  
69  
46  
87  
8  
45  
64  
83  
34  
43  
50  
1,764   24  
1,545   16  
-   
     -   
3,309   19  
149  
151  
     -   
300  
2  
2  
-   
2  
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
932   13  
692  
7  
92   25  
1,716   10  
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
     -   
     -   
     -   
-    16,876   12  
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
33,751   24  
-   
-   
-   
-   
24,100   17  
218   13  
4,858   92  
     -   
-    16,876   12  
33,751   23  
29,176   20  
     -   
  -    145,262  
     -   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
  9,947  
37  
27,282  
137   10  
2,554   43  
2,691   37  
     -   
     -   
     -   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
93  
7  
1,387   23  
1,480   20  
     -   
     -   
     -   
  -   
  -   
  -   
1,313  
5,936  
7,249  
6,000  
3  
300  
0  
16,876  
9  
33,751   17  
32,371   16  
  9,947  
5  
196,917   100  
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
     -   
  -   
  -   
  -   
  -   
7,263  
9,492  
368  
17,123  
  -    138,290  
1,675  
  -   
5,297  
  -   
4  
5  
0  
9  
70  
1  
3  
74  
14  
1  
3  
4  
Table 2: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
Expenditure category 
Investment costs 
i. Civil Works 
ii. Private Investment Financing 
iii. Training 
iv. Consultancies 
v. Workshops 
vi. Grants and subsidies 
vii. Vehicles and equipment 
Total investment costs 
Recurrent costs 
viii. Salary and allowances 
ix. Operating costs 
Total recurrent costs 
Total 
(US$ '000) 
IFAD Loan 
Amount  % 
Heifer 
Amount  % 
ADBL 
CSR 
Amount  % 
Private 
sector  
Amount  % 
Benef-
iciaries  
Amount  % 
Banks 
Amount  % 
Government 
State / local 
% 
Amount 
Total 
Amount 
% 
16,973 
63,563 
6,421 
1,317 
1,463 
- 
504 
90,241 
6,133 
1,297 
7,430 
97,671 
63 
46 
67 
69 
82 
- 
76 
50 
44 
34 
42 
50 
- 
- 
1,764 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,764 
2,624 
1,612 
4,236 
6,000 
- 
- 
18 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
19 
43 
24 
3 
- 
- 
12 
288 
- 
- 
- 
300 
- 
- 
- 
300 
- 
- 
0 
15 
- 
- 
- 
0 
- 
- 
- 
0 
- 
16,876 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
16,876 
- 
- 
- 
16,876 
- 
12 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9 
- 
- 
- 
9 
- 
33,751 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
33,751 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
19 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24,100 
1,426 
292 
314 
- 
150 
26,281 
5,215 
875 
6,090 
33,751 
17 
32,371 
- 
17 
15 
15 
18 
- 
23 
15 
37 
23 
34 
16 
9,846 
- 
2 
- 
14 
- 
9 
9,871 
76 
- 
76 
9,947 
37 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
1 
6 
1 
- 
0 
5 
26,820 
138,290 
9,625 
1,897 
1,791 
- 
663 
179,084 
14,048 
3,784 
17,832 
14 
70 
5 
1 
1 
- 
0 
91 
7 
2 
9 
196,917 
100 
Table 3: Programme costs by component and year 
(US$ '000) Yr1 
Yr2 
Yr3 
Yr4 
Yr5 
Yr6 
Total 
% 
Component 
1: Inclusive supply chain development 
1.1 Farm Business Capacity Development 
1.2 Brokering and Investment Facilitation  
1.3 Supply Chain Knowledge and Policy 
financial  service 
Subtotal 
2:  Expanding 
agriculture 
2.1 Private Investment Financing 
2.2 Capacity enhancement and policy  
   Component Implementation Support  
to 
Subtotal 
3: Supply chain infrastructure 
Programme Management 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Programme Management Office 
Subtotal 
Total 
Programme financing  
804 
1,767 
21 
2,592 
21,514 
190 
384 
22,088 
1,617 
1,836 
54 
3,506 
31,480 
398 
758 
32,636 
2,308 
1,946 
62 
4,316 
27,623 
418 
982 
29,023 
1,413 
1,736 
65 
3,214 
22,404 
439 
1,006 
23,849 
1,061 
1,307 
81 
2,449 
20,131 
230 
1,057 
21,418 
61 
901 
85 
7,263 
9,492 
368 
1,047 
17,123 
15,138 
- 
1,109 
16,247 
138,290 
1,675 
5,297 
145,262 
51 
13,417 
10,683 
3,021 
110 
- 
27,282 
222 
947 
1,169 
25,900 
192 
887 
1,078 
50,638 
186 
937 
1,122 
45,144 
282 
963 
1,245 
31,329 
161 
1,011 
1,172 
272 
1,192 
1,464 
1,313 
5,936 
7,249 
25,148 
18,758 
196,917 
100% 
4% 
5% 
0% 
9% 
0% 
70% 
1% 
3% 
74% 
14% 
0% 
1% 
3% 
4% 
Total programme financing of US$ 196.9 million is comprised of  IFAD  funding of US$97.67 million (49.6%), government funding of 
US$9.9 million (5.1%), ADBL and banks US$32.4 million (16.4%), Heifer $6.0 million (3.0%), beneficiaries US$33.8 million (17.1%) 
and private sector contributions of US$16.9 million (8.6%). All beneficiary and private sector contributions shown are in cash. There 
is no financing gap. 
Of the funds set aside for line of credit, while IFAD funds will be used exclusively for meeting medium terms credit needs of farmer 
and  MSME  borrowers,  ADBL  and  PFIs  will  finance  the  associated  short-term  credit  in  entirety  using  their  internal  resources.  Of  the 
government and ADBL financing US$ 2.6 million and US$ 1.98 million, respectively are estimated to be the amount for taxes. ADBL 
will  meet  the  tax  expenditure  from  the  income  which  will  be  generated  from  the  interest  spread  that  the  GON  will  provide  on  the 
subsidiary loan for the purpose.   
The taxes and duties to be paid on expenses incurred for the project will be funded from the counterpart funds provided by the state 
and  local  government  for  the  infrastructure  construction  expenses  and  by  ADBL  for  the  inclusive  supply  chain  development  of 
component 1; capacity enhancement and policy development facility of component 2; and project management expenses. In case of 
private investment financing, the private sector and beneficiaries will cover the taxes and duties from their equity, cash contribution 
and  bank  loan  while  Heifer  will  provide  funds  for  expenses  inclusive  of  taxes  and  duties.  Because  of  above  funding  modality,  the 
federal government will not provide counterpart funds for this project. The resources it will allocate for the use of provincial and local 
government may be used for the meeting the expenditures thus incurred, however.  
The  proposed  funding  modality  follows  the  principle  of  fiscal  devolution  befitting  a  federal  system  of  governance  and  has  several 
advantages. Firstly, by putting tax burden of productive infrastructure on provincial and local governments, it enhances transparency 
with respect to the total financial cost of investment proposals which will encourage these governments to consider the proposals with 
due care and diligence. Secondly, it also makes ADBL and PFIs independent of the governmental annual budget allocation and release 
system and also helps reducing the transaction cost by eliminating expenditure settlement process. 
Detailed cost tables 
Notes on gender, youth and nutrition aspects in the cost tables 
Component 1: 
Mentoring and mobilization of smallholders 
The programme has explicit targets to ensure a minimum of 60% women, 30% youth and 25% dalit/janajati as well as having 
women in genuine leadership roles and supporting the introduction of local measure to increase youth access to key productive 
resource (especially, land to rent for production and loans to investment – including backed by local authority/PO guarantees if 
needed). The targets are in-line with the past levels of performance achieved in IFAD supported project such as HVAP and Heifer’s 
SLVC project. Budgets for these critical targeting, mobilization and capacity building activities are included in this line item and 
delivered as an integrated package of support by the local NGO service providers under Heifer. 
The costs and activities directly contribute to IFAD’s gender policy objectives on women’s economic empowerment, agency for 
decision making. By creating groups of empowered women, these activities also provide the foundation for women to engage 
more substantively in local policy on gender equality, including via the MSPs (see below).  
Business Skills to Farmers: 
The enhanced business skills training covers a series of empowerment and inclusion related modules as well as its core business 
skills training, targeting both women and youth. These include elements of the GALS visioning, issues of improved nutrition 
knowledge and practice, and creating opportunities for families’ adult children. 
A separate line item is shown for nutrition to illustrate the estimated proportion of total time and costs related to nutrition within 
the overall enhanced business skills training. The overall course included around 60-70 hours of training – typically delivered in 
weekly sessions of 2-3 hours over 6 months. Nutrition is expect to be covered for 6-7 hours within this, spread over several 
sessions to reinforce the messages and behavioural changes. The cost for nutrition are their for estimated as 10% of the overall 
business skill activities, and shown as a single line item. However, in practice they will be delivered as a fully integrated part of 
the over training package. 
The business skills training will be delivered on a peer-to-peer basis by Business Skills Facilitators. Priority is to be given to 
women to be the BSF - which typically become high status roles in the groups and the BSFs become strong role models for other 
young women. 
The costs and activities directly contribute to IFAD’s gender policy objectives on women’s economic empowerment by providing 
the foundation skills for women to increase their incomes. It contributes to the objective in women’s voice by creating role models 
for younger women, by the choice of women as the business skill facilitators. It contributes to the rebalancing of workloads 
between women and men through the use of elements of the GALS methodology within the enhanced business skills course – 
termed ‘ GALS-lite’ in the context of VITA. Further, it demonstrates the potential for improved returns on labour through 
investment in labour saving technologies and production systems. 
Brokering and facilitation 
A central element of these activities are the multi-stakeholder platforms. These will be attended by the leaders of the supported 
producer groups on an equal basis with agribusinesses, service providers, local government representatives and policy makers. A 
majority of the leaders of the supported groups are expect to be women, who have also received capacity building and mentoring 
support. These women will therefore both have an increasingly important voice in the decision making in their local supply chains 
but also influencing local policy, both on local economic development in general but also on issues that are a specific priority to 
their women members. The MSPs create an important space for women to have direct access to policy makers that they would not 
ordinarily have. 
Sector Development Facility 
A major activity under the SDF is the Support Market Development (e.g. for technical services to producers). As part of this, the 
priority will be to identify and train youth to become local technical services providers in their community (either self-employed or 
as embedded service providers working for buyers or POs). The scale of budgets used for support market development will 
depend on demand, but it is estimated that this will account for between 25%-50% of the total SDF budget of around $850,000. 
The SDF investments in support market development will expand the availability and use of labour savings production 
technologies and equipment. This will raise labour productivity in the farms of supported households and reduce the total labour 
needed for a given level of income. As women are a key part of the agricultural labour force, they are expected to benefit 
disproportionately more from these labour saving technologies. 
Staff 
Key posts working on gender, youth and nutrition issues under Component 1 include the: (ToR’s in PIM) 
o  Targeting gender and inclusion specialist – with responsibilities also for nutrition.  
o  Socio-Economic Mobilization team – comprising: Expert (x1 @ HQ), Coordinators (x5 @ state-level), Officers x10 (at 
District level, covering 2-3 districts per officer). This team will manage and support the delivery of all farmer-facing 
activities by the local NGO partners ensuring all aspects of gender empowerment, youth inclusion and nutrition 
activities are delivered as planned. 
Component 2 
Private investment finance 
A substantial amount of both the medium- and short-term lending will go to women and youth - roughly in proportion to their 
participation level in the programme - which is targeted as minimum 60% women, 30% youth. While specific disaggregated 
targets are not set for this indicator, it will be reported and tracked on a disaggregated basis - by gender, age, socio-ethnic 
groups, DAG-status for all borrowers as well as additionally on their poverty status for those beneficiaries also supported under 
component 1). 
Capacity enhancement and policy development facility 
Three of the sub-projects on capacity building with ADBL are specifically relevant to the mainstreaming priorities: 
review and improvement of financial services/products that are better suited to women and youth in agriculture 
o 
o  expanding use of collateral free lending - through more cashflow-based and risk-based lending mechanisms - which is 
specifically important to youth and women who may not have land titles or other quality collateral 
o  establishing mainstream use by ADBL of institutional guarantees for young producers to enable youth to access finance 
for investment – with guarantees provided either from the local municipal government or the local PO to which the 
youth are affiliated 
M&E 
IFAD Empowerment indicator surveys and minimum dietary diversity - women (MDD-W) survey budgets are included for baseline, 
mid-term and completion. 
Component 1 
Table 1. Inclusive Supply Chain Development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Mentoring and mobilization of producers / POs Producer Organisation mobilization sub-award Via NGOs No. of sub-award1525382323-12434,065511.0851.61,294.5783.5783.5-4,224.1523.7916.61,462.8929.7976.2-4,809.0TRAINING_EAHEIFER (32.2422%), LOAN (54.7578%), BANKS (13%)Capacity Building of NGOs Event6476866757413911,08069.182.192.972.461.644.3422.370.888.3105.085.976.757.9484.6TRAINING_EAHEIFER (44.0916%), LOAN (42.9084%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 580.1933.71,387.4855.9845.144.34,646.3594.61,004.91,567.81,015.51,052.857.95,293.6B. Business Skills to Farmers Farmers Diary Design and Publication Trainee6,24120,39527,25013,9472,367-70,2001.811.236.749.125.14.3-126.411.539.555.429.85.3-141.6CON_EACSR (87%), BANKS (13%)Business Skills to supply chain groups Group208680908544--2,340395.182.2268.7358.8215.0--924.684.2289.2405.5255.1--1,034.0TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Nutrition modulle training and delivery - within Business Skills course Trainee6,24120,39527,25013,9472,367-70,2002.415.049.065.533.55.7-168.816.754.672.937.36.30.0187.8TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)TOT for business skills facilitators including refersher training Event6135---24630037.881.931.5---151.238.788.135.6---162.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Training materials development and printing of 70000 copies Number8,91525,31428,0807,890--70,1993.632.191.1101.128.4--252.732.998.1114.233.7--278.9TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Busienss Skills Facilitator Review and Sharing Workshop Event-494--173150-12.628.412.6--53.6-13.632.015.0--60.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Establishment and Operation of Agriculture Market Information System Number111111618001.81.81.81.81.81.810.81.81.92.02.12.22.412.5TRAINING_EACSR (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 180.1541.9636.1316.411.81.81,688.1185.9585.0717.7372.913.92.41,877.8C. Brokering and cluster facilitation Provincial Level MSPs Event2021171510-833,50070.073.559.552.535.0-290.571.879.167.262.343.6-324.0TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Cluster level MSPs Event4512213637--3401,50067.5183.0204.055.5--510.069.2197.0230.565.9--562.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)B2B/B2S interactions at Cluster Level Event18048954314742-1,40117531.585.695.025.77.4-245.232.392.1107.430.59.2-271.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 169.0342.1358.5133.742.4-1,045.7173.2368.2405.2158.752.8-1,158.0D. Capacity Development Capacity Development Training for Project Staff (MSP, VCD, BP development, and social mobilization) Event89994-396,00048.054.054.054.024.0-234.049.258.161.064.129.9-262.3TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Enhancing Capacity of Bank Staff on Cluster based Supply Chain Development and Climate Smart Agricultural Financing Scale-up Event--488-205,000--20.040.040.0-100.0--22.647.549.8-119.9TRAINING_EABANKS (100%)National and International Exposure Visits to Stakeholders and Staff Event-2222-817,900-35.835.835.835.8-143.2-38.540.542.544.6-166.1TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Production and Post-harvest Training to Smallholders Event9024527174--68025022.561.367.818.5--170.023.165.976.622.0--187.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Exposure visit to Producers, Traders and Processor Events-888--243,000-24.024.024.0--72.0-25.827.128.5--81.4TRAINING_EABANKS (100%)Subtotal 70.5175.1201.6172.399.8-719.272.3188.4227.8204.4124.3-817.2E. Sector Development Facilities Sector Development Facility (Market Feasibility Studies, Action Research, Demonstration, Certification, First Movers Guarantee and Service Market Development) Number-111--3250,000-250.0250.0250.0--750.0-269.1282.5296.6--848.2SUBSIDY_EALOAN (69.1911%), CSR (17.8089%), BANKS (13%)F. Knowledge Management Support Knowledge Product Development and Publication Number111111620,00020.020.020.020.020.020.0120.020.521.522.623.724.926.2139.4CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Knowledge Sharing Workshop (in house) Number-222221010,000-20.020.020.020.020.0100.0-21.522.623.724.926.2118.9CON_EALOAN (50%), BANKS (50%)Knowledge Sharing Workshop (External) Number-11122710,000-10.010.010.020.020.070.0-10.811.311.924.926.285.0WS_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Media Trips Number--111145,000--5.05.05.05.020.0--5.75.96.26.524.4CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 20.050.055.055.065.065.0310.020.553.862.265.381.085.0367.7G. Vehicles and Equipment Double Cab Pick-up (PO-5,PMU-1) Number6-----650,000300.0-----300.0307.5-----307.5VEHICLE_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Motor-cycle Number48-----483,000144.0-----144.0147.6-----147.6VEHICLE_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Laptops Number4812----601,00048.012.0----60.049.212.9----62.1VEHICLE_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Photocopiers, Printers and Scaner Number6-----65,00030.0-----30.030.8-----30.8VEHICLE_EABANKS (100%)Furniture Set and Other Logistics Number6-----65,00030.0-----30.030.8-----30.8VEHICLE_EABANKS (100%)Motor-cycle (heifer) Number45----93,00012.015.0----27.012.316.1----28.4VEHICLE_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Laptops (heifer) Number45----91,0004.05.0----9.04.15.4----9.5VEHICLE_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Printer and other equipments (Heifer) Number2-1---35,00010.0-5.0---15.010.3-5.7---15.9VEHICLE_EABANKS (100%)Subtotal 578.032.05.0---615.0592.534.45.7---632.5Total Investment Costs 1,601.12,330.42,891.41,781.21,058.9111.39,774.31,641.12,508.13,267.52,113.51,319.3145.610,995.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist pers_year1111--420,80020.820.820.820.8--83.221.322.423.524.7--91.9SAA_EALOAN (100%)Focal Person Coordinator at HO (1 person in MSME Department) pers_year111110.55.520,80020.820.820.820.820.810.4114.421.322.423.524.725.913.6131.4SAA_EALOAN (100%)Focal Person Officer at HO (1 person in MSME Department) pers_year111110.55.514,30014.314.314.314.314.37.278.714.715.416.217.017.89.490.3SAA_EALOAN (100%)Supply chain coordinator at province level (P2-3; P5-6; P3:3) pers_year1212121212127220,800249.6249.6249.6249.6249.6249.61,497.6255.8268.6282.1296.2311.0326.51,740.2SAA_EALOAN (100%)SEM Expert at HO (Heifer) pers_year111111626,25926.326.326.326.326.326.3157.626.928.329.731.232.734.4183.1SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)SEM coordinator at province level (Heifer) pers_year5555553018,97194.994.994.994.994.994.9569.197.2102.1107.2112.6118.2124.1661.3SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Supply Chain Officer at Branch / District Level (1-2 number) pers_year28282828281415414,300400.4400.4400.4400.4400.4200.22,202.2410.4430.9452.5475.1498.9261.92,529.7SAA_EALOAN (100%)SEM Officer at District Level (Heifer) pers_year1010101010106010,046100.5100.5100.5100.5100.5100.5602.8103.0108.1113.5119.2125.2131.4700.4SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Total Recurrent Costs 927.5927.5927.5927.5906.7688.95,305.5950.7998.21,048.11,100.51,129.6901.26,128.3Total 2,528.53,257.93,818.92,708.71,965.6800.215,079.82,591.73,506.34,315.63,214.02,448.91,046.817,123.4 
Component 2 
Component 3 
Table 2. Private Investment Financing (Investment Promotion) Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Private Investment Financing Medium Term Credit (Net Capital) Lumpsum13,500.019,700.014,900.08,300.05,900.01,262.663,562.613,500.019,700.014,900.08,300.05,900.01,262.663,562.6PIF_EALOAN (100%)Short Term Credit (Net Capital) Lumpsum4,400.05,700.04,200.03,700.03,100.03,000.024,100.04,400.05,700.04,200.03,700.03,100.03,000.024,100.0PIF_EABANKS (100%)Beneficiary Investment Contribution Lumpsum2,409.04,053.05,682.06,936.07,421.07,250.033,751.02,409.04,053.05,682.06,936.07,421.07,250.033,751.0PIF_EABEN (100%)Private Sector Investment Contribution Lumpsum1,205.02,027.02,841.03,468.03,710.03,625.016,876.01,205.02,027.02,841.03,468.03,710.03,625.016,876.0PIF_EAPRIVATE (100%)Capacity enhancement and policy development facility Lumpsum12221-8185,000185.0370.0370.0370.0185.0-1,480.0189.6398.2418.1439.0230.5-1,675.5TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Total Investment Costs 21,699.031,850.027,993.022,774.020,316.015,137.6139,769.621,703.631,878.228,041.122,843.020,361.515,137.6139,965.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary (ADBL Staff) Financial Management Officer pers_year111111617,69917.717.717.717.717.717.7106.218.119.020.021.022.123.2123.4SAA_EABANKS (100%)Credit Officer - Part-time (15%) pers_year511141414147219,46997.3214.2272.6272.6272.6272.61,401.899.8230.5308.0323.4339.6356.61,657.9SAA_EABANKS (100%)Branch Manager - Part-time (15%) pers_year4.510.513.513.513.513.56917,69979.6185.8238.9238.9238.9238.91,221.281.6200.0270.0283.5297.7312.61,445.4SAA_EABANKS (100%)Finance Officer - Part-time (15%) pers_year511141414147217,69988.5194.7247.8247.8247.8247.81,274.390.7209.5280.0294.0308.7324.21,507.1SAA_EABANKS (100%)Digital Banking Expert - Part-time (15%) pers_year0.450.450.450.450.450.452.720,0499.09.09.09.09.09.054.19.29.710.210.711.211.862.9SAA_EABANKS (100%)IT Officer - Part-time (15%) pers_year0.450.450.450.450.450.452.719,4698.88.88.88.88.88.852.69.09.49.910.410.911.561.1SAA_EABANKS (100%)Subtotal 301.0630.2794.8794.8794.8794.84,110.2308.5678.2898.1943.0990.21,039.74,857.8B. Staff salary (Project Staff) Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert pers_year111111626,00026.026.026.026.026.026.0156.026.728.029.430.932.434.0181.3SAA_EALOAN (100%)Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist pers_year111---320,80020.820.820.8---62.421.322.423.5---67.2SAA_EALOAN (100%)Digital Banking Expert pers_year111111620,80020.820.820.820.820.820.8124.821.322.423.524.725.927.2145.0SAA_EALOAN (100%)Assistant Finance Officer pers_year11111166,5006.56.56.56.56.56.539.06.77.07.37.78.18.545.3SAA_EALOAN (100%)Subtotal 74.174.174.153.353.353.3382.276.079.883.763.266.469.7438.8Total Recurrent Costs 375.1704.3868.9848.1848.1848.14,492.4384.4758.0981.91,006.31,056.61,109.45,296.6Total 22,074.132,554.328,861.923,622.121,164.115,985.6144,262.022,088.132,636.229,023.023,849.321,418.116,247.0145,261.7Table 3. Productive Infrastructure Development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works Integrated Market Number-21---32,608,695-5,217.42,608.7---7,826.1-5,478.32,739.1---8,217.4CW_EALOAN (65.25%), LOCAL (34.75%)Satellite Market Number-1515---30313,044-4,695.74,695.7---9,391.3-4,930.44,930.4---9,860.9CW_EALOAN (52.2%), LOCAL (47.8%)Rural Roads (each 2.5 km) Km-252525--7560,600-1,515.01,515.01,515.0--4,545.0-1,590.81,590.81,590.8--4,772.3CW_EALOAN (73.95%), LOCAL (26.05%)Irrigation Scheme (5 ha. each) Number-300300300--9004,200-1,260.01,260.01,260.0--3,780.0-1,323.01,323.01,323.0--3,969.0CW_EALOAN (73.95%), LOCAL (26.05%)Subtotal -12,688.110,079.42,775.0--25,542.4-13,322.510,583.32,913.8--26,819.5B. Vehicles and Equipments Motor Cycle Number7-----73,00021.0-----21.021.5-----21.5VEHICLE_EALOAN (69.6%), LOCAL (30.4%)Laptops Number7-----71,2008.4-----8.48.6-----8.6VEHICLE_EALOAN (69.6%), LOCAL (30.4%)Subtotal 29.4-----29.430.1-----30.1C. Capacity Development Number1--1--22,5002.5--2.5--5.02.6--3.0--5.5TRAINING_EALOAN (69.6%), LOCAL (30.4%)D. Consultation Workshop, Feasibility Study, Design and Estimate, Bid Evaluation Events-1111-410,000-10.010.010.010.0-40.0-10.811.311.912.5-46.4WS_EALOAN (69.6%), LOCAL (30.4%)Total Investment Costs 31.912,698.110,089.42,787.510.0-25,616.832.713,333.210,594.62,928.612.5-26,901.6II. Recurrent Costs Infrastructure Specialist pers_year-1111-420,800-20.820.820.820.8-83.2-22.423.524.725.9-96.5SAA_EALOAN (80%), LOCAL (20%)Sub Engineer / Overseer pers_year-5555-207,800-39.039.039.039.0-156.0-42.044.146.348.6-180.9SAA_EALOAN (80%), LOCAL (20%)Procurement Specialist pers_year11111-518,20018.218.218.218.218.2-91.018.719.620.621.622.7-103.1SAA_EALOAN (80%), LOCAL (20%)Total Recurrent Costs 18.278.078.078.078.0-330.218.783.988.192.697.2-380.5Total 50.112,776.110,167.42,865.588.0-25,947.051.413,417.210,682.83,021.1109.6-27,282.1 
KM, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Programme Management Office 
Table 4. Project Monitoring and Evaluation Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (NPR '000)Base Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Capacity Development Capacity Building of NGOs on M&E Event246---123,5007841,5682,352---4,7047.014.021.0---42.07.215.123.7---46.0TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)B. System Development MIS System Development, Update, Financial Digitization Number1--1--230,0003,360--3,360--6,72030.0--30.0--60.030.8--35.6--66.3TRAINING_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Tablets for Data Collection (Busienss Facilitators and Economic Mobilisers) Number270535210---1,0151404,2348,3893,293---15,91537.874.929.4---142.138.780.633.2---152.6CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)SIM Cards for Internet Connectivity and Data Uploading Number2708051,0151,0151,0151,0155,135103029021,1371,1371,1371,1375,7512.78.110.210.210.210.251.42.88.711.512.012.613.360.9CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 7,8969,2904,4304,4971,1371,13728,38670.583.039.640.210.210.2253.572.389.344.747.612.613.3279.8C. Studies and Documentation Baseline Studies including IFAD empowerment indcator survey + MDD-W Number1-----180,0008,960-----8,96080.0-----80.082.0-----82.0CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)PPI Survey - 3 times per group (baseline, mid-line and end-line) Number2978441,2331,1071,2331,1075,821103339451,3811,2401,3811,2406,5203.08.412.311.112.311.158.23.09.113.913.115.414.569.0CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Mid-term Survey including IFAD empowerment indcator survey + MDD-W Number---1--180,000---8,960--8,960---80.0--80.0---94.9--94.9CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Impact Assessment and End-line Surveyincluding IFAD empowerment + MDD-W Number-----1180,000-----8,9608,960-----80.080.0-----104.7104.7CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Qualitative studies annual---111310,000---1,1201,1201,1203,360---10.010.010.030.0---11.912.513.137.4CON_EALOAN (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 9,2939451,38111,3202,50111,32036,76083.08.412.3101.122.3101.1328.285.09.113.9119.927.8132.2388.0Total Investment Costs 17,97311,8048,16315,8173,63812,45769,850160.5105.472.9141.232.5111.2623.7164.5113.482.4167.640.5145.5713.8II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Knowledge management manager (50% time) Heifer pers_year0.50.50.50.50.50.5319,5001,0921,0921,0921,0921,0921,0926,5529.89.89.89.89.89.858.510.010.511.011.612.112.868.0SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Communication Officer (25%) pers_year0.250.250.250.250.250.251.519,4695455455455455455453,2714.94.94.94.94.94.929.25.05.25.55.86.16.433.9SAA_EALOAN (100%)Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist pers_year111111620,8002,3302,3302,3302,3302,3302,33013,97820.820.820.820.820.820.8124.821.322.423.524.725.927.2145.0SAA_EALOAN (100%)PM&E officer at HO (Heifer) pers_year11111169,9151,1101,1101,1101,1101,1101,1106,6639.99.99.99.99.99.959.510.210.711.211.812.413.069.1SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)MIS Officer pers_year0.250.250.250.250.250.251.517,6994964964964964964962,9734.44.44.44.44.44.426.54.54.85.05.35.55.830.8SAA_EALOAN (100%)Data Collection (Remuneration to BSFs) Group_year2971,1412,0772,3402,3402,34010,535206652,5564,6525,2425,2425,24223,5985.922.841.546.846.846.8210.76.124.646.955.558.361.2252.7SAA_EALOAN (100%)Total Recurrent Costs 6,2388,12910,22510,81410,81410,81457,03555.772.691.396.696.696.6509.257.178.1103.2114.6120.3126.3599.6Total 24,21119,93218,38826,63114,45223,271126,885216.2178.0164.2237.8129.0207.81,132.9221.6191.5185.5282.1160.8271.81,313.4Table 5. Project Management Office Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Meeting and Workshop PSC Meeting Number222222125001.01.01.01.01.01.06.01.01.11.11.21.21.37.0WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (National) Event1----122,5002.5----2.55.02.6----3.35.8WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (Provisional) Number5----5101,5007.5----7.515.07.7----9.817.5WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (District/Municipal) Number90----901801,00090.0----90.0180.092.3----117.7210.0WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Policy Formulation Workshop Event--111145,000--5.05.05.05.020.0--5.75.96.26.524.4WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Coordination and other meetings/workshop as required (2 times per province) Event444444241,0004.04.04.04.04.04.024.04.14.34.54.75.05.227.9WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Planning and Review Workshop Event11111165,0005.05.05.05.05.05.030.05.15.45.75.96.26.534.9WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Planning and Review Workshop (Provincial Level) Number555555305,00025.025.025.025.025.025.0150.025.626.928.329.731.132.7174.3WS_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Supervision / Implementation Support Missions' Preparation Number11111161,0001.01.01.01.01.01.06.01.01.11.11.21.21.37.0CON_EALOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%)Total Investment Costs 136.036.041.041.041.0141.0436.0139.438.746.348.651.1184.5508.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Chief Executive Officer (10% time) pers_year0.10.10.10.10.10.10.644,2484.44.44.44.44.44.426.54.54.85.05.35.55.830.8SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Country Director: Heifer (10% time) pers_year0.10.10.10.10.10.10.669,2686.96.96.96.96.96.941.67.17.57.88.28.69.148.3SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Deputy Chief Executive Officer (10% of time) - 4 persons pers_year0.40.40.40.40.40.42.420,7968.38.38.38.38.38.349.98.59.09.49.910.410.958.0SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)VITA PMU Coordinator (PIU Director) pers_year111111620,04920.020.020.020.020.020.0120.320.621.622.723.825.026.2139.8SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Program director - Heifer (2 part time staff) pers_year0.80.80.80.40.40.43.644,03635.235.235.217.617.617.6158.536.137.939.820.921.923.0179.7SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Finance Director - Heifer (40% time) pers_year0.40.40.40.40.40.42.435,02914.014.014.014.014.014.084.114.415.115.816.617.518.397.7SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Senior Manager PM&E - Heifer (40% time) pers_year0.40.40.40.40.40.42.422,9039.29.29.29.29.29.255.09.49.910.410.911.412.063.9SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)MSME and Agriculture Finance Department Head / Programme Manager (25% time) pers_year0.250.250.250.250.250.251.520,0495.05.05.05.05.05.030.15.15.45.75.96.26.634.9SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Province Director - 5 persons (10% time) pers_year0.50.50.50.50.50.5320,04910.010.010.010.010.010.060.110.310.811.311.912.513.169.9SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Planning office - 6 persons (25% time) pers_year0.60.60.60.60.60.63.619,46911.711.711.711.711.711.770.112.012.613.213.914.615.381.4SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Human Resource Officer (10% time) pers_year0.10.10.10.10.10.10.619,4691.91.91.91.91.91.911.72.02.12.22.32.42.513.6SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Procurement Officer (10% time) pers_year0.10.10.10.10.10.10.619,4691.91.91.91.91.91.911.72.02.12.22.32.42.513.6SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Legal Expert (10% time) pers_year0.10.10.10.10.10.10.620,3542.02.02.02.02.02.012.22.12.22.32.42.52.714.2SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)HR officer (30% time) Heifer pers_year0.30.30.30.30.30.31.812,4783.73.73.73.73.73.722.53.84.04.24.44.74.926.1SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Finance and Admin at Province level (Heifer) pers_year3333331811,92135.835.835.835.835.835.8214.636.738.540.442.444.646.8249.3SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Driver at Province level  (Heifer) pers_year555555307,30236.536.536.536.536.536.5219.137.439.341.343.345.547.8254.5SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Driver (1 part time) Heifer pers_year0.50.50.50.50.50.536,4753.23.23.23.23.23.219.43.33.53.73.84.04.222.6SAA_EAHEIFER (100%)Programme Assistant pers_year11111167,8007.87.87.87.87.87.846.88.08.48.89.39.710.254.4SAA_EABANKS (70%), LOAN (30%)Project Divers pers_year666666364,55027.327.327.327.327.327.3163.828.029.430.932.434.035.7190.3SAA_EALOAN (100%)Subtotal 245.1245.1245.1227.5227.5227.51,417.9251.2263.8277.0270.0283.5297.61,643.1B. Operational costs Travel and DSA Office_year1111116200,000200.0200.0200.0200.0200.0200.01,200.0205.0215.3226.0237.3249.2261.61,394.4OPC_EALOAN (80%), BANKS (20%)Operation and Maintenance Cost Office_year1111116100,000100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0600.0102.5107.6113.0118.7124.6130.8697.2OPC_EALOAN (26.1%), BANKS (73.9%)Staff insurance and recruitment costs (Heifer) Office_year11111161,6251.61.61.61.61.61.69.81.71.71.81.92.02.111.3OPC_EAHEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%)Travel and  DSA  (Heifer) Office_year1111116153,545153.5153.5153.5153.5153.5153.5921.3157.4165.3173.5182.2191.3200.91,070.5OPC_EAHEIFER (100%)Operation and Maintenance Cost (Heifer) Office_year111111671,74471.771.771.771.771.771.7430.573.577.281.185.189.493.9500.2OPC_EAHEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%)Audit expenses and project compliance (Heifer) Office_year111111615,88615.915.915.915.915.915.995.316.317.118.018.819.820.8110.8OPC_EAHEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%)Subtotal 542.8542.8542.8542.8542.8542.83,256.8556.4584.2613.4644.1676.3710.13,784.4Total Recurrent Costs 787.9787.9787.9770.3770.3770.34,674.7807.6848.0890.4914.0959.71,007.75,427.5Total 923.9823.9828.9811.3811.3911.35,110.7947.0886.7936.7962.71,010.81,192.25,936.1 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
A. 
Introduction 
The  programme  goal  is  “Improved  livelihoods  and  nutrition  of  poor  and 
vulnerable  people”  and  its  development  objective  is  “Farm  enterprises  of  poor  and 
vulnerable  rural  people  are  increasingly  profitable  and  sustainable,  strengthen  their 
market linkages and use an improved range of good quality rural financial services”. 
  Geographical  area:  While  the  programme  will  have  a  mandate  to  operate 
nationwide  as  part  of  its  scaling-up  objective,  it  will  initially  focus  intensive  activities 
within  28  districts  in  three  states  where  all  three  programme  components  will  operate 
(see  table  below).  Within  these  districts,  the  programme  will  work  in  specific  locations 
linked to clusters for specific supported commodities with priority given to locations with 
high  agricultural  potential  and  higher  concentrations  of  poorer  households.  State  5  and 
State  2  have  strong  agricultural  potential  combined  with  highest  numbers  of  people 
living  in  poverty  –  together  they  are  home  to  55%  of  all  people  living  in  multi-
dimensional  poverty  in  the  country.  In  State  3,  the  programme  be  more  focused, 
working in districts with good agricultural potential that were the most severely impacted 
by the 2015 earthquake. VITA will also provide financial services under Component 2 to 
small-scale  producers  in  State  1  and  Sate  6  in  partnership  with  other  ongoing 
programmes  providing  business-focussed  support  similar  to  that  provided  under 
Component 1. In the IFAD portfolio, this includes the ASDP in State 6 and RERP in State 
1. RERP is also already active in State 2 and VITA is designed to build-on RERP activities 
there. 
Target  groups:  VITA  will  target  small-scale  producers,  including  landowners  and 
landless,  and  labourers  involved  in  selected  supply  chains.  Inclusion  of  small-scale 
producers and poor and vulnerable rural populations will be ensured by selecting supply 
chains  that  have  promise  to  deliver  the  biggest  benefits  to  the  largest  number  of  poor 
and  by  propagating  technologies  that  benefit  the  intended  target  group  most.  VITA  will 
have a  strong focus of  women and youth – with at least 60% women  beneficiaries and 
30% youth. This will involve selection of crops and livestock with high returns on labour 
and technologies that are labour saving and help reducing drudgery of women. Similarly, 
disadvantaged  individuals  including  Dalits,  Janjatis,  landless  and  other  disadvantaged 
groups  will  be  specifically  targeted  using  similar  approaches  and  to  be  outlined  in  an 
inclusions  strategy  to  be  included  in  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  A 
secondary  target  group  are  MSMEs  and  producer  groups  also  active  in  the  targeted 
supply chains.  
Beneficiaries:  120,000  small-scale  producers  are  expected  to  directly  benefit 
from programme supported services, falling into three categories:  
In  addition,  many  more  individuals  and  MSMEs  will  benefit  as  users  of  public 
infrastructure supported by the programme, such as markets and access roads. 
  Duration of the programme will be 72 months, with the actual completion date to 
be  the  end  of  the  financial  year  in  which  72  months  of  implementation  have  been 
passed. 
Programme  locations  and  outreach:  All  three  components  of  VITA  will  be 
implemented in 28 (15 Terai and Siwalik and 13 mid and high hills) districts with 70,000 
estimated newly engaged beneficiaries receiving services from 90 ADBL branches. There 
will  be  20,000  beneficiaries  of  coops  already  supported  by  Heifer  and  30,000 
beneficiaries partner projects receiving financial services only. 
Table 1 below shows the information on programme locations and outreach.  
Table 1: Programme locations and outreach 
VITA 
Coverage 
State   Districts  by Agro-ecological zone 
Terai and Siwalik  Mid and High 
Hills 
Small-scale 
producers 
under VITA 
Branches 
ADBL 
Full 
programme 
coverage 
Comp:  
1, 2 & 3 
Newly engaged groups 
Five  All – 12  Nawalparasi 
Two  All – 8 
West, Banke, 
Bardiya, Dang, 
Kapilvastu, 
Rupandehi 
Saptari, Siraha, 
Dhanusha, Bara, 
Mahottari, 
Sarlahi, 
Rautahat, Parsa 
Three  81 of 13  Chitwan 
30,000 
33 
Arghakhanchi, 
Palpa, Pyuthan, 
Rolpa, Gulmi, 
Rukum East 
25,000 
37 
Makawanpur 
Sindhuli, Kavre, 
Dhading, 
Dolakha 
Sindhupalchok 
Nuwakot 
13 
15,000 
20 
70,000 
90 
28  
Sub-
total 
Co-ops already supported by Heifer 
15 
Finance services only, Comp 2 only - with partner projects 
Total 
Target areas and beneficiaries 
20,000 
30,000 
120,000 
For  the  purposes  of  this  EFA,  benefits  are  modelled  assume  the  following 
programme support:  
1  
Earthquake 2015, Post Disaster Needs Assessment 
Severely  affected  district  from  2015  earthquake  -  see  National  Planning  commission  (2015)  Nepal 
  The primary focus of VITA will be to promote pre-harvest supply chain and focus on 
increased  agricultural  production  of  the  selected  supply  chain  commodities  through  the 
adoption  of  improved  technology,  management  practices  and  access  to  agricultural 
finance support. In total 120,000 farm households will benefit from the projects. Table 2 
below shows the phase-in and total number of direct beneficiaries of the project over the 
project period.  
S.N. 
Supply chain  
Unit 
2020/21 
2021/22 
2022/23 
2023/24 
2024/25 
2025/26 
Total 
% of Total 
Table 2: Phase-in of beneficiaries 
A  Major coverage (85%) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Vegetables 
Goats 
Fish 
Potato – seed 
Cereals – seed 
6  Milk 
7 
Banana 
B 
Additional coverage (15%) 
1 
Local potential value chain (citrus, 
back yard chicken (traditional 
breed), coffee, honey, medicinal 
and aromatic plants) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
16,680  
35,880  
39,960  
9,480  
4,260  
9,240  
11,040  
2,580  
4,260  
9,240  
11,040  
2,580  
1,632  
3,480  
3,540  
1,632  
3,480  
3,600  
1,632  
3,480  
3,600  
1,632  
3,480  
3,600  
1,632  
3,480  
3,540  
864  
864  
864  
864  
864  
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
102,000  
27,120  
27,120  
9,516  
9,576  
9,576  
9,576  
9,516  
85.0  
22.6  
22.6  
7.9  
8.0  
8.0  
8.0  
7.9  
-   
3,060  
12,696  
2,244  
-   
-   
18,000  
15.0  
Total 
No 
16,680  
38,940  
52,656  
11,724  
-   
-   
120,000  
100.0  
  These households will benefit through supply chains development support and will 
be supported based on cluster development approach. This process will be driven by the 
primary actors themselves, principally farmers and MSMEs through packages of services 
comprising of mentoring and mobilization of small-scale producers, brokering and cluster 
facilitation  and  inclusive  supply  chains  knowledge  and  policy  support.  They  will  receive 
business  skill  on  financial  literacy  and  household  finances;  managing  own  farm  as  a 
business;  managing  a  group  enterprise  as  well  as  aspects  of  climate  change,  youth, 
nutrition  and  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS).  All  these  including  GALS  will  be 
integrated mainly among primary beneficiaries. 
  Beneficiaries  will  be  assisted  through  multiple  services  such  as  adaptation  and 
mitigation technologies and practices, improved access to markets, basic and productive 
and  market  infrastructure,  and  use  of  wider  range  of  affordable  and  suitable  financial 
services  and  products.  Under  this  project,  confidence  of  the  farmers  on  production  will 
be  enhanced  will  their  inclusion  into  supply  chains  and  improved  marketing  strategies 
through  joining  producers’  organizations  (POs)  that  will  allow  them  engage  in  produce 
aggregation,  distribution,  responsiveness  to  market  demands.  Project  support  to  these 
producers  through  producer  organizations  will  be  geared  to  enable  them  successful 
investments and become reliable supply chain partners for buyers and customers. 
Post harvest supply chain 
Besides pre-harvest, VITA will create incremental benefits by improving efficiency 
and  effectiveness  on  existing  supply  chain  of  these  commodities.  This  will  be  done 
through  improvement  on  wholesale  and  retail  markets,  processing  and  different  nature 
and type of value addition such as produce aggregation, processing, packaging, storage 
and  distribution.  Such  a  support  to  create  time,  place  and  form  utility  of  the 
commodities.  
The  project  will  focus  on  brokering  and  cluster  facilitation  to  improve  linkages 
between  farmers,  buyers  and  service  providers  to  better  exploit  market  opportunities. 
This  will  be  done  through  facilitation  of  rolling  multi-stakeholder  platforms,  and 
associated  business-to-business  (B2B)  follow-up  with  existing  buyers  and  post  harvest 
supply  chain  infrastructures  initially.  During  the  later  stage  of  the  project,  some  post 
harvest  supply  chain  enterprises  mainly  related  to  processing  of  the  commodities  and 
input  supply  will  potentially  emerge.  Indicative  enterprise  and  production  models  for 
most  likely  supply  chains  such  as  small  scale  dairy  processing,  agro-vet  services  and 
seed enterprises has been prepared.  
Financial services  
  VITA primarily focuses on promoting access to finance for its target beneficiaries. It 
will  support  the  beneficiary  farmers  to  prepare  the  investment  plans.  Producers 
themselves  will  carry  out  the  risks  and  rewards  analysis  of  their  own  investments  and 
implement their plans. They will be assisted to access financial services from ADBL and 
other partner BFIs. 
  Enterprises potentially promoted under VITA will be requiring mainly short (working 
capital)  and  medium  term  (term  loan)  loan.  Very  few  enterprises  likely  to  be  emerged 
under  VITA  supply  chain  development  support  such  as  cold  storage,  large  scale  dairy, 
slaughter houses, and processing entity could potentially be long-term nature, but such 
enterprise requiring long term loans are not visualized at the design stage, not the cost 
accounting of this types of enterprises done.  
  Under  current  government  policy,  all  the  micro-enterprise  loans  extended  under 
VITA will qualify for interest rate subsidy of 5 percentage points, and 6 percentage point 
in the case of women borrowers. It is mandatory that BFI should insure such enterprises 
with  mainstream  insurance  companies  and  guarantee  such  loan  with  Deposit  Insurance 
and  Credit  Guarantee  Fund.  Both  insurance  and  loan  guarantee  of  the  microenterprises 
to be promoted under VITA will be within the existing provision of the GON, system and 
process  are  already  in  place  and  VITA  resources  will  be  not  be  used  for  setting  these 
arrangements  but  will  increase  awareness  of  entrepreneurs  on  insurance  services  and 
banks with guarantee scheme.  
  ADBL  currently  expects  interest  accrued  on  its  loans  to  be  paid  on  monthly  basis 
irrespective  of  the  cash-flow  generated  by  enterprise  financed.  In  cognizance  to  the 
practical  reality  that  any  changes  on  this  will  be  very  disruptive,  VITA  borrowers  will 
repay the interest on monthly basis using their household cash flows. VITA will reinforce 
using household level cash-flow which is an inherent part of ADBL loan appraisal process. 
In term of effective interest rate, for the loan with nominal interest rate of 10% pricing 
requiring borrower to make monthly repayment of interest will result to effective interest 
rate of 10.5%. 
Enhanced access to wider range of financial products 
  Human ATM: Under VITA ADBL and other PFIs will develop and enhance access to a 
range of financial products to the small farmers residing in VITA area. To this end, ADBL 
will  promote  (i)  digital  financial  services,  (ii)  savings  mobilization,  and  remittance 
services, and (iii) agriculture insurance.  
  Digital financial services. Capacity of the VITA beneficiaries will be enhanced to 
use  ATM  and  debit  card  services  extended  by  the  ADBL  and  other  partner  PFIs.  VITA 
beneficiaries  are  mainly  rural  poor  characterized  by  low  income,  education  and  under 
employment,  use  of  the  digital  financial  services  will  be  instrumental  to  reduce  their 
transaction cost on accessing financial services.  
  Savings  mobilization  and  remittance  services.  ADBL  and  partner  BFIs  will 
implement financial education programme to increase the capacity of the VITA clients in 
savings mobilization and getting remittance from formal channel and promote productive 
use of remittance.  
  Agricultural  insurance.  VITA  beneficiaries  will  be  assisted  to  buy  crop  and 
livestock  insurance  policy  with  mainstream  insurance  companies.  This  will  enhance  risk 
bearing capacity of the beneficiaries with the availability of the risk transfer mechanisms. 
The  project  will  actively  encourage  it  beneficiaries  to  opt  for  insurance  coverage  with 
intensive  awareness  campaign  either  stand  alone  or  addition  on  financial  literacy 
package highlighting the benefits of insurance and options available with attendant cost. 
Implementation  of  VITA  planned  interventions  has  been  expected  to  bring  about 
significant  changes  in  land  use,  production  patterns,  households’  incomes  and  overall 
well-being  of  the  participating  households  through  support  to  agricultural  supply  chain, 
expanding  financial  services  to  agriculture  and  improved  supply  chain  infrastructure. 
These aspects are examined under the (EFA). 
Approach and Methodology of EFA 
Cost-benefit analysis method was used for carrying out the EFA2. Project benefits 
from different project interventions both on pre-harvest and post-harvest supply chain of 
eight selected commodities namely vegetables, fish, milk, goat, potato seed, paddy and 
wheat seed and banana; and other local potential value chain such as citrus, back yard 
chicken (traditional breed), coffee, honey, medicinal and aromatic plants, etc.  
Benefits are estimated for all categories of the beneficiaries of the project. Major 
sources  of  quantifiable  benefits  will  be  increased  agricultural  production  through 
adoption of improved technology, management practices and VITA access to agricultural 
finance  support  including  digital  banking,  financial  education  insurance  and  guarantee 
mechanism  and  this  has  been  properly  accounted.  Additionally,  the  project  will  also 
improve wholesale and retail markets, road access, improved irrigation condition, which 
will potentially generate different benefits and would also benefit much broader group of 
people  and  areas.  These  benefits  had  been  captured  through  indicative  enterprise  and 
production  models  that  are  focussed  on  input  marketing,  product  aggregation, 
processing, packaging, storage and distribution.  
Further, the project implementation approach to increase sustainability, resilience 
and  profitability  as  a  result  of  adaptation  and  mitigation  technologies  and  practices, 
improved access to markets, basic and productive and market infrastructure, and wider 
range of financial services and products are assumed to reduce price and quantity risks 
of the producers and are captured through integrated pricing mechanism.  
2  
The project's cost benefit analysis was carried out based on 'with/without' assumptions. Required data 
were collected from multiple sources including agriculture census survey 2011, publications from Agribusiness 
Promotion and Marketing Development Directorate, and Agribusiness promotion and statistics division, MoAD, 
and field level data collected by project staff and field survey of representative enterprises. 
Assumptions  and  results  of  ex-post  EFA  of  HVAP  and  ex-ante  EFA  of  ASDP  were 
used to ensure that VITA EFA is consistent EFA done under the IFAD funded projects in 
Nepal.  
Financial Analysis 
  Assumptions and observations: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All the costs and benefits are valued at constant market price of July 2019.  
Average  size  of  landholding  is  0.6  ha  in  mid-  and  high  hills  and  0.5  ha  per 
household  in  Terai  and  Siwalik  and  various  seasonal  and  perennial  crops  are 
planted  and  VITA  support  will  enable  beneficiary  households  to  shifts  from 
traditional  cropping  patterns  to  more  commercial  oriented  farming  system  within 
the project areas. 
In  all  120,000  households  will  receive  VITA  benefits.  These  households  will  have 
access  to  finance  that  will  enable  them  to  introduce  new  packages  of  practices, 
crop varieties and cultivation techniques eventually leading to increased production 
and income.  
Beneficiary  households  will  organise  themselves  into  POs  through  training  and 
capacity building and will participate effectively in VITA package of services.  
Beneficiary  households  will  receive  VITA  package  of  services  under  three 
components:  support  to  agricultural  supply  chain,  expanding  financial  services  to 
agriculture  and  supply  chain  infrastructure.  They  will  receive  required  technical 
support  from  existing  network  of  government  and  non-government  agricultural 
service providers. 
Most villages in Terai and Siwalik have surface or ground water irrigation facilities, 
some  of  them  are  small  and  farmer  managed,  while  those  in  mid  and  high  hills 
have perennial or seasonal streams that could be tapped for irrigation through the 
construction of pipelines-based irrigation, small lift-irrigation works, etc. These will 
be supported under supply chain infrastructure component of the project.  
Commonly  grown  crops  are  paddy,  wheat,  maize,  millets,  off-season  vegetables 
and other fruit crops and the households apply both farm  yard manure / compost 
or  chemical  fertilizer  and  households  especially  in  mid  and  high  hill  use  poly-
tunnels of limited size. 
Crop  productivity  will  improve  through  adoption  of  use  of  quality  of  seeds, 
weeding,  mulching,  use  of  improved  farm  tools  and  implements,  which  were 
demonstrated to the participating households but access to quality seeds has been 
an issue.  
Off-season vegetable cultivation includes cultivation of cabbage, cauliflower, carrot, 
radish, coriander, mustard, peas, beans, cucumber, etc and average area planted to 
cultivation of vegetable seeds is 1.50 Ropani. 
Improved road connectivity and other attendant facilities provided by GoN enabled 
participating households to realise increased margins for their farm produce.  
The project area households tend cattle, buffalo, sheep, goats, poultry birds etc in 
addition  to  agricultural  activities  but  potential  for  up-scaling,  technology  training 
and para-vet services. The farm households will specialize on goats and dairy cattle 
farming for commercialization. 
Fish  farming  is  important  high  return  enterprise  in  Siwalik  and  Terai  areas.  There 
are existing fish pond as well as there is farmers interested to convert agricultural 
land into  fish  pond.  Fish  pond  lease  market  is  well  developed  in  Siwalik  and  Terai 
districts.  
On an average a household has 2 to 3 does, 1 bucks, 1 buckling and 1 doeling and 
more  than  70%  of  households  use  sheds  for  the  small  ruminants  adopt  better 
feeding  practices  and  health  care  facilities  and  about  50%  are  improved  breeds. 
There  is  demand  to  increase  their  herd  size  and  shift  to  stall  feeding  among 
beneficiary households. 
Productivity increases under individual supply chain varied. It is more in vegetable, 
fish and banana value chain compared to other identified during project design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There will be notable improvement on marketing of the farm produces due to VITA 
support  through  mentoring  and  mobilization  of  small-scale  producers,  brokering 
and  cluster  facilitation  and  inclusive  supply  chains  knowledge  and  policy  support. 
Over  90%  beneficiary  households  will  have  information  about  prices  and  nearly 
80% receive payments at sale and the remaining after weeks. 
An average wage rate of NPR 700/person day for both male and female labour has 
been  assumed  although  the  farm-wages  tended  to  vary,  and  the  same  rate  has 
been assumed for without project situation.  
Farmers  pay  land  and  water  taxes  as  applicable  and  these  form  part  of  the 
production costs.  
Commodity  prices  vary  significantly  between  districts  and  seasons  and  the  July 
2019  prices  were  collected  during  the  mission  from  different  sources  and  those 
prices were compared with the prices used by the Agriculture Sector Development 
Project  (ASDP)  design  mission  and  High  Value  Agriculture  Project  (HVAP)  project 
completion mission. 
Reflow of the short term and medium term estimated assuming (i) 3% lending rate 
of  GON  to  ADBL  per  annum,  (ii)  10%  per  annum  retail  lending  rate  of  ADBL  and 
partners  BFIs  retail  lending  rate  on  supply  chain  MSMEs,  (iii)  99%  on-time 
payment rate, (iv) 8% grace period and 20 years loan term, (v) administrative cost 
of 3.5% of outstanding loan portfolio, and (vi) five year loan term for the medium 
term loan and one year for working capital loan. 
BFIs will provide mainly the short and medium term loans in the initial 3-4 years. 
They will extend long term financial support to supply chain enterprises on related 
to  aggregation,  processing,  packaging,  storage  and  distribution  in  the  later  phase 
of the project. Overall loan portfolio for long-term loan will be less than 10%. 
Digital financial services will primarily reduce transaction cost for extending and/or 
assessing financial services by BFIs and project beneficiaries. Incremental benefits 
of  such  services  will  be  marginal  and  will  be  captured  in  improved  efficiency  and 
effectiveness of the supply chain.  
The  project  will  strengthen  existing  agriculture  insurance  and  credit  guarantee 
services as a tool for risk mitigation for producers in the supply chain and the BFIs. 
Benefit  from  these  services  in  form  of  risk  reduction  for  producers  and  improved 
repayment  performance  of  the  BFIs  has  been  integrated  in  higher  production  and 
better commodity prices.  
Agricultural Enterprise models 
  Agricultural  enterprise  models  type:  following  agriculture  enterprise  models, 
which are indicative, were develop under without project and with project situation were 
developed for the purpose of ex-ante EFA. 
  Off season vegetables (hills and terai) 
  Goat production (hills and terai for one household herd size) 
  Fish (new pond, rehabilitation and rent-in) 
  Potato – seed 
  Cereals – seed 
  Daily/Milk (cattle and buffalo) 
  Banana 
  Local potential value chain (citrus, back yard chicken (traditional breed), coffee, 
honey, medicinal and aromatic plants) 
  The  demand-driven  nature  of  the  project  makes  both  financial  modeling  and 
calculation  of  a  benefit  stream  rather  indicative.  Eleven  agricultural  enterprise  models 
were  prepared  to  illustrate  income  generating  activities  and  micro-enterprises  that  can 
be  subject  of  VITA  support.  These  are  exclusively  through  agricultural  supply  chain 
support.  
  The  project  will  work  supply  chain  development  activities  in  following  eight  value 
chain  along  the  major  North-South  road  corridor  in  province  2,  3  and  5  as  well  as 
provide access to agricultural finance to partner projects (RERP and ADSP). 
  Benefits:  The  project  is  expected  to  lead  to  increase  in  incomes  for  existing  and 
new  poor  and  disadvantaged  who  otherwise  lack  access  to  finance  from  formal  sources 
and  to  generate  employment  opportunities  in  the  target  areas.  Key  benefits  would 
accrue  from  agricultural  business  creation  and  expansion,  facilitated  by  project  support 
on  supply  chain  development  through  social  mobilization  support  from  project  to 
establish their linkages with potential suppliers and enhanced access to finance, through 
the  promotion  of  innovative  financial  instruments  and  strengthened  capacities  of  the 
overall financial sector in general and financial sector in the project areas.  
  Financial  analysis  was  done  at  project  level  using  market  prices.  Incremental 
benefits  were  estimated  based  on  actual  physical  outputs 
from  the  selected 
commodities. Prices information was collected for all inputs and output commodities from 
the  markets  and  adjusted  them  to  farm-gate  prices  and  collection  of  farm  level  price. 
Using  all  available  data,  both  primary  and  secondary,  type  production  models  for  each 
value chain were developed under with and without project scenario.  
  Without  and  with  project  scenario:  While  fish,  vegetable,  and  MAPs  are  land 
intensive  activities,  goat  and  dairy  are  not  land  intensive.  Goat  farming  is  very  much 
suitable to marginal and landless farmers.  
Table 3: Agriculture Enterprise under without and with project scenario 
Supply chain 
With-out project 
With project 
Model size with project 
Vegetable  
Paddy, wheat, maize 
Winter, summer and rainy season 
vegetable 
Hill: 0.05 ha 
Terai: 0.17 ha 
Fish  
Dairy 
Goat  
Paddy, wheat, existing 
fish pond 
Fish pond, or existing fish pond for 
leasing and improvement 
Upgrading on existing 
cattle/buffalo 
Upgrading on existing 
goat 
Dairy 
Goat 
0.17 ha. Leasing and 
improvement type might be 
larger 
2 mature cattle/buffalo model 
5 mature goat model 
Potato seed 
Paddy, wheat, maize 
Potato seed 
Paddy and wheat 
seed  
Paddy, wheat 
Paddy and wheat seed 
Banana 
Paddy and wheat 
Banana orchard 
Other local 
potential supply 
chain 
Paddy, wheat and maize 
Citrus, back yard chicken 
(traditional breed), coffee, honey, 
medicinal and aromatic plants3 
0.35 ha 
0.35 ha 
0.17 ha 
- 
  Due to project support on supply chain development, there will be modernization of 
the  farming  sector  through  (i)  transformation  of  paddy  and  wheat  farming  into  fish 
farming, (ii) paddy, wheat, maize and millet farming to vegetable farming, (iii) shifting of 
traditionally  grown  crops  (paddy,  wheat,  maize  and  millet)  to  potato  seed  production, 
paddy and wheat multiplication and banana farming, and up-grading of the subsistence 
goat  and  dairy  farming  to  commercial  activity.  This  assumption is  supported  and  based 
on  emerging  trend  of  large  number  of  farmers  in  the  project  areas  transforming  paddy 
field  to  fish  ponds,  and  vegetable  farming  (both  hills  and  terai).  Such  conversion  have 
already started and potentially increase during the project period.  
  Agriculture enterprise models were prepared for all farming activities. Profit margin 
under  different  farm  model  (i)  without  project  scenario  covering  traditional  crops  like 
paddy, wheat, maize, vegetable crops, goat and dairy activities were calculated, and (ii) 
with  project  for  improved  vegetable  farming,  fish  farming  (new  pond  construction, 
rehabilitation  of  existing  pond  and  leasing),  commercial  (improved)  cattle/buffalo,  and 
goat  farming,  potato  seed  production,  paddy  and  wheat  seed  production  and  banana 
farming were also worked-out. These are included in the separate excel file. 
3  
Enterprise model for back yard poultry has been prepared detailed supply chain analysis done. 
  Financial  benefit  and  cost  analysis  of  agricultural  enterprise  model:  Fixed 
investment and incremental benefits of all above seven farm activities (eleven scenarios) 
over 25 year horizon (2020-2045) of the project were estimated. Incremental annual net 
benefits vary widely across activities, ranging from US$ 458 for vegetable production in 
Terai to US$ 2,378 from fish pond leasing. As anticipated, these activities are playing a 
bigger  role  in  employment  generation,  on  an  average  2  family  members  and  1  hired 
worker  will  be  employed  and  there  is  prospect  to  increase  to  a  notable  level.  All  the 
models  demonstrate  very  satisfactory  benefit/cost  ratios,  Financial  Internal  Rates  of 
Return (FIRR) and positive net present value (NPV) demonstrating the attractiveness of 
the investments on these farm activities.  
Table 4: Summary of Financial Analysis of Selected Supply Chain Commodities 
Model type 
Unit 
Size of Enterprise 
Total 
Investment 
(US$) 
Incremental 
annual net 
benefits at full 
development 
Incremental 
family labor 
per year 
Incremental 
hired labor 
per year 
Net 
incremental 
benefits per 
USD of 
investment 
BCR 
NPV (USD) 
IRR 
Vegetable Terai 
Ha. 
Vegetable hills 
Ha. 
Aquaculture 
(new) 
Aquaculture 
(rehabilitation) 
Aquaculture 
(Leasing) 
Dairy 
(Cattle/Buffalo) 
Goat 
Ha. 
Ha. 
Ha. 
No. 
No. 
Potato seed – Hill 
Ha. 
Paddy + wheat 
seed production 
(Terai) 
Banana 
Other potential 
value chain - back 
yard poultry 
Ha. 
Ha. 
No. 
0.17 
0.05 
0.17 
1,473 
1,607 
2,027 
0.35 
1,457 
0.35 
1,457 
2.00 
2,054 
5.00 
0.35 
0.35 
1,339 
1,429 
1,071 
697 
902 
971 
914 
787 
499 
825 
852 
655 
0.17 
1,429 
822 
1,200 
2,589 
1,435 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
0.47 
1.26 
2,238 
63.8% 
0.56 
1.33 
3,213 
87.4% 
0.48 
1.15 
5,072 
72.5% 
0.63 
1.40 
5,120 
112.0% 
0.54 
1.10 
4,174 
81.3% 
0.24 
1.17 
2,580 
63.6% 
0.62 
2.26 
4,557 
103.6% 
0.60 
1.32 
4,693 
100.0% 
0.61 
1.32 
3,639 
105.6% 
0.58 
1.53 
4,181 
73.1% 
0.55 
1.27 
7,682 
85.5% 
  Vegetable  production:  the  agro-ecological  conditions  in  the  project  districts 
(province  2,  3  and  5)  are  favorable  for  vegetable  production  round  the  year.  The 
vegetables grown have experienced increasing domestic demand and have a huge export 
potential. The model assumes that a small-scale with 0.17 ha of land can produce up to 
2,500 kg of open field cauliflower and 1,500 Kg of tomato in a low-cost poly-house of 5 x 
20  m  and  earn  as  much  as  697  US$  in  Terai/Siwalik  and  902  US$  in  Hills,  obtaining 
about  US$  5  per  family  labour-day  while  generating  some  additional  external 
employment during harvest time and for greenhouse maintenance. 
  Aquaculture:  small-medium  scale  aquaculture 
initial 
investments,  but  when  properly  managed,  commercially  oriented  fish  production  can 
yield  very  high  returns  and  become  an  important  source  of  employment.  The  carps 
production  model  shows  how  a  pond  constructed  in  about  0.17  hectare  of  land  can 
generate as much as US$ 914 net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 full time jobs for 
family and non-family labour respectively. 
fairly  high 
requires 
  Dairy:  Demand  for  dairy  products in  Nepal  in  general  and  in  the  project  areas  in 
particular has been growing significantly in the recent years, driven by more consumers, 
higher incomes and greater interest in nutrition. Dairy production in Nepal is one of the 
growing  economic  sectors,  in  the  recent  years,  and  is  playing  an  important  role  to 
increase  household  level  income  in  rural  areas,  mainly  by  increasing  employment 
opportunities and establishing rural-urban linkages through milk and milk product as well 
as industrial products trade. Two cattle/buffalo model can generate as much as US$ 499 
net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 full time jobs for family labour. 
  Goat: Goat sector is an important part of Nepalese agriculture as well as livelihood. 
It  not  only  provides  manure  to  increase  the  productivity  of  the  field  but  also  assist  in 
livelihood of rural farmers. Goats are easy to rise with other animals due to their friendly 
nature. Goats can  be  raised  to  produce  meat,  milk,  skin/fiber  and  manure. Goat 
farming in Nepal requires low capital than poultry and dairy farming setup. Goat meat is 
nutritious, lean and has an excellent demand in both local and international markets and 
it is very popular in the project area. Five goat model can generate as much as US$ 825 
net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 full time jobs for family labour. 
  Potato  seed:  Potato  is  a  major  food  crop  in  the  mid-hills  and  mountains  in  Nepal 
and producing potato seed is highly profitable. Quality potato seed has high demand and 
fundamental  for  promoting  potato  production.  Yield  is  relatively  higher  and  cost  of 
production is relatively inexpensive and has high local market. Potato seed produced in 
0.35  ha  of  land  can  potentially  generate  as  much  as  US$  852  net  profit  per  year  while 
creating 2 and 3 supplementary jobs for family labour. 
  Paddy  and  wheat  seed  production:  There  growing  demand  for  improved  seed  and 
increasing seed replacement rate is one of the challenges in Nepalese agriculture. Paddy 
and  wheat  seed  production  has  larger  potential  to  increase  production  and  productivity 
of these crops in terai area. Seed produced by two successive crops: paddy and wheat in 
0.35  ha  of  land  can  potentially  generate  as  much  as  US$  655  net  profit  per  year  while 
creating 2 and 3 supplementary jobs for family labour. 
  Banana farming: There is great potential for banana production in Nepal and there 
is  huge  un-met  demand  and  larger  portion  of  banana  consumed  in  Nepal  has  been 
imported.  At  present  there  are  few  commercial banana  plantations.  There  exists 
possibility of generating as much as US$ 822 net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 
supplementary jobs for family labour by intensive banana farming in 0.17 ha of land. 
  Local  potential  supply  chain:  In  addition  to  seven  main  commodities  mentioned 
above,  the  project  will  provide  support  on  a  more  limited  scale  to  five  further 
commodities with relevant to specific locations within the project area: Citrus; Backyard 
chicken  (traditional  breed);  Coffee;  Honey,  and;  Medicinal  and  Aromatic  Plants  (MAPS). 
All these have notable income generation potentials. As an example, financial model for 
the  back  yard  poultry  model  has  been  prepared  which  demonstrate  the  possibilities  of 
generating  as  much  as  US$  1,435  net  profit  per  year  creating  2  and  1  supplementary 
jobs for the family labor. 
  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Households Models 
  Using  production  budgets  and  models  from  a  range  of  supply  chain  commodities 
‘household  models’  for  the  respective  supply  chain  were  prepared  to  broadly  illustrate 
the  VITA’s  ‘expected  impacts’  on  the  incomes,  and  use  of  household  labour  adopting 
and/or  adapting  both  on-farm  and  non-farm  activities.  For  the  purpose  of  assessing 
household  operations,  average  size  of  operational  landholding  size  was  accounted  and 
analyzed. Supply chain households models analyzed include: off-season vegetable, goat, 
aquaculture, seed potato, cereal (paddy and wheat) seed production, dairy / milk (cattle 
and  buffalo),  banana  and  model  local  potential  commodity  (back  yard  poultry).  Table  5 
presents the overview of the these household models. 
Table 5: Overview of the Household Model 
Supply chain 
Average 
farm size 
(ha) 
Cropping intensity (%) 
Model size 
Average Loan Size (NPR) 
Financial Indicators 
WoP 
WP 
Unit 
Quantity 
Term 
loan 
Working 
capital 
loan 
IRR 
NPV 12% DF 
BCR 
Off-season 
vegetable 
Hills 
Plain and 
Siwalik 
Goat 
Hills 
Plain and 
Siwalik 
Aquaculture 
New 
Rehabilitation 
Leasing 
Dairy 
Hills 
Plain and 
Siwalik 
Potato seed 
Cereal seed 
Banana 
Other potential 
value chain (back 
yard poultry) 
Hills 
Plain and 
Siwalik 
0.50 
0.40 
0.25 
0.20 
0.50 
0.50 
0.20 
0.30 
0.35 
0.60 
0.80 
0.60 
126.00 
208.33 
132.00 
208.33 
154.50 
169.00 
160.00 
192.00 
205.56 
130.00 
169.44 
160.00 
0.25 
0.20 
132.00 
195.00 
140.00 
241.67 
132.00 
208.33 
137.83 
169.00 
160.00 
192.00 
205.56 
188.33 
169.44 
149.33 
132.00 
195.00 
Ha 
Ha 
No 
No 
Ha 
Ha 
Ha 
No 
No 
Ha 
Ha 
Ha 
No 
No 
0.05 
0.17 
5.00 
5.00 
0.17 
0.17 
180,000 
60,000 
59.6% 
258,115 
155,000 
162,000 
41.6% 
157,381 
150,000 
15,000 
55.8% 
326,955 
150,000 
15,000 
50.9% 
315,923 
227,000 
68,000 
49.1% 
439,802 
163,200 
61,250 
77.6% 
486,473 
0.17 
163,200 
61,250 
55.9% 
345,604 
2.00 
2.00 
0.35 
0.33 
0.17 
230,000 
15,000 
38.5% 
328,976 
230,000 
15,000 
36.5% 
186,662 
160,000 
105,000 
69.3% 
435,208 
120,000 
75,000 
73.2% 
339,799 
275,000 
75,000 
51.7% 
377,898 
200.00 
290,000 
60,000 
56.2% 
617,388 
200.00 
290,000 
60,000 
62.7% 
679,085 
1.21 
1.15 
1.56 
1.52 
1.11 
1.32 
1.07 
1.28 
1.14 
1.25 
2.45 
1.39 
1.18 
1.19 
  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Sub-Project Model 
  Household  models  when  grouped  and  aggregated  are  called  “sub-project  models” 
and  these  are  required  in  order  to  estimate  overall  project  performance  indicators. 
Information on implementation phasing of these sub-projects provided in Table 2 for six 
year  project  period.  The  supply  chain  sub-project  has  been  computed  for  all  the 
commodities. The analysis results are summarized in Table 6.  
Table 6: Overview of the Sub-project Supply chain Model 
Supply chain 
Total HHs 
Adoption 
rate 
Adoption 
adjusted 
Financial Indicators 
IRR 
NPV 12% DF (Rs. '000) 
BCR 
Off-season vegetable 
Goat 
Aquaculture 
Dairy 
Potato seed 
Cereal seed 
Banana 
Other potential value chain 
(back yard poultry) 
27,120 
27,120 
9,516 
9,576 
9,576 
9,576 
9,516 
18,000 
Total 
120,000 
65 
80 
80 
65 
55 
55 
80 
65 
69 
51.9% 
53.3% 
57.5% 
38.7% 
69.3% 
73.2% 
51.6% 
56.0% 
17,628 
21,696 
7,613 
6,224 
5,267 
5,267 
7,613 
12,600 
83,908 
  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
4,943,400 
5,752,507 
2,694,764 
1,712,125 
1,907,209 
1,489,833 
2,386,535 
6,982,996 
1.23 
1.60 
1.13 
1.25 
1.25 
2.41 
1.38 
1.18 
Adoption rate 
  Average  adoption  rate  for  the  project  has  been  estimated  integrating  the  findings 
of  the  mission  during  field  studies,  discussion  with  key  informants,  focus  groups 
discussions,  assumptions  on  adoption  rate  made  by  recently  appraised  project  and 
findings on assumption by similar recently completed projects.  
  Field survey conducted under this mission uncovered that in general, adoption rate 
will be higher in those activities relatively longer in duration, required initial investment 
that is which is specific to the enterprises and proven evidence of the perpetual flow of 
income  over  the  longer  period  with  lower  intensity  and  impact  of  price  and  production 
risk.  These  commodities  are  goat  farming,  aquaculture,  and  banana  farming.  On  the 
other  hand,  adoption  rate  is  lower  on  commodities  with  low  initial  investment  cost, 
higher intensity and impact of price and production risks. These commodities are potato 
seed  and  cereal  seed  production.  Activities  like  off-season  vegetable,  dairy  and  back 
yard poultry are in between in terms intensity and impact of price and production risks.  
In  cognizance  to  above  a  69%  adoption  rate  (ranging  between  55%  and  80% 
among the selected supply chain commodities) was used in this EFA.  
  The  assumption  on  adoption  rate  used  in  this  report  is  consistent  to  the  other 
recently  appraised  and  completed  projects  namely  ASDP  and  HVAP  respectively.  The 
assumption rate used in the ex-ante EFA of ASDP was 75% flat, the same adoption rate 
applied  for  all  the  commodities  (apple,  goat,  dairy,  off-season  vegetable,  potato,  timur, 
turmeric,  orange  and  walnut)  analyzed.  On  the  other  hand,  adoption  rate  used  by  ex-
post EFA of HVAP ranged between 64% and 91%, with an average of 84%. The adoption 
rate  used  was  highest  (91%)  in  case  of  goat  and  off-season  vegetable  value  chain  and 
lowest  (64%)  for  timur.  The  adoption  rates  used  for  other  crops  were:  apple  (88%), 
vegetable seed (83%), turmeric (78%), and ginger (72%). 
In view of above the adoption rate used in this EFA is slightly conservative than the 
rate used in the recently appraised (ASDP) and completed (VITA) projects.  
  The details are included in the separate excel file.  
Financing plans 
  Total  investments  will  be  financed  through  beneficiaries’  equity  contributions  in 
cash, contributions in kind and short to medium term loans from ADBL and other partner 
banks and financial institutions (BFIs). Financing plans were prepared  for all models, in 
order to assess whether the mix of funding sources would be sufficient and adequate for 
enterprise creation and expansion. Table 7 presents the financing plans for the selected 
supply chain enterprises. 
Table 7: Financing Plans – Unit Enterprise Costs and Financing 
Enterprise 
Fixed Cost- 
NPR ' 000 
Working 
Capital- NPR 
'000 
Total cost NPR 
'000 
Av Loan size - 
US$ 
Description 
Average 
Investment 
Cost/ 
Enterprise- 
US$ 
Vegetables – Terai 
Vegetables – Hills 
Seed Potato – Hills 
Seed Potato – Terai 
Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
155 
180 
160 
100 
120 
276 
150 
230 
227 
163 
163 
162 
60 
105 
75 
120 
75 
15 
15 
68 
61 
61 
317 
240 
2830 
2143 
2126 
5 Kattha 
1554 
1 Ropani, 
Tunnel (.075 
Ha) 
160 
1429 
1750 
175 
1563 
1161 
7 Ropani 
(0.3ha) 
10 Kattha (0.3 
ha) 
240 
351 
165 
245 
2143 
3131 
1473 
2188 
1607 
0.5 Ha 
2258 
10 Kattha (0.3 
ha) 
1045 
5 Does unit 
1545 
2 buffaloes 
unit 
294 
2629 
1901 
224 
2004 
1457 
224 
2004 
1457 
5 Kattha (0.15 
ha) 
5 Kattha (0.15 
ha) 
5 Kattha (0.15 
ha) 
  All  the  selected  enterprise  models  meet  the  eligibility  criteria  to  access  financial 
services  from  ADBL  and  partner  BFIs.  They  will  manage  the  required  finance  through 
equity  (30%  for  term  loan  and  20%  for  working  capital  loan)  and  loan  from  ADBL  and 
partner  BFIs  (70%  for  term  loan  and  80%  for  working  capital  loan).  While  working 
capital loan will be minimal in case of cattle/buffalo and goat loan, it will be quite notable 
in  case  of  agricultural  production  related  activities  such  as  vegetable  farming,  banana 
farming, seed production (potato, wheat and maize) and fish. Interest rate for both term 
loan and working capital loan will be 10%. Enterprises borrow money to finance working 
capital  in  their  initial  years  and  during  expansion.  Assumption  that  the  loan  repayment 
will  be  fixed  based  on  enterprise  cash  flow  and  its  debt  serving  ability  across  all  the 
models computed in this analysis. 
Cash flow analysis 
In almost all the supply chain household model, the cash flow in the first year was 
negative and it is necessary for the entrepreneurs to look for additional financial sources 
to ensure adoption of the proposed technology. Access to medium term from VITA will be 
instrumental  for  farmer  to  finance  the  proposed  investment  as  well  as  short  term 
working capital loan to help finance annual operational cost of these enterprises. 
  Cash  flow  analysis  was  done  to  evaluate  the  cash  inflows  and  outflows  from 
operations  of  eight  supply  chain  household  models.  This  was  done  integrating  planned 
borrowing/lending  of  term  and  working  capital  loans  and  projected  repayment  of 
principle  and  interest  of  the  loans  in  cash  flow  before  financing  of  each  supply  chain 
household models.  
  The cash flow after financing shown for each supply chain model proves that for all 
the  year  during  the  project  life,  there  is  no  negative  cash  flow  in  these  models.  This 
indicates that project proposal to promote these  eight different types of supply chain is 
“financially viable” at household level. These imply that project proposal will be attractive 
for  the  beneficiaries,  ensuring  high  rate  of  adoption  of  the  proposed  supply  chain.  This 
finding  provide  solid  basis  to  assume  that  the  investment  on  these  supply  chain  would 
yield the expected financial benefits. 
  Findings of the cash flow analysis reveal that each supply chain household models 
have required debt service capacity.  
  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Reflows Analysis 
  VITA has been designed to enable GON to on-lend USD 63.6 million to ADBL under 
a subsidiary loan agreement (SLA) in local currency terms (Component 2). GON will bear 
the  foreign  exchange  risk  associated  with  the  IFAD  loan.  Though  further  details  related 
to such relending will be defined in the SLA which will be subject to the endorsement by 
IFAD.  
  For  the  purpose  of  the  EFA,  some  assumptions  on  annual interest  rate,  loan  term 
and  grace  period  has  been  made.  it  has  been  assumed  that  (i)  lending  rate  of  GON  to 
ADBL will be 3% per annum, (ii) ADBL and partners BFIs retail lending rate will be 10% 
per  annum,  (iii)  on-time  payment  rate  will  be  99%  (current  ADBL  repayment  rate  in 
MSMEs),  (iv)  grace  period  will  be  eight  year  and  full  repayment  in  20  years  time,  (v) 
administrative cost of ADBL on MSME loan is 3.5% of the outstanding loan portfolio, and 
(vi)  loan  term  will  be  five  year  for  medium  term  loan  and  one  year  for  working  capital 
loan. 
  Reflow has been  estimated based on above assumptions of repayment rates, loan 
terms,  retail  lending  rates,  and  administrative  costs  of  the  ADBL  on  (i)  medium-term 
credit (Net capital) from project and (ii) short-term credit (net capital). This provided an 
estimate of overall reflow rate of 5.41% (3.15% for medium-term credit and 12.22% for 
short term credit. The estimated benefits were incorporated into EFA. 
 The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Economic Analysis 
Main assumptions 
  Following  were  the  assumptions  used  for  economic  analysis  of  the  project.  These 
assumptions were cross-checked with the assumptions used in economic analysis of the 
ASDP (ex-ante) and HVAP (ex-post). 
  A twenty year analysis period is assumed, which included 6 year project investment 
period. 
  Project  produced  goods  will  move  freely  within  project  area  in  response  to  market 
signals. 
  All agricultural inputs and outputs that are traded are valued at price as of July 2019 
and constant market price has been used.  
  Economic  investment  costs  are  net  of  taxes.  All  costs  directly  associated  with  the 
incremental  production  are  included  in  full,  including  incremental  farm  inputs  and 
labour. 
  A  standard  conversion  factor  (SCF)  of  0.85  is  applied  to  both  traded  and  non-traded 
items for adjusting financial prices.  
  The average financial rural wage rate is taken to be the best estimate of the economic 
value of labour4.  
  The analysis includes only direct on-farm benefits. Benefits accruing from supply chain 
infrastructure  such  as  such  regional  wholesale  market,  satellite  wholesale  market, 
small-scale  community  infrastructure  including  small-scale  water  and  irrigation 
schemes  for  crops  and  livestock  (<  5  Ha.  each)  and  upgrading  farm  access  roads 
(under 10 km each) has not been accounted for want specific details. The benefits of 
these  infrastructures  is  assumed  to  be  captured  by  incremental  income  in  the  project 
promoted supply chain commodities; 
  All  costs  and  benefits  are  relating  to  investments  made  on  targeted  project  area 
households and the resultants benefits; 
  Significant changes or shifts in cropping patterns are assumed owing to strengthening 
of the supply chain and increased adoption of appropriate agronomic practices such as 
inter-cropping,  crop  rotation,  use  of  improved  seeds,  improved  technologies,  etc.  and 
these reflect in cultivation of off-season vegetables, potato seed, paddy and wheat seed 
and fruit crops like banana.  
  The  project  interventions  are  also  expected  to  reduce  GHG  emissions  through 
mitigation  measures  and  economic  value  of  net  GHG  emissions  has  not  been 
accounted. 
  The analysis employs an Opportunity Cost of Capital (OCC) at 9%, which is the current 
long-term  bond  rate  in  Nepal  and  forecasted  future  stream  of  benefits  and  cost  were 
discounted at 9%. 
Costs and Benefits Streams and Analysis 
  Production benefits. The farm productions are direct output from the respective 
sub-project.  In  all,  120,000  households  will  receive  project  services.  Improved  farming 
practices resulted in productivity increase will be in a range of 30% and 40%. The EIRR 
is calculated for all the agricultural supply chain commodities to be promoted under the 
project.  As  discussed  already,  all  the  seven  supply  chain  components  further 
disaggregated to 14 different types, were analyzed. This was done in cognizance to the 
fact  that  these  are  the  eventual  project  results.  Incremental  net  benefits  at  full  project 
development were used for all categories of farm investment. Adoption rate of each farm 
enterprises  is  estimated  to  range  between  55%  and  80%  with  an  average  of  69%  (for 
justification refer para 51 to 55 above).  
  Project economic costs. The project economic costs are direct expenditures after 
adjusting for taxes and inflations but inclusive of physical contingencies. Recurrent costs 
for continued operations and maintenance have been included in full. Economic prices for 
inputs  and  outputs  models  were  estimated  by  applying  conversion  factors  on  financial 
prices. Inputs and outputs prices5 were collected during field visit of design mission and 
review  of  published  information  of  Nepal  Rastra  Bank,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and 
Livestock Development, and Central Bureau of Statistics.  
  Environmental  Benefit.  Key  environmental  benefits  have  been  increased  rural 
employment, social mobilisation and effective participation of rural poor and the Dalits and 
indigenous  people,  linkages  with  rural  economy  and  markets  and  overall  reduction  in 
vulnerability.  The  project  interventions  are  also  expected  to  reduce  GHG  emissions 
through  mitigation  measures  and  economic  value  of  net  GHG  emissions  has  not  been 
accounted. 
Analysis Results 
  Economic  analysis.  Cost-benefit  analysis  yields  an  overall  IRR  of  27%.  The 
estimated NPV for a 9% discount rate is NPR 303,693 million (USD 302.69 million) and 
the BCR of 2.92. A positive NPV under the current Opportunity Cost of Capital (OCC) of 
4  
It  may  be  noted  that  three  trends  stand  out  in  the  project  area:  first,  poverty  is  falling  sharply, 
second,  rural  wages  are  rising  significantly,  third  farmers  are  shifting  from  cereals  to  superior  food  crops  in 
response to market signals. 
5  
See Annex … containing list of financial and economic prices used in EFA. 
9%  indicated  that  the  project  investments  were  sound.  Economic  analysis  results  will 
improve significantly if the economic values of net GHG emissions are incorporated. Main 
results for economic cost-benefit analysis are presented in separate excel file. 
  Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the effect of 
variations in (i) 10% and 20% decrease in benefits; (ii) 10% and 20% increase in costs, 
(iii) one year and two year delay on incremental income accrual, and (iv) 10% and 20% 
decrease  in  adoption  rate.  In  all  these  scenarios,  EIRR  was  above  19%.  Result  of 
sensitivity  analysis  revealed  that  the  project  is  highly  sensitive  on  delay  on  benefit 
accrual by one and two year compared to decrease on project benefits and cost. 
Table 8: Results of the Sensitivity Analysis 
Risk scenario 
∆% 
Link with the risk matrix 
IRR 
NPV (USD M) 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
27.0% 
302.69 
-10% 
-20% 
10% 
20% 
Combination of risks affecting 
output prices, yields and 
adoption rates 
25.0% 
256.69 
22.9% 
210.68 
Combination of risk associated 
to inflation of project related 
materials  
25.2% 
286.95 
23.6% 
271.21 
Project benefits delayed 
1 year  Delay in the programme 
23.0% 
250.36 
Project benefits delayed by two year 
2 year 
Project benefits delayed by three year 
3 year 
implementation due to various 
factors including 
implementation capacity, delays 
in system set-up. 
17.3% 
170.82 
15.0% 
126.69 
Adoption rate  
Adoption rate  
-10% 
-20% 
Combination of risks affecting 
output prices, yields and 
adoption rates 
25.6% 
271.56 
24.2% 
240.43 
  Switching Values. The switching value for the total project benefits is about 52% 
while for the project costs it is approximately 107%.  
Table 9: Switching value 
NPV incremental benefit 
  51,529,934.05  
NPV incremental cost 
  17,628,272.07  
-65.79% 
192.31% 
Project Benefits 
The immediate benefits from the project will be increased productivity through the 
introduction  of  better  management  and  improved  farming  practices  of  the  supply  chain 
commodities. The responses could be expressed as increased households income.  
  Other benefits. Additional benefits will be generated from VITA’s capacity building 
interventions supply chain development,  expanded financial services  for agriculture and 
increased  availability  of  supply  chain  infrastructure.  First,  all  participating  households 
and  SC  groups  have  the  benefit  and  advantages  of  the  services  of  supply  chain  actors, 
and  private  service  providers,  which  will  be  capacitated  and  provided  fund  support  for 
various economic and commercial developments. Secondly, women from the poor groups 
will participate in and managing their social and economic development and have better 
access  to  inputs  and  marketing  their  products.  Thirdly,  there  will  be  agro-businesses 
facilitated  buy-back  arrangements,  technical  training  and  capacity  building  that  will 
further strengthen supply chain. 
  Tax  revenue  and  other  incomes.  The  project  will  be  generating  additional  tax 
revenues to the government in the form of land tax, water tax, land tax on fruit crops, 
corporate taxes including VAT on the incremental turnover of the project generated agro-
businesses, the details of which are still emerging.  
Risk Analysis 
  There  were  a  number  of  risks  associated  with  VITA.  These  were  relating  to  farm 
technology,  reluctance  on  the  part  of  the  farmers  to  continue  the  new  technology, 
inadequate  extension  and  market  linkages  and  poor  price  margins,  lack  of  service 
providers  and  poor  coordination  and institutional  support  and  policy  risks.  These  issues 
and  risks  need  to  be  addressed  to  some  extent  during  the  implementation  of  the 
programme. 
Table 10: Risk Analysis 
Risks 
Risk description  
Economic and 
market risks 
Institutional 
Market 
 
 
External shocks to 
market economy 
Increase in cost of 
production inputs 
  Reduced producers 
prices 
  Reduced demand 
Delay in technology 
transfer/lack of quality 
planting materials slowing 
down the uptake rates and 
production 
Lack of financial capacity of 
BFIs to invest in high value 
agriculture 
High transaction cost of 
borrowing and lending to 
small-holders  
Inadequate profit margins due 
to poor access, lack of 
transport and of market 
information 
Lower market prices of 
commodities 
Insufficient historical weather 
data limits spread and quality 
of insurance products 
Relatively high portfolio at risk 
of agricultural loan portfolio 
Probability of 
occurrence  
Mitigation measures  
Impact on VITA 
performance if no 
corrective measures  
Low to 
medium 
Medium 
Low to 
Medium 
Supply chain management  Decline in benefits and 
increase in costs by 
25%: 
IRR= 17.8% 
NPV= USD 192.31 
million 
Extensive training and 
support to supply chain 
linkages of commercially 
viable key commodities  
Benefits lag by 2 years: 
EIRR= 17.3% 
NPV= USD 170.8 
million 
Supply chain financial 
product development and 
staff training 
Promotion of digital 
financial services  
Decline in benefits by 
20%: 
IRR= 22.9% 
NPV= USD 210.68 
Decline in benefits and 
increases in cost by 
15%: 
IRR= 21.4% 
NPV= USD 210.07 
million 
Medium to 
high 
Strengthen market 
information system 
Diversified production,  
market led production 
promotion and strengthen 
supply chain 
Buy-in of credit guarantee 
and agricultural insurance 
scheme 
Design and use of supply 
chain finance financial 
Risks 
Risk description  
Probability of 
occurrence  
Mitigation measures  
Impact on VITA 
performance if no 
corrective measures  
products and services 
Policy 
Others  
Lack of commitment to 
investing in inclusive 
agricultural supply chain 
development 
Medium 
Orientation and awareness 
on SC approach to 
government officials and 
policy makers.  
Farm operating costs 
increase by 20%: 
IRR= 23.6% 
NPV= USD 271.21 
million 
Climate change risks of 
delayed and abnormal rainfall, 
drought, floods, frosts, etc  
Natural calamities including 
flood and drought lower 
output of farm production 
Medium  
Training farmers on 
climate smart agriculture 
system 
Decline in benefits and 
increase in costs by 
25%: 
Promotion of agriculture 
insurance services 
IRR= 17.8% 
NPV= USD 192.31 
million 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
Review Note  
1.  Introduction  
This Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) review note 
1. 
has been prepared for the Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
programme.  The  programme  objective  is  to  ‘increase  returns  from  sustainable  farm 
enterprise  for  rural  people,  including  the  poor,  women  and  youth,  through  the 
development  of  increasingly  profitable  and  resilient  links  to  markets  and  access  to 
appropriate financial services’. The programme has three closely related components: 1) 
Inclusive supply chain development, 2) Expanding financial services to agriculture, and 3) 
Supply chain infrastructures. The programme will target high potential supply chains such 
as vegetables, goats, fish, cereal seed, potato (seed) dairy and banana. From year 2 to 5, 
the project will target citrus, coffee, honey, backyard chicken and medicinal and aromatic 
plants. Component 1 supports capacity building in fundamental business skills to farmers 
and producer groups, so they are more  confident, able to engage in the supply chains, 
with capacity to broker market linkages. Component 2 specifically tackles the supply-side 
constraints  for  appropriate  financial  services  to  agriculture,  especially  to  small-scale 
farmers.  It  includes  credit,  savings  and  investment,  value  chain  financing,  digitalised 
remittance  services  and  payment  services,  and  insurance  products  among  others. 
Financing  will  be  on-lend  through  ADBL,  an  institution  which  will  serve  as  a  Financial 
Intermediary.  Component  3  supports  small  infrastructure  to  increase  production  and 
linkages to markets. Major investment activities in Component 1 include; business skills 
training to farmers, mobilization of producer groups, facilitation of business-to-business 
linkages and targeted investment support to private and public investment to upgrade the 
supply  chains  –  excluding  any  investment  in  public  infrastructure.  Major  investment 
activities  in  Component  2  include  financing  for  short-term,  medium-term  private 
investment  by  farmers  and  Micro,  Small,  and Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  in  the  target 
supply  chain,  complemented  by  capacity  building  of  partner  financial  institutions  to 
improve their offering and delivery of rural financial services. Major activities in Component 
3  includes  financing  for  expansion  of  small  irrigation  and  multi-use  water  systems, 
upgrading farm access roads within clusters, networks of satellite wholesale markets and 
regional wholesale markets.  
The primary target groups will be smallholders and workers involved in the selected 
2. 
value  chains  whereas  MSME  along  with  the  producer  groups  will  also  benefit  from  the 
Programme. VITA will primarily cover a total of 28 districts of states 2, 3 (Bagmati) and 5. 
In states one and six (Karnali), the Programme will only provide financing to farmers and 
MSMEs  in  partnership  with  other  programmes,  notably  the  on-going  IFAD  funded 
Agriculture Sector Development Programme (ASDP)1 and Rural Enterprises and Remittance 
Project (RERP)2 in state 6 and 1, respectively. The participating 28 districts will be from 
the Plain area to the Mountain regions of State 2, 3 and 5; however, the Programme is not 
making any investments in the high Himal areas. A list of participating districts is listed in 
Annex I 
3. 
A  preliminary  SECAP  review  note  was  prepared  at  the  concept  note  stage  of  the 
Programme  design  to  identify  potential  social,  environmental  and  climate  risks  to  the 
Programme  and  possible  impacts  of  the  Programme  at  an  early  stage  of  the  design 
process. The overall objective was to identify potential environmental, social and climate 
risks  and  impacts  and  recommend  technical  feasible  and  cost-effective  mitigation  and 
adaptation  measures  to  be  incorporated  into  the  Programme  design.  The  Programme 
1 https://www.asdp.gov.np/ 
2 http://rerp.moi.gov.np/en 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
design mission was conducted from 25 November to 17 December 2019 and the SECAP 
analysis  and  review  note  has  been  further  refined  and  finalized.  This  SECAP  is  mainly 
based  on  secondary  sources  of  information,  supplemented  by  meetings  conducted  with 
key government authorities, development partners, thematic experts of climate change, 
value chain, GESI, M&E, Livestock, and agriculture, and the production farmers  of  each 
proposed commodities (Annex II).  
2.  Situational analysis and potential Programme impacts  
COVID-19 and VITA 
4. 
COVID-19 pandemic related risks appear to be high but also highly uncertain. There 
is likely to be a substantial slowing of economic growth for at least the next 2 years, with 
disruption to key sector including tourism and remittances. This will create fiscal pressures 
and  foreign  exchanges  risks  for  the  government.  At  the  same  time  there  has  been  an 
increase in the number of migrant workers returning from overseas, potentially bringing 
skills and resources with them while also needing to find gainful work but also a loss in 
remittance  income.  There  may  also  be  disruption  to  import  supply  chains,  creating 
opportunities for domestic suppliers. Specific risks to the programme appear to be three-
fold: i) availability of government funds to meet financing obligations – considered to be 
low  after  mitigation  through  the  design  of  the  internal  financing  arrangement  for  the 
programme,  ii)  disruption  to  market  demand  and  supply  chains  –  considered  to  be 
moderate, given focus on food crops and mostly short and domestic supply chains, and iii) 
increased  financial  or  other  pressures  within  beneficiary  households  that  reduce  their 
appetite  or  capacity  to  invest  in  their  farming  –  considered  moderate  to  low  after 
mitigation, given emphasis on affordable investment pathways, accessible financing and 
also  the  needs  of  households  themselves  to  find  gainful  work  including  for  returning 
migrant workers. 
In Financial Year (FY) 2019, Nepal achieved its third consecutive year of +6% growth 
5. 
in  more  than  50  years.  Prior  to  the  COVID-19  outbreak,  GDP  growth  was  projected  to 
average 6.5% over the medium term. Most recent World Bank projections (April 2020) are 
for  growth  to  slow  to  2.8%  in  FY2020  and  remain  subdued  in  FY2021  reflecting  lower 
remittances,  trade  and  tourism,  and  broader  disruptions  caused  by  the  COVID-19 
outbreak.  Consequently,  the  fiscal  and  current  account  deficits  are  likely  to  increase 
significantly. Risks to the outlook stem primarily from a large-scale domestic transmission 
of  COVID-19  and  limited  capacity  of  government  to  implement  emergency  relief  and 
recovery measures.  
6. 
In 2019, the poverty headcount ratio at the USD 1.90/day line is estimated at 8% 
(from 15% in 2010). At the national poverty line, it is estimated at 18.7% (from 25.2% in 
2010). However around a further 31.2% of the population live between USD 1.90 and USD 
3.20  a  day  and  face  significant  risks  of  falling  into  extreme  poverty,  primarily  due  to 
reduced  remittances,  loss  of  earnings  of  potential  migrants,  job  losses  in  the  informal 
sector, and rising prices for essential commodities as a result of COVID-19. 
7. 
Remittances play an important role for many rural households and in the economy 
as  a  whole.  Remittances  reached  an  estimated  US$8.06  billion  in  2018  –  equivalent  to 
28.0% of Nepal’s GDP (World Bank, 2019). Remittances have continued to grow strongly 
– more than doubling since 2010 – and now represent a similar share of GDP to agriculture 
(and substantially more than manufacturing). However, it is notable that the number of 
Nepali  migrant  workers  taking  up  jobs  abroad  has  slowed  since  2016  (IMF,  2019).  The 
scale  and  widespread  distribution  of  remittances  makes  them  a  potentially  important 
resources  for  productive  investment,  especially  in  rural  areas.  However,  over  70%  of 
remittances  is  spent  on  consumption  (Central  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2012).  COVID-19  is 
likely  to  have  significant  impacts  on  remittances  –  both  in  the  short  term  as  migrants 
return home, but also potentially over the medium if there is a prolonged global economic 
slowdown, with many few jobs in key overseas employment sectors, such as the oil sector 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
in  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Community  Council  (GCC)  countries.  In  May  2020,  the  Foreign 
Employment Board estimated that around 407,000 migrant workers may return in the long 
run from GCC countries and Malaysia where there were around 1.5 million Nepali migrant 
workers (Kathmandu Post, 2020). 
8. 
In terms of access to finance, NRB already has in place a progressive framework of 
interest subsidies and other measures to increase lending to deprived and priority sectors 
–  including  interest  subsidies  of  6%  for  women  borrowers  and  5%  for  agriculture  and 
youth.  Additional  measures  and  interest  subsidies  are  expected  in  the  budget  for 
FY2020/21 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
9.  With the COVID-19 pandemic, agriculture is seen as increasingly important for rural 
economic recovery, not only for food security but as an economic engine that can absorb 
the returning labour force – especially given the expected slowdown in the service sector. 
Policy priorities for the agriculture sector at local and national level are expected to evolve 
accordingly. 
10.  VITA will need to have a strong focus on targeting women’s economic empowerment 
strategies,  to  mitigate  the  short-  and  long-term  economic  impact  of  COVID,  support 
recovery  and  build  resilience  for  the  future.  It  will  additionally  promote  awareness  of 
women’s land rights via its business skills training. 
In the context of COVID-19, VITA is a timely major new investment programme that 
11. 
will make a valuable contribution to the recovery from the pandemic as well as building 
resilience of rural communities to future shocks. It will create new profitable opportunities 
for  small-scale  producers  including  the  large  numbers  of  returning  migrants.  Its  strong 
focus on expanding supply chains for high nutritional value foods will further contribute to 
both local and national food security and reducing reliance on imported foods. Its internal 
financing  structure  means  that  it  will  achieve  this  without  creating  fiscal  burden  on  the 
government.  Several  adjustments  to  this  effect  are  incorporated  in  the  components  as 
outlined  in  the  PDR.  More  generally,  the  roll-out  plans  to  the  programme  districts  have 
been accelerated such the activities will launch in all 28 focus districts within the first 15 
months of the programme. Such adjustment have not created costs, but rather build on 
what was already planned.   
Situation analysis and impacts 
12.  Poverty remains a key challenge of the targeted smallholders. Traditional production-
oriented farming, lack of employment generating activities, lack of skills, outmigration to 
pursue  employment  options,  lack  of  gender  equality  and  social  inclusion  are  the  key 
identified social challenges. People inhabiting rural areas generally do not have easy access 
to financial institutions for agriculture-based credit, especially for longer term investment. 
The  key  environmental  impacts  facing  the  country  include:  deforestation  and  loss  of 
biodiversity;  increased  air  and  water  pollution;  poorly  managed  waste  management 
services; uncontrolled and excessive use of chemicals and pesticides in some locations; 
and  unmanaged  and  environmentally  damaging  cultivation  practices  such  as  excessive 
tillage,  agriculture  in  sloping  and  degraded  land  reducing  soil  fertility;  poorly  planned 
settlement and infrastructure development. VITA is mindful of these wider environmental 
impacts and so is designed to have minimal impacts on the environment, and furthermore 
it  will  work  to  enhance  the  environment  quality  and  mitigate  against  possible  impacts 
through its Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) matrix (Annex VI).  
13.  While the major investment activities are outlined above,  the programme will only 
support  small  infrastructure  like  market  structure,  road  and  small-scale  irrigation  and 
multi-use water systems. Through the various programme interventions outlined, there is 
expected to be an increase in cropping area – through a combination of increased cropping 
intensity  as  well  as  bringing  previously  abandoned  farmland  back  under  cultivation. 
Consequently, the  Programme does not expect  to  create any further pressure  on  forest 
and  biodiversity  resources.  The  irregular  rainfall  and  consecutive  dry  days  may  cause 
temporary shortage of water especially for the cereal production, the supply chain location 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
will be selected in areas with already established adequate irrigation system to ensure the 
sufficient water availability. The drought resistant varieties will be promoted in the areas 
having  prolonged  droughts  trend  and  project  will  promote  water  efficient  technologies, 
infield water harvesting, and conservation ponds in these areas.     
14.  Livestock  supply  chains,  such  as  goats,  dairy  and  fish,  will  be  covered  by  the 
Programme.  Before  such  activities  are  started  in  each  cluster  area,  the  programme  will 
confirm the  carrying capacity of the area and  the suitability of the proposed production 
systems to the area. Programme interventions will be promoted as stall-based production 
systems  in  the  case  of  livestock  and  pond  based  production  for  fish.  Grazing  on 
surrounding forest or rangelands will be strictly prohibited by encouraging farmers to plant 
forage and fodder crops. The programme will promote sustainable agriculture and animal 
husbandry practices limiting use of agrochemical and medicine and motivating integrated 
pest management approach. The above livestock carrying capacity is expected to be based 
on an estimation of Total Digestive Nutrients supply and demand balance for the herd at 
the  municipality  or  settlement  level.  Base  level  supply  will  include  estimation  of  supply 
from  all  sources  in  the  local  area  and  be  calculated  through  GIS  tools  and  data  on 
vegetation cover. Future potential carrying capacity estimates will reflect expected changes 
to livestock production and feeding systems, including feed and fodder production as well 
as improvements to management of existing feed resources including forest and grazing 
lands. Carrying capacity assessment will be fully shared with municipal authorities for use 
in their own planning processes.  
Socio-economic and nutritional assessment  
15.  Overall poverty situation: Nepal’s GDP per capita reached US$ 1034 in July 20193 
with real GDP growth of 7.1%. Despite a relatively long political transition and frequent 
changes in the government, the proportion of population living below the poverty line has 
been decreasing steadily. It is estimated that around 18.7 % of the country’s populations 
remain below the poverty line4. This compares very favourably with poverty incidence rate 
of 41.8% in 1996, 30.6% in 2004, and 25.16% in 20115.  
16.  Multi-dimensional  poverty  has  also  seen  significant  reductions.  The  national-level 
multi-dimensional poverty  index which fell from 59.35% in 2006,  39.13% in 2011, and 
28.62% in 20146, and within this 33.2% in rural area and 7% in urban area. It is noted 
that  the  most  recent  MPI  use  data  from  2014  -  before  the  2015  earthquake  that  had 
substantial impacts on many rural locations particularly in State 3.  
Table 1: Multi-dimension poverty headcount and population by state (2014) 
State 
2 
5 
1 
7 
3 
6 
4 
 Total 
MPI Poverty 
Population 
MPI Poverty 
Headcount rate 
VITA outreach 
Number of 
people 
(000s) 
    2,935  
    1,677  
    1,006  
      922  
      755  
      671  
      419  
    8,386  
%  
of poor 
people 
35 
20 
12 
11 
9 
8 
5 
100 
Total 
(producers) 
25,000 
30,000 
15,000 
- 
15,000 
15,000 
- 
10,000 
%  
25 
30 
15 
- 
15 
15 
- 
100 
Type of 
outreach 
Full package 
Full package 
Finance only 
Full package 
Finance only 
All 
% 
47.89 
29.92 
19.67 
33.56 
12.24 
51.22 
14.19 
28.62 
3https://www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/nepal/gdp-per-capita, accessed on 09/16/2019 
4Government of Nepal, Economic Survey 2019 
5Government of Nepal, Central Bureau of Statistics 2005 & 2011 
6National Planning Commission of Nepal with the support of Oxford University 2018 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
17. 
In  terms  of  district  level  poverty,  the  report  on  Small  Area  Estimation  on  Poverty 
2011  published  in  June  2013  analysed  the  poverty  status  of  large  municipalities  and 
districts. Further analysis of the data shows that high poverty prevalence rate is in State 
7 (Sudurpaschim) followed by State 6 (Karnali) and State 2. State 5 and Bagmati (State 
3) are moderate. Details of poverty status of all districts is presented in Annex 9. Currently 
poverty estimates are not available for at the new municipality level. 
Table 2: Poverty by state - Nepal Household Living Standard Survey 2011  
States 
1 
2 
3  
4 
5 
6 
7 
State 
poverty 
status 
18.39 % 
27.93% 
23.98 % 
20.57% 
25.86% 
41.19% 
47.09% 
Highest poverty 
district 
Lowes Poverty district 
Ilam  
Taplejung   26.95% 
Saptari  
39.49 %  Mahottari  
Sindhuli  
38.33 % 
39.98 % 
Mustang  
Kapilbastu   35.48 % 
56.02 % 
Humla  
64.05 % 
Bajura  
Chtwan  
Kaski  
Nawalparasi  
Rukum (West) 
Kanchanpur  
7.3 % 
16.19% 
8.89 % 
4.02 % 
17.03 % 
26.26 % 
31.36 % 
(World Bank, 2013) 
Poverty and VITA geographic targeting  
18.  More  than  75%  of  VITA’s  intensive  interventions,  where  all  three  components  will 
operate in tandem, will be in States 2 and 5 – which together are home to more people 
(55%  of  all  poor)  in  multi-dimensional  poverty  than  the  entire  rest  of  the  country 
combined. In these states VITA will work in all districts. In State 3, VITA will work on a 
smaller scale only in selective rural districts that were most severely affected by the 2015 
earthquake  and  where  reconstruction  and  economic  recovery  is  ongoing.  The  8  of  14 
districts  to  be  targeted  in  State  3  had  an  average  poverty  rate  of  22.4%  prior  to  the 
earthquake - close to the national average 25.1% (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2011). It 
is noted that the low poverty headcount rate in State 3 is also influenced by the presence 
of the relatively wealthy population of over 1.0 million in the Kathmandu valley. Based on 
this  analysis,  geographical  target  of  VITA  fully  implemented  with  all  components  on  28 
districts of State 2 (all 8 districts), State 5 (All 12 districts) and Bagmati (State 3 – 8 of 
14 districts). 
19.  Beyond  these  core  programme  areas,  VITA  will  work  with  ongoing  partner 
programmes in States 1 and 6 to provide agricultural finance to smallholder and MSMEs 
being supported by those programmes. State 6 has the highest multi-dimensional poverty 
incidence but relatively small total numbers of poor due to its relatively low population. In 
State 6 the primary partner programme, ASDP, works in all districts. State 1 has the third 
largest number of poor, after States 2 and 5, but a poverty incidence below the national 
average.  In  State  1  the  primary  partner  programme,  RERP,  works  in  8  of  14  districts 
primarily  targeting  rural  districts  with  significant  numbers  of  poor  combined  with 
agricultural potential. 
20.  State 7 (Sudurpaschim) has relatively high number of poor, the third highest poverty 
incidence  and  reasonable  agricultural  potential.  It  is  therefore  a  strong  candidate  for 
coverage by VITA. However, it is not included in VITA at this stage as is understood to be 
a primary target for support from other major donors, including the World Bank, including 
the  Irrigation  And  Water  Resources  Management  Project,  the  Nepal  Livestock  Sector 
Innovation  Project  and  a  candidate  for  the  pipeline  Rural  Economic  and  Enterprise 
Development project.  
21.  State  4  has  the  lowest  number  of  poor  people  and  a  low  poverty  incidence.  It  is 
therefore not a priority for VITA. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
22.  The  VITA  targeting  strategy  is  further  detailed  in  the  Programme  Implementation 
Manual. 
Gender and social inclusion 
23.  The 2018 Gender Inequality Index7 ranks Nepal 115 out of 162 countries. Women 
hold 33.5 per cent of the country’s parliamentary seats which shows greater participation 
of women than in South Asia in general. Only 29.0 per cent of adult women have reached 
at  least  a  secondary  level  of  education  compared  to  44.2  per  cent  of  their  male 
counterparts; this is lower than the average for South Asia. The maternal mortality rate is 
high with 258 women dying from pregnancy related causes for every 100,000 live births, 
higher than the average for South Asia. The adolescent birth rate is 65.1 births per 1,000 
women aged 15-19 also much higher than the average for South Asia. Female participation 
in  the  labour  market  is  81.7  per  cent  compared  to  84.4  for  men  and  25.9  per  cent  of 
women in the overall South Asia region. Labour Force Survey Report 2017/18 has clearly 
mentioned about gender disparities, while population ratio of male to female is 100:125 
in  the  working  age  population,  it  is  100:59  among  the  employed.  Less  than  1  in  7 
managers in the country are women. Nepalese employees earned an average (mean) of 
Rs.17,809  per  month.  However,  gender  disparities  were  obvious  in  the  mean  monthly 
earnings  gap  between  males  and  females  of  Rs.  5,834  in  favour  of  males8.  The  same 
report shows 56.8 percent of fully employed females and 40.6 percent of fully employed 
males were involved in the production of goods for own final use. Similarly, 90.7 percent 
of females participated in providing services for own final use while only 47.2 percent of 
males  participated.  Females  were  disproportionately  more  (88  percent)  involved  than 
males (38.5 percent) in unpaid household work. Gender disparities further analysed and 
reported  as  93.3  percent  of  female  who  were  fully  employed  were  also  involved  in 
providing services for own final use, while only 46 percent of their male counterparts were 
involved in these activities.  
24.  Nepal has one of the highest rate of women’s participation in agriculture in the world. 
Outmigration  of  men  for  employment  in  urban  centres  and  other  countries  drives  the 
feminization of agriculture in rural areas. Such migration has also resulted in the proportion 
of female-headed households which grew from 14.9 per cent in 2001 to 25.7 per cent in 
2011  (CBS,  2011;  IFAD,  2019a).  According  to  the  2011  National  Demographic  Health 
Survey (NDHS), 76.4 per cent of women aged 15-49 years engaged in agricultural work 
are  not  paid,  compared  to  15.9  per  cent  of  women  engaged  in  non-agricultural  work 
(MoHP, 2012; FAO, 2019). In 2011, 10.4 per cent of women employed in agricultural work 
received in-kind only payment while 7.3 per cent received cash and in-kind payments. The 
NDHS showed that 5.9 per cent of women in agricultural work received cash only compared 
to  80  per  cent  in  non-agricultural  work.  Just  over  82  per  cent  of  women  in  agricultural 
work are employed by family members, compared to 14.6 per cent by non-family members 
and  2.6  per  cent  self-employed  (MoHP,  2012;  FAO,  2019).  The  proportion  of  women 
engaged in seasonal work in agriculture (47.4 percent) is also significantly higher than in 
other  sectors  (8.6  percent)    In  rural  areas,  due  to  migration  and  long-term  absence  of 
men from agricultural fields, women have now also taken up responsibilities traditionally 
performed by men, such as ploughing. As a result, it has not only increased the workload 
of women but it also caused poor agricultural performance due to labour scarcity as well 
as lack of access to credit for agriculture inputs. The heavy burden of unpaid household 
responsibilities borne by women often leads to ‘time poverty’ (MoHP, 2012; FAO, 2019). 
25.  The 2016 Demographic and Health Survey (Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and 
ICF, 2017) found that 52 per cent of women decide independently how their earnings are 
7 The GII “reflects gender-based inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, empowerment, and economic activity. 
Reproductive health is measured by maternal mortality and adolescent birth rates; empowerment is measured by the share of 
parliamentary seats held by women and attainment in secondary and higher education by each gender; and economic activity is measured 
by the labour market participation rate for women and men. The GII can be interpreted as the loss in human development due to 
inequality between female and male achievements in the three GII dimensions.” (UNDP, 2019). 
8 CBS, 2017/18. Report on the Nepal Labour Force Survey, 2017/18/ Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
used,  while  35  per  cent  decide  jointly  with  their  husbands.  Only  11  per  cent  of  women 
reported that their husband mainly decides on the use of their earnings. The same survey 
reported that the women who are least likely to have independent control over their own 
earnings are those aged 15-19 (38 per cent), those with five or more living children (42 
per cent), those in the mountain zone (42 per cent ), and those with no education (45 per 
cent)..  
26.  Despite  a  steadily  increasing  gender  development  index  revealing  an  overall 
reduction  of  the  gender  gap,  discrimination  continues  to  persist  in  limiting  women’s 
equitable access to and control over productive resources such as land, capital–including 
credit, markets, and other available opportunities. Nearly 20 percent of women own fixed 
assets of the household, which is higher in urban (26.77%) than rural areas (18.02%)9. 
Socially, women and girls in Nepal are disadvantaged by traditional practices like the dowry 
system,  early  marriage,  son-preference,  stigmatization  of  widows,  seclusion  of  women 
(pardah),  domestic  violence,  and  segregation  of  women  and  girls  during  menstruation 
(chhaupadi, which has recently been banned but is still practiced in some communities). 
Women face an onerous burden of household work and role of caretaker while their role 
in economic activities is minimized and the value of unpaid work is  largely unaccounted 
for  both  in  the  household  and  national  economy.  Consistent  with  widespread  social 
patterns  of male dominance  of the public sphere and women being more limited to the 
domestic  sphere,  there  is  far  higher  involvement  of  women  in  production  of  goods  and 
provision  of  services  for  own  final  use  -  almost  double  that  of  men  (Central  Bureau  of 
Statistics,  2019).  The  household-level  planning  process  too  often  still  lacks  equitable 
participation from the women as male are still found to dominate on the decision making. 
Furthermore, at present women from poor and vulnerable sections of society and youths 
face particular problems in access to credit for investment in market-oriented agriculture 
production  and  supply chains  and  other  enterprises.  This  is  despite  there  being  specific 
policies  to  promote  such  lending  developed  by  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  and  issued  to  all  the 
class A, B and C Banks and financial institutions. Effective implementation of the policy 
and loan products is still an issue to be resolved.  
27.  The time-consuming but unpaid tasks for own consumption by women in turn limit 
their  involvement  and  productivity  in  economic  activities.  Women’s  involvement  has 
therefore often been in informal/subsistence agriculture. Their engagement is typically in 
the production level which is generally labour intensive. Women in rural areas mostly stay 
at home, hence the workload increases if the cultivation or livestock rearing takes place 
near to the house. Men traditionally tend to dominate work in the more public sphere - on 
the processing and market linkage or the works related to outside the farmland. The out-
migration  leaves  young  women  behind  to  care  for  husbands’  households,  limiting  their 
ability  to  spend  time  on  their  own  pursuits.  The  2014  Women’s  Empowerment  in 
Agriculture  Index  (WEAI)  baseline  report  for  Nepal  reflected  that  community leadership 
and  time  allocation  are  the  areas  where  women  are  least  empowered.  These  dynamics 
affect  the  aspirations  and  engagement  of  young  women  in  agriculture  and  require 
intentional  pathways  be  developed  by  the  project  to  ensure  their  meaningful 
participation10. 
28.  Women  therefore  face  a  series  of  obstacles  to  greater  economic  and  personal 
empowerment – pressure on their time, low returns on their labour, access to information, 
knowledge on production technologies and also access to finance to invest in themselves 
and their farm to make their farming commercial and profitable.  
9Census, 2011. National Population and Housing Census 2011, National Report. Central Bureau of Statistics, 
Government of Nepal. 
10 USAID & LEO. 2016. Youth engagement in agricultural value chains across feed the future: a synthesis report. 
Retrieved from http://www.acdivoca.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/LEO-Youth-Engagment-Ag-VCs-
Across-FTF.pdf 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
29.  A summary analysis of different roles of women and men in the production of the 
prioritized commodities is presented in Annex 3.  
30. 
In Nepal, there is a complex interaction of several factors that heavily influence an 
individual’s  situation  and  opportunities.  Most  notably  these  include  socio-ethnic  group, 
age,  gender  and  wealth  levels.  A  detailed  analysis  of  the  situation  and  opportunities  of 
different groups against this complex interaction of factors is presented in Annex 8. This 
has been used during the design process to test the planned interventions against in order 
to ensure high level of participation and inclusion have been mainstreamed into all aspects 
of the programme design. 
Building on opportunities and good practice 
31.  While these patterns remain, the increasing feminisation of agriculture resulting from 
the  out-migration  of  men  from  rural  areas  has  also  created  opportunities  for  women  in 
some  communities  to  taken  on  wider  roles  in  agriculture.  A  transition  to  profitable 
commercial  smallholder  agriculture  offers  the  opportunity  to  increase  the  household 
income and the return on women’s labour. This may sometimes increase total workload, 
but will often see the substitution of low or unpaid work for higher paying activities. With 
the additional earning, household can manage better food, education, health to their family 
members,  which  are  often  high  priorities  for  women,  and  thereby  access  more  socially 
acceptable 'status' in society. 
32.  A  successful  supply  chain  does  not  actually  increase  the  workload  on  women  but 
rather it seeks to replace women’s unpaid work with engagement in economic activities. 
This  has  helped  to  boost  the  motivation,  access  to  technology,  skill,  and  confidence  of 
women  on  decision  making  and  also  increases  leadership  capacity  and  networking  with 
outsiders. Successful cases from previous IFAD funded projects like High Value Agriculture 
Project (HVAP) have shown that increases in household income have assisted women to 
wisely  decide  on  the  production  and  further  investment  planning  with  increased  control 
over  incomes.  This  has  also  strengthened  family  cohesiveness  and  reduced  levels  of 
domestic  violence11.  The  HVAP,  a  recently  completed  IFAD  funded  project  in  State  six, 
impact assessment also highlighted the wider positive impacts, such as; 47 percent women 
and 25 percent Dalits, Janajatis and other ethnic minorities have increased their annual 
income by 37 percent equivalent to US$ 500 that was earned crop (50 %) and livestock 
(93%).  This  further  shows  that  ownership  of  durable  assets  increased  by  10  percent, 
production assets by 7 percent, livestock by 9 percent and more importantly the dietary 
diversity  was  increased  by  1  percent  with  high  vegetables,  fruits,  milk  and  other  dairy 
products12.  
33.  VITA  will  use  multiple  elements  to  strengthen  women’s  agency  and  economic 
empowerment.  By  facilitating  a  combination  of  efficient  production  technology  and 
methods, easy access to credit, market access, a comprehensive package (covers business 
skills, financial knowledge, land ownership, GALS ‘lite’, nutrition and balanced diet, climate 
change) of financial and business skills and effective mobilization, it will facilitate not only 
the empowerment of women economically, it also contributes to develop their agency and 
leadership.    The  women  groups  will  be  sensitized  on  women’s  land  rights,  benefits  of 
women’s land ownership and household welfare, and capacitated on the process to own 
and manage land via business skill and group development skill training. These initiatives 
will  open  up  new  windows  of  opportunity  of  business  and  services  specially  for  young 
women  and  men.  Mobilization  of  inclusive  production  groups,  with  women  in  key 
leadership roles, facilitating households to run their own farm enterprise in the name of 
women,  providing  credit  in  the  name  of  women  will  promote  women’s  ownership  on 
productive assets, widen their network and exposure, build leadership and promote socials 
11Interaction with GESI expert  
12 Kafle, K., Krah, K., and Songsermsawas, T. 2018. Impact assessment report: High Value Agriculture Project in 
Hill and Mountain Areas (HVAP), Nepal. IFAD, Rome, Italy. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
status. Overall, all these interventions will increase the productivity and return of women 
and men alongside the empowerment of women.   
Youth 
34.  Youth  between  the  ages  of  15-2913,  represent  approximately  33  percent  of  the 
population of the country with over 61 percent of them live in rural areas (CBS, 2011). 
Youth  continue  to  face  challenges  related  to  education,  civic  engagement,  political 
participation and unemployment. Youth migration is one of the major challenges in rural 
areas  that  affect  agricultural  activities  at  large.  Limited  economic  opportunities  in  rural 
areas, high concentration of economic activities in urban areas, wider availability of low- 
skilled jobs in Middle East Countries, low economic return of traditional agriculture, and 
demographic changes are powerful push and pull factors affecting the movement of the 
youth.  
35.  Shifting workforce patters out of low return primary agricultural production and into 
higher productivity sectors is and expected part of economic development process for a 
country. Yet the challenges in the sector mean that opportunities for interested youth to 
engage in higher return modern smallholder commercial agriculture  and remain in their 
communities are being missed.  
36.  As well as the well document issues facing all smallholder agriculture, (fragmented 
production and supply chains, limited irrigation, access to credit, weak market linkages), 
youth  face  several  additional  specific  challenges.  Access  to  credit  for  investment  is 
particularly challenging, where they have few assets of their own or other incomes source. 
Other  important  push  factors  out  of  agriculture  and  rural  areas  include:  lack  of  proper 
visioning and planning of life; insufficient mutual discussions and understanding among 
couples; over controlling attitude of parent; insufficient support system to promote youth 
in  commercial  agriculture  and  limited  or  poorly  targeted  public  investment  to  promote 
economic  activities  and  private  investment  in  rural  areas.  In  rural  areas  youth  who  are 
self-employed often have little to show in terms of income and market access. The status 
of farming is also an important factor – with the traditional farming of their parents seen 
as  hard  and  un-glamourous  work,  with  uncertain  incomes  and  low  social  status  of 
agriculture (often affecting their marriage). Self-employment for youth is also constrained 
due to lack of knowledge and access to efficient production technology, lack of business 
skills  and  financial  literacy  and  the  inability  of  youth  to  access  finance.  Changing  the 
perception of farming to be a respected modern profession, with farming as a business, is 
important in attracting youth. Real role models and success stories are critical. 
37.  The  challenges  of  young  women’s  participation  in  the  labour  force  are  even  more 
pronounced.  Newly  married  women  in  migrant  families,  whose  husband  have  migrated 
overseas for work, often live with the husband’s family, especially in the Terai and middle 
class  families.  In  many  cases  these  women  do  not  have  proper  communication  with 
husbands and support system from parents-in-laws. They have little control over the own 
time or the resources and income of their husbands. Such women and their husbands are 
considered  as  high-risk  households.  The  different  groups  within  youth  require  specific 
attention  with  regard  to  the  constraints  and  challenges  of  exclusion,  inequality  and 
discrimination. These groups include young women vulnerable to sexual abuse, trafficking 
and exploitation; historically marginalized indigenous youth; disadvantaged young women 
and    girls;  Dalit  youth;  young  people  with  disabilities;  youth  without  basic  education;  
unemployed youth; migrant workers and their families; rural landless and land-poor youth; 
young  bonded  and  forced  laborers;  young  urban  slum  dwellers  and  squatters;  conflict-
affected  youth; young people especially vulnerable  to  climate risks; sexual and gender 
minority youth; and young people living with HIV, among others14 
13 In Nepal, youth are officially defined as being 16-40 years old. For consistency, this is the definition that will 
be used for monitoring and reporting purposes within the programme. 
14 UNDP Nepal Youth Strategy 2018-2022 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
38.  This situation calls for development programmes supporting agricultural value chain 
development,  entrepreneurship  skill  enhancement  and  greatly  increased  access  to 
institutional  finance  at  rural  areas.  Promotion  of  competitive,  smallholder-based 
agriculture  supply  chains  will  help  create  opportunities  to  utilize  remittances  more 
effectively  for  productive  purposes  and  ultimately  encourage  migration  returnees  and 
increase the investment in rural areas, increase the productivity of youths and profitability 
of agriculture.  
Demography 
39.  Fertility  and  mortality  decline  are  key  aspects  of  demographic  transition.  Nepal  is 
facing a relatively short window of  favourable  demographics. Based  on the most up-to-
date projections, Nepal will transition to an  “ageing society” in 2028, and into an “aged 
society” by 2054, making the transition from “ageing” to “aged” in just 26 years. In terms 
of an ageing transition, from ageing to aged, Nepal’s duration is projected to be close to 
that of Japan’s, which  at 26 years is among the fastest ageing transitions in the world. 
This will create increasingly urgent policy and investment challenges over the next decade 
to take advantage the demographic dividend in order to catalyse both economic growth 
and  social  development15.  Appropriately  designed  youth  sensitive  supply  chain 
programmes  are  one  mechanisms  for  immediately  leveraging  the  current  demographic 
dividend of Nepal. 
Indigenous Peoples 
40.  Nepal  is  a  multi-lingual,  multi-religious,  multi-ethnic  and  multicultural  country 
inhibited  by  over  125  caste/ethnic  groups,  123  languages  and  10  religious  groups16. 
National  census  of  2011  calculated  35.8%  of  the  population  comprises  of  indigenous 
people (IP) and the country has legally recognized 59 indigenous nationalities as an Adivasi 
Janajati  and  classified  in  different  5  categories  as  a)  Endangered  (10),  b)  Highly 
Marginalized  (12),  c)  Marginalized  (20),  d)  Disadvantaged  (15)  e)  Advanced  living  in 
mountains (18), Hills (24), Inner Tarai (7) and Tarai (10).17  
41.  There  is  extreme  variation  on  economic  situation  of  indigenous  people-from  the 
Rautes who still make their livelihood through hunting and gathering, to the Newars and 
Thakalis  who  are  well  advanced  in  commercial  and  industrial  activities.  IPs  have  been 
adopting either one or more strategies for their livelihood, including foraging, horticulture, 
agriculture and industrial activities18. 
42.  More  generally,  a  study19  conducted  in  2014  shows  that  levels  of  socio-economic 
exclusion in Nepal vary across indicators and across and within caste/ethnic groups. None 
of the groups has a significantly lower level of socio-economic exclusion across the broader 
social  groups.  Caste/ethnic  groups  that  having  high  levels  of  exclusion  in  one  indicator 
may face higher levels of inclusion in another indicator. However, Hill Brahman/Chhetris 
and  Hill  Janajatis  have  low  rates  of  exclusion  across  a  fairly  high  number  of  indicators. 
Within  the  broader  groups,  hill  Brahmans,  Newars,  and  Tarai  Brahman/Chhetris  have 
similar scores. In contrast, hill and Tarai dalits scored poorly across a number of indicators 
and often face higher levels of exclusion than other caste/ethnic groups. This above report 
further  concludes  on  the  poverty  gap,  it  is  narrowest  among  hill  Brahman/Chhetris  and 
Muslims,  and  widest  among  hill  and  Tarai  Dalits.  Disaggregated  figures  show  that  the 
15 NPC 2017, DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES OF NEPAL: Trends and Policy Implications, National Planning 
Commission Government of Nepal, in association with United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Kathmandu. 
16 CBS (2012) National Population and Housing Census 2011: National Report, Volume 01, Kathmandu: 
National Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal.   
17 Classification of official Janajatis by NFDIN 2004, 
18Bhattachan, K.B. (2012) Country Technical Note on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, Federal Democratic Republic of 
Nepal.  
19 CDSA-TU (2014) Poverty and Exclusion in Nepal: Further Analysis of Recent Surveys and Census, Central 
Department of Sociology and Anthropology (CDSA), Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
poverty gap is wider among hill Chhetris than it is among hill Brahmans and wider among 
other hill Janajatis than it is among Newars.  
Dalits 
43.  National  Dalits  Commission  defines  Dalits  as  the  communities  who,  by  virtue  of 
atrocities  of  caste-based  discrimination  and  untouchability,  are  most  disadvantaged  in 
social,  economic,  educational,  political  and  religious  fields,  and  are  deprived  of  human 
dignity  and  social  justice.  Caste  Based  Discrimination  and  Untouchability  (Offence  and 
Punishment)  Act  2011  has  made  such  discrimination  punishable  in  law.  National  Dalits 
Commission  has  scheduled  26  castes  under  Dalit  including  7  Hill  Dalit  castes  and  19 
Tarai/Madhesi Dalit castes20. Lack of productive resources and socio-cultural discrimination, 
lack  of  opportunities  to  advance  the  traditional  skills  of  providing  essential  services  like 
tailoring,  making  shoes,  making  ornaments,  preparing  agriculture  tools,  mason  and 
carpentry, and opportunities to acquire marketable skills are the factors that push Dalits 
in the highest poverty rates. Nepal Living Standard Survey III (2011), shows that poverty 
rate  among  Hill  Dalits  and  Tarai  Dalits  is  43.63  percent  and  43.16  percent  respectively 
while the average poverty rate is 25.1621. As mentioned above study conducted by Central 
Department  of  Sociology  and  Anthropology,  hill  and  Tarai  Dalits  scored  poorly  across  a 
number  of  indicators  and  often  face  higher  levels  of  exclusion  than  other  caste/ethnic 
group (CDSA, 2014). Among Dalits, Musahars and Doms are most marginalized as well as 
landless  Tarai  Dalits22.  Programme  interventions  such  as  facilitation  for  arrangement  of 
rented land, collateral free credit, introduction of efficient production technology, selection 
of  profitable  crop  varieties,  involvement  in  household  mentoring  through  Heifer  Corner  
Stones  approach  for  most  vulnerable  women  with  comprehensive  packages  of  financial 
knowledge  and  business  skills  will  facilitate  to  promote  involvement  of  very  poor  and 
vulnerable Dalit women to get benefit from the programme.  
Nutrition 
44.  Nepal has made impressive strides in reducing the prevalence of stunting (chronic 
undernutrition)  nationally,  which  fell  from  57%  in  2001,  to  36%  in  2016.  Stunting 
prevalence for children under 5 years does vary by region; it is 55% in state 6 and 29% 
in Province 4. Moreover, the chronic undernutrition rate varies by maternal education and 
wealth  levels—23%  of  children  whose  mothers  have  secondary  education  are  stunted, 
while the rate rises to 46% of children whose mothers had no formal education. (USAID, 
2018) 
45.  The high prevalence  of  adolescent underweight, combined with the persistent and 
high adolescent pregnancy rate, is a disturbing trend. Adolescent pregnancy is associated 
with a 50 percent increased risk of stillbirth and neonatal death, and an increased risk of 
low birth weight, premature birth, asphyxia, and maternal mortality. Furthermore, the risk 
of stunting is 36% higher among first-born children of girls under 18 years in South Asia. 
(USAID,  2018)  This  suggests  that  young  women  should  be  a  particular  priority  for  the 
programme for unlocking issues of gender, youth and nutrition. 
20 List of Hill Dalit: Gandharva (Gaine), Pariyar (Damai, Dargee, Suchikar, Nagarchee, Dholee, Hudke), Badi, 
Bishwokarma (Kami, Lohar, Sunar, Od, Chunanra, Parki, Tamata), Mijar (Sarki, Charmakar, Bhool), Pode 
(Deula, Pujari, Jalari) and Chyame (Kuchikar, Chyamkhal); List of Tarai Dalit: Kalar, Kakaihiya, Kori, Khatik, 
Khatwe (Mandal, Khang) Chamar (Ram, Mochi, Harijan, Ravidas), Chidimar, Dom (Marik), Tatma (Tanti, 
Das), Dushadh (Paswan, Hajara), Dhobi (Rajak, Hindu), Pasi, Bantar, Musahar, Mestar (Halkhor), Sarbhang (Sarbariya), 
Natuwa, Dhandi and Dharikar/Dhankar 
21 CBS 2011, Nepal Living Standard Survey, Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal, Kathmandu.     
22 Human Rights Situation of Dalit Community in Nepal, Submission to the United Nations Universal Periodic Review of 
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal for Second Cycle, TwentyThird Session of the UPR, Human Rights 
Council, 2-13 November 2015 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
46.  Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS), 201623 has shown that the national 
household food security is only 48.2% whereas in rural areas the percentage is only about 
38.8%.  About  10%  of  the  households  are  severely  food  insecure.  Geographically,  the 
mountain regions suffer from more food insecurity where the percentage of food secure 
households is 38.4% compared to Terai where the statistics is about 51%. Furthermore, 
the severely food insecure households in mountain region are about 13.8% compared to 
9.2% of Terai region. Among the provisional Programme working States, Karnali State (6) 
has the lowest level of food security with food secure households are only 22.5% and the 
severely  food  insecure  households  are  about  17.5%.  State  two  has  43.1%  food  secure 
households and 10.7% households are severely food insecure. Food secure and severely 
insecure  households  for  State  five  and  three  are  48.4%,  55%  and  10.2%  and  8.5% 
respectively (NDHS, 2016). 
47.  Poor  nutrition,  food  insecurity,  and  malnutrition  continue  to  pose  risks  to  Nepal's 
population, despite the country’s progress in reducing stunting in under five years’ children 
from 57 per cent in 2001 to 37.3 per cent in 2014 and 36 per cent in 2016 (NDHS 2016, 
MICS,201424). There continues to be a need to accelerate the progress in this reduction in 
order to achieve the World Health Assembly target of relative reduction of 40% of the total 
number of children stunted compared to 2012 baseline by 202525. 
48.  Nepal has a very high rate of child malnutrition  - 36% and 27% of children under 
five  are  stunted  and  underweight,  respectively.  Poor  dietary  diversity  is  a  major  causal 
factor. Poor maternal nutrition, especially among adolescent girls, significantly contributes 
to  an  intergenerational  cycle  of  malnutrition  and  poverty.  Inadequate  infant  and  young 
child feeding (IYCF) practices also contribute to high prevalence of undernutrition. About 
17% women of  reproductive age have chronic energy deficiency (Body Mass  Index less 
than 18.5) and 41% of those populations are anaemic (NDHS, 2016). Similarly, women 
and  children  also  suffer  from  some  of  the  world’s  highest  levels  of  vitamin  and  mineral 
deficiencies which can be emphasized by the fact that Vitamin A deficiency is the cause of 
death of approximately 6,900 children in Nepal each year. One in five (21%) children is 
born with low birth weight in Nepal reflecting malnutrition in the womb. As a result, 2 to 
10  times  the  risk  of  death  and  at  higher  risk  of  diabetes  and  cardiovascular  disease  in 
adulthood is reported. Iodine deficiency in pregnancy causes more than 200,000 babies a 
year to be born mentally impaired and IQs that are 10 to 15 points lower than those with 
normal birth. About 2-3 % of GDP (US$ 250 to 375 million) is lost every year in Nepal on 
account of vitamin and mineral deficiencies alone. The wider availability of diversified and 
high  nutritional  value  foods  in  the  household  and  local  communities  is  therefore  a  key 
priority, to which VITA will contribute through the development of increased local supply 
of  a  series  of  diversified  high  nutritional  value  foods  stuff  including  meat,  fish,  dairy, 
vegetables, fruits, potato, honey and more. The new crop varieties with high nutritional 
value  and  benefits  will  be  given  higher  priority.  Project  will  promote  and  support  the 
development  of  post-harvest  management,  storage  and  processing  technologies  at  the 
community and household level. The project will focus on gender responsive and nutrition 
sensitive value chains, pro-poor investment in sustainable agriculture, maternal education 
and  awareness  of  optimal  nutrition  practices  and  convergence  with  ongoing  nutritional 
programmes of Government of Nepal. A key driver of poor nutritional is the low nutritional 
status of young women and teenage girls combined with the high level of teenage mothers. 
These are, in turn, primarily driven by societal and intra-household attitudes. A key focus 
of the GALS lite activities with POs will therefore be to address these attitudes, including 
through  the  visioning  exercises  accompanied  by  mentoring  of  parents  and  the  women 
23 Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and ICF. 2017. Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2016. Kathmandu, 
Nepal: Ministry of Health, Nepal 
24 Central Bureau of Statistics, 2015. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2014, Final Report. Kathmandu, 
Nepal: Central Bureau of Statistics and UNICEF Nepal. 
25 Global Nutrition Monitoring Framework: operational guidance for tracking progress in meeting targets for 
2025. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
themselves to be able to identify pathways they can follow-up to make genuine changes 
in this area. Anecdotal results from the recent pilots of GALS in State 2, have shown very 
positive results in changing such intra-households attitudes and the status of women in 
their household.  
49.  The National Planning Commission has set 5 targets with its benchmarks to meet the 
SDG-2,  ‘Ending  hunger,  achieve,  food  security  and  improved  nutrition,  and  promote 
sustainable agriculture.’ 26 These are: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
to end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular, the poor and people in 
vulnerable situations.  
to end all forms of malnutrition, including stunting and wasting in children under five 
as  well  as  provide  sufficient  nutrition  to  adolescent  girls,  pregnant  and  lactating 
women, and older persons.  
to double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in 
particular women and indigenous peoples. This is to be achieved through secure and 
equal  access  to  land,  other  productive  resources  and  inputs,  knowledge,  financial 
services, markets and opportunities for value addition.  
for the food production systems to be sustainable and resilient agricultural practices 
that  increase  productivity  and  production  along  with  strengthening  capacity  for 
adaptation  to  climate  change,  extreme  weather,  drought,  flooding,  and  other 
disasters.  
to  maintain  the  genetic  diversity  of  seeds  of  both  cultivated  and  wild  plants  and 
animals. This target also describes ensuring access to and fair and equitable sharing 
of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional 
knowledge.  
50.  The multidimensional poor population in Nepal are 28.6 percent. The indicators that 
contribute most to multidimensional poverty in Nepal are undernutrition and households 
that  lack  any  member  who  has  completed  five  years  of  schooling27.  There  are  clear 
opportunities  allowing  to  further  reduce  these  levels  of  multidimensional  poverty  by 
increasing  availability  and  access  to  higher  nutrient  value  foods  for  women  and 
marginalized, especially in rural areas, through their own involvement in production and 
marketing  of  such  products  via  a  systemically  designed  and  implemented  agriculture 
supply chain programmes. Enhancing the attitudes, knowledge and practices of regarding 
available nutritious products through peer-to-peer based mentoring – as planed via the 
business skills training and Heifer corner stone-based approach in the programme leading 
to improved nutrition. 
51.  The lessons from HVAP demonstrate that interventions in increasing production and 
marketing of food stuffs in supply chain process also increased the dietary diversity of the 
smallholder  producers  by  1  percent28.  Increased  access  to  nutritious  diets  through 
production  of  diversified  high  nutrient  value  food  stuffs,  including  from  horticulture  and 
livestock products; wider exposure to markets; increased income and social mobilization 
along with a comprehensive package of financial knowledge and business skills; combined 
with good nutrition knowledge for a balanced diet; and use of the GALS-lite elements and 
26 NPC/GoN,2015. Sustainable Development Goal, Status and Roadmap: 2016-2030, National Planning 
Commission, Government of Nepal 2017.  
27 NPC 2018, Nepal’s Multidimensional Poverty Index: Analysis Towards Action, National Planning Commission, 
Government of Nepal and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), Oxford Poverty and Human 
Development Initiative (OPHI), University of Oxford, Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), University 
of Oxford, Kathmandu 
28 Kafle, K., Krah, K., and Songsermsawas, T. 2018. Impact assessment report: High Value Agriculture Project in 
Hill and Mountain Areas (HVAP), Nepal. IFAD, Rome, Italy. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Heifer corner stone based approach will facilitate to improve the nutritional status of under 
5  children,  pregnant  and  lactating  women.  VITA  will  also  focus  on  selection  of  gender 
responsive  and  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains,  pro-poor  investment  in  sustainable 
agriculture,  maternal  education  and  awareness  of  optimal  nutrition  practices  and 
convergence with ongoing nutritional programmes of Government of Nepal.  
Land rights and access 
52.  Poverty  in  Nepal  is  highly  correlated  to  the  size  and  quality  of  landholdings.  The 
poorest  are  those  land-poor  families  especially  women,  Dalits,  ethnic  minorities, 
economically poor people, and agricultural laborers. There have been past efforts at land 
reformmostly concentrated on securing land rights of the family, without much regard for 
differences in land ownership of individuals within households and with   little success in 
equalizing highly skewed land holdings, reducing landlessness and improving security of 
land  tenure.  There  are  an  estimate  1.3  million  landless,  land  poor  and  other  families 
holding nearly 10 million parcels of land without formal recognition and under continued 
threat to eviction (UN Habitat, 2020). These chronic land issues helped to fuel the years 
of conflict but the new approved Land Act of February 11 2020 will contribute to change 
these issues.  
53.  There is a growing body of evidence linking women’s land ownership and household 
welfare.  However, according to the population census  of 2011,  women enjoy ownership 
over  land  and  property  in  only  19.71  per  cent  of  households  in  Nepal.  While  this  is  an 
increase over a 10-year period, it should be noted that 77 per cent of all households in the 
country reported to have ownership of agricultural land and in in only 10.7 per cent of the 
households, women had land in their names. So, while progress has been made, women 
still lag far behind as far as land ownership is concerned.  
54.  A study conducted in 3 districts reports that women face numerous gender- specific 
barriers to accessing, owning and controlling land  including: i) the dominant patriarchal 
value in which the land is passed through the male line with the perception that daughters 
are sent off to her husband’s house after marriage is a prime obstacles for women to be 
considered coparceners in family property; ii) the societal recognition that the husband is 
the sole decision maker and the presumption that women cannot handle property and land 
transactions as well as men do and  should be relegated to doing household chores and 
taking  care  of  the  family;  iii)  Limited  awareness  of  the  legal  provisions  related  to  their 
rights to own land such as the tax exemption when registering land in the name of the 
woman,  the  minimal  registration  cost  for  joint  ownership  of  spouses,  or  information  on 
land transfer, registration and requirements primarily due to low level of education; iv) the 
mobility constraint and the long distances to the local land office; v) the process of land 
registration  and  transfer  is  male  dominated,  often  lengthy  and  time-consuming  which 
entails high administrative costs and require a lot of different documents (IOM 2016).   
55.  When  women  own  land,  it is  almost  half  (0.4)  that  of  men  (0.7)  according  to  the 
national statistics collected in 2014 by CBS. Female-headed households accounted for 19.7 
percent  of  the  total  agriculture  landholders  in  2011,  a  rise  from  10.8  percent  in  2001 
(SAHAVAGI, 2016). Land is the most important source of collateral, the lack of or small 
landholdings  limit  their  access  to  credit  and  the  purchasing  of  crucial  inputs  which 
ultimately results in low productivity.   
56.  When women take up the role of household head this does not translate into their 
decision-making  power.  With  the  exception  of  single  women  living  alone  or  with  young 
children,  women  do  not  necessarily  have  control  over  the  property  they  own,  and  the 
decisions related to any kind of transaction of such property is taken by the men of the 
family, whether it is the father, husband or the son even when they are working abroad or 
outside the district. Men remain the decision-makers.  
57.  Paralegals  and  groups  are  very  good  sources  of  land  related  information  women 
interested in registering, owning or selling a piece of land.  Paralegals are seen as helpful 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
to help women and minority groups arrange all the necessary documents and letters and 
complete  all  land  related  transactions.  Upon  completion  of  all  the  processes,  service 
seekers pay certain fees to the paralegals. It is recognized that more female paralegals 
are  needed  in  the  field.  Women  also  receive  information  on  legal  provisions  on  land 
ownership through the meetings of the groups they are members of such as Savings and 
Credit  groups;  Mothers  groups,  and  Land  Rights  Forum.  Other  groups  include  forest 
groups, consumer groups, and land rights groups. 
In term of land for agriculture, around 84% of farms in Nepal are owner-operated 
58. 
and about 10% of land is held under some form of registered tenancy. The actual incidence 
of  tenancy  is  likely  significantly  higher  due  to  the  presence  of  informal  unregistered 
tenants. Sharecropping is the most common form of tenancy. Most leased land is worked 
by households that farm their own land and rent-in additional land when they have the 
capacity. Landless farmers work about 2% of total farm holdings. (USAID, 2018) 
59. 
In Nepal, landless and land-poor youth is a major challenge. Youth’s limited access 
to land, and most importantly their limited involvement in policy dialogues are  some  of 
the major challenges that restrict youth involvement in agriculture. The new land act of 
February 2020, offers new opportunities for youth land rights, along with land lease and 
rental. Unless, youth centered policies and plans are in place and youth participate in policy 
dialogue, the youth potential in agriculture will not be realized. 
60.  The  distribution  of  agricultural  land  is  uneven  as  the  majority  of  small  farmers 
operate only 18 percent of the total agricultural land with an average holding size of less 
than  0.5  hectare,  less  than  the  average  national  land  holding  size  (0.7  hectare)  (CBS, 
2014d). On the other hand, 22 percent of the land is operated by large farms with more 
than 2 hectares. The remaining 60 percent of land is owned or operated by medium-sized 
farms with an average agricultural land between 0.5 and 2 hectares (CBS, 2014d). The 
fragmentation of land is higher in rural as compared to urban areas, suggesting there may 
be challenges in the use of modern technologies.  
61.  Large  areas  of  private  rural  holdings  (an  estimated  17%–60%,  with  the  higher 
percentages  in  the  hills  and  mountains)  are  uncultivated.  Some  land  is  unsuitable  for 
farming, and some is left fallow under systematic crop rotation, but most of the land is 
idle due to lack of irrigation, low yields, or the absence of a family member able to farm 
the land (usually due to migration from rural to urban cities or foreign countries in search 
of employment). In some cases, landowners report not renting out idle land for fear that 
tenants will claim rights under land legislation that grants tillers rights to claim a share of 
cultivated land. Although the legislation officially ended in 2001, fear remains that the law 
may be re-introduced and they feel vulnerable to unfair ownership claims. (USAID, 2018) 
62.  At the policy level, women’s rights to land have been taking a progressive turn. New 
laws  have  been  drafted  to  ensure  that  the  legal  framework  improves  and  protects  the 
rights of women. However, socio-cultural norms have prevented women, especially those 
in  the  rural  areas,  from  benefitting  from  tax  discounts  and  other  incentives  that  the 
Government  of  Nepal  (GON)  provides  for  joint/women  registration,  equal  ancestral 
inheritance and spousal rights. 
63.  There has been significant progress at the policy level in recent years. Following the 
promulgation  of  the  new  Constitution  in  September  2015,  the  Government  of  Nepal 
amended the Lands Act of 1964 through enacting a Lands (Seventh Amendment) Act in 
2018  which  provided  a  legal  framework  for  implementation  of  Article  40  (5)  of  the 
Constitution on the provision of land to landless Dalits (“The State shall once provide land 
to the landless Dalit in accordance with law.”).  This was endorsed in September 2018 and 
paved way for yet another Bill for an Eighth Amendment of the Land Act which proposed 
to  allow  ownership  of  land  for  “landless  squatters”  and  “unmanaged  dwellers”.  This  8th 
Amendment Bill to the Land Act was passed on September 19, 2019. The new Land Act 
finally  came  into  force  on  February  11,  2020.  The  National  Land  Policy  adopted  by  the 
Government  of  Nepal  in  March  2019  commits  to  securing  tenure  and  land  ownership, 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
protection  of  land  rights,  rehabilitation  of  the  landless,  squatters  and  informal  tenure-
holders  for  improved  housing,  equitable  access  to  land  for  all,  including  women  and 
vulnerable groups. This policy is intended to support the achievement of the national goal 
of sustainable development through good land governance. The Land Act should provide 
a legislative framework to achieve these policy goals. (UN Habitat, 2020) 
64.  The major highlights of the legislation are: 
i)  The land authority shall distribute the land equally among the landlord and the 
tenant,  thus  protecting  the  land  rights  of  the  tenants  and  dispelling  dual 
ownership over land. 
ii)  Landless squatter families who have no land anywhere in the country and have 
no economic means to procure a piece of land will be provided with a parcel of 
land and land title free of cost for one-time up-to a designated size preferably 
at their original site of informal holding or relocated to any other appropriate site 
as deemed necessary in case they are currently residing in designated critical 
areas.  The  law  provides  for  some  restrictions  to  ensure  the  family  does  not 
become landless again. 
iii)  In  case  of  other  informal  tenure  holder  residing  in  government  land  for  more 
than 10 years and who also have registered land elsewhere in the country, they 
may be provided with land title for the piece of land up-to a designated size upon 
payment  of  levy  calculated  on  the  basis  of  their  economic  status,  residential 
status,  type  of  land,  area  of  land,  land  value,  duration  of  the  informal 
landholding, and status of landholding elsewhere. 
65.  The law demands for a thorough assessment of the persons, families or households 
and land parcels for the identification, verification and recordation  of  landless squatters 
and  informal  tenure  holders,  their  landholdings  and  information  on  different  criteria  to 
decide  on  the  amount  of  levy  to  be  imposed  in  case  of  non-landless  informal  tenure 
holders. In this process, more work on  developing additional rules and regulations, and 
technical  guidelines  is  necessary.  Work  has  already  begun  on  piloting  practical  tools  in 
critical areas, including: 
i)  The  Social  Tenure  Domain  Model  (STDM),  a  pro-poor,  gender  responsive, 
participatory and affordable land information system for capturing person/s to 
land relationships cognizant of the land rights continuum, has been implemented 
in  Nepal  and  has  proven  to  be  technically  sound  to  generate  the  information 
required to implement on the new Land Act. 
ii)  Fit-For-Purpose Land Administration (FFP-LA) strategy has been developed and 
FF-PA.  STDM  and  FFP-LA  application  have  been  piloted  together  in  several 
settlements.  
66.  The Land Policy is intended to directly address the issue of land administration and 
land management reforms under six major and key pillar objectives: Security of tenure; 
Access  to  land;  Land  Use;  Land  Valuation,  taxation  and  land  market;  Land  acquisition, 
and; Modernization of land administration services. It is underpinned by a strong inclusive 
agenda that considers the issues affecting the land rights of women and vulnerable groups. 
This  includes:  Rehabilitation  of  landless,  squatters  and  informal  tenure-holders  for 
improved  housing;  Access  to  land  and  security  of  tenure;  Tenure  security  for  landless 
peasants for farming; Women’s access to land ownership, and; Optimum use of land for 
sustainable housing. (Global Land Tool Network, 2020) 
67.  The  policy  also  considers  key  environmental  challenges  related  to  food  security, 
infrastructure  development,  and  the  application  of  Fit-For-Purpose  techniques  in  land 
administration. In moving to implementation, there are a number of areas now expected 
to be prioritised, including (Ibid): 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
i)  Dialogue and capacity building with multiple stakeholders at provincial and 
local levels on the benefits of the land policy. 
ii)  Capacity building on practical tools like the Fit-For-Purpose approach and how 
it can be used to address outstanding land administration challenges in line 
with federal restructuring. 
iii)  Identification, Verification and Recordation (IVR) of informal tenure-holders 
covering approximately 25% of arable land. 
iv)  Amendment and enactment of land legislation at the federal, provincial and 
local levels in line with the provisions of the new land policy. 
v)  Training and implementation of Land Use Planning at the municipal levels. 
vi)  Collaboration with national agencies, development partners and civil society 
organizations to fill the financial and technical gaps required to implement the 
policy.  
3.  Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
68.  Geography: Nepal is a landlocked country with incredible geographic diversity that 
ranges from tropical alluvial plains in the south area to the very rugged and permanently 
snow and ice capped Himalayan Mountain in the north. There are five major physiographic 
zones based on geology and geomorphology, from north to south: the High Himal, High 
Mountains, Middle Mountains, Siwalik and Terai Plains. Lengthwise, all the zones extend 
from east to west across the country.  
Figure 1 Physiographic Regions of Nepal (Source: Department of Survey, GoN) 
The lowland terai region – below 500 m asl. – is the northern part of Indo-Gangetic 
69. 
plain. The terai extends nearly 800 km from east to west and about 30-40 km from north 
to south. The Siwalik, a narrow east-west belt of hills ranging between 500-1000m asl and 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
only  10-50  km  in  width,  marking  the  northern  boundary  of  the  terai  plains  and  the 
southern boundary of the middle mountains. The middle mountains range from 1000 to 
3000  m  asl  which  is  also  called  as  Mahabharat  range  and  is  cut  in  many  places  by 
antecedent  rivers  such  as  Koshi,  Gandaki  (Narayani),  Karnali  and  Mahakali.  The  high 
mountains  range  from  3000  to  5000  m  asl  and  the  high  Himal  above  5000  m  asl.  The 
climate  varies  significantly.  In  general,  climatic  zones  are  categorized  by  temperature 
regimes based on altitudinal ranges. Tropical climatic zones occur below 1000 m asl, sub-
tropical to temperate climates between 1000 – 3000 m asl, sub-alpine to alpine climates 
between 3000 – 5000 m asl and tundra/arctic climates above 5000 m asl. 
Table 3 Physiographic and Bioclimatic zones of Nepal29,30 
Physiographic Zone 
Coverage (%) 
Elevation (m) 
Bioclimatic Zone 
High Himal 
High Mountains 
Middle Mountains 
Siwalik 
Terai 
23 
19 
29 
15 
14 
Above 5000 
Nival (Tundra and Arctic) 
4000-5000 
Alpine 
3000-4000 
Sub-Alpine 
2000-3000 
Montane (Temperate) 
1000-2000 
Sub-Tropical 
500-1000 
Below 500 
Tropical 
70.  Biodiversity31:  The  unique  geography  with  its  spectacular  changes  in  elevation 
within relatively short north-south span, and the associated high variability in eco-climatic 
conditions,  has  resulted  in  a  highly  rich  diversity  of  flora  and  fauna  in  the  country.  The 
country has 118 ecosystems, including forest ecosystem (112), cultivation ecosystem (4), 
water  body  ecosystem  (1)  and  glacier/snow/rock  ecosystem  (1).  Within  0.1  percent  of 
global area, Nepal harbours 3.2 and 1.1 percent of world’s known flora and fauna. A total 
of 284 species of flowering plants, 160 animal species, 1 species of bird, and 14 species 
of herpetofauna are recorded as endemic to Nepal. Nine species of plants, 55 mammals, 
149  birds,  64  herpetofauna,  and  21  fish  are  included  in  the  International  Union  for 
Conservation  of  Nature  (IUCN)  Red  List.  Similarly,  15  groups  and  species  of  plants,  52 
mammals, 108 birds and 19 reptiles and three insects have been listed in the Convention 
on  International  Trade  in  Endangered  Species  of  Flora  and  Fauna  (CITES)  Appendices. 
Several species of plants and animals, including 27 mammals,  9 birds, 14 angiosperms, 
and 4 gymnosperms have been declared as protected species by the government. 
71.  Most of the Nepalese people are directly or indirectly linked to biodiversity for their 
livelihood  and  economic  well-being.  Biodiversity  relates  to  every  aspects  of  livelihood 
including  agriculture  productivity,  food  security,  human  health,  nutrition,  indigenous 
knowledge, gender equality, culture, climate, water recourses and aesthetic value to the 
society.  
72.  The  predominant  threats  to  biodiversity  as  a  whole  remain  natural  habitat 
degradation  and  loss  due  to  expansion  of  settlements,  agriculture,  and  infrastructure, 
overexploitation,  and  invasion  by  alien  species,  and  pollution  of  water  bodies. 
Agrobiodiversity has been threatened by improper use of insecticides and pesticides, and 
rapid expansion of hybrid varieties - for example in rice: Kaveri gold, Gangotri, Chandan, 
29Dobremez, J. F., 1976. Le Ne´pal: E´cologie et Bioge´ographie [Ecology and Biogeography of  Nepal]. Centre 
Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France. 
30GoN/MoFSC 2014. Nepal Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2014-2020. Government of Nepal, Ministry of 
Forests and Soil Conservation, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
31 CBD, 2014. Nepal Fifth National Report to Convention on Biological Diversity (2014). Environment Division, 
Ministry of Forest and Soil Conservation, Government of Nepal.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Khusi and Mamsa , and maize: 10V10, Sresta, Banni, 9081, Dragon, Rajkumar varieties. 
These varieties generally demand higher volumes of water, fertilizers, and pesticides and 
also  have  a  shorter  rotation  period  thus  increasing  the  use  of  soil  nutrients  and 
deteriorating  soil  quality  if  not  properly  managed.  Widespread  mining  of  gravel  from 
streams and rivers beds for private and public construction and infrastructure development 
works  has  emerged  as  a  major  threat  to  aquatic  biodiversity.  Little  attention  has  been 
given by a number of development projects in recent years to environmental safeguards 
posing  a  direct  threat  to  diversity.  This  has  caused  considerable  damage  to  biodiversity 
and local environment (CBD, 2014). VITA’s activities will be confined to areas designated 
to agricultural use and agro-forestry and will not involve areas designated for forestry and 
those  with  high  biodiversity  values.  Forest  encroachment  will  be  strictly  monitored  in 
collaboration  with  Divisional  Forest  Offices.  Dependency  on  forest  product  like 
fodder/forage  will  be  reduced  by  sufficiently  plantation  of  fodder  and  forage  in  private 
lands  and  promoting  stall  feeding.  Non  bio  pesticides  and  fertilizers  will  be  discouraged 
and use of bio products will be encouraged. 
73.  Forestry:  Forest  occupies  40.36%  of  the  total  area  of  country  and  other  wooded 
land covers 4.38%32. Forest and other wooded land occupy  20.88% of Terai, 73.56% of 
Siwalik, 53.75% of Mid Mountain and 37.81% of the High Mountain and High Himal. The 
forest ecosystems are categorized in to ten major groups: i) tropical, ii) subtropical broad-
leaved, iii) subtropical conifer, iv) lower temperate board-leaved, v) lower temperate mixed 
broad-leaved, vi) upper temperate broadleaved, vii) upper temperate mixed board-leaved, 
viii) temperate coniferous, ix) subalpine, and x) alpine scrub33.  
74.  Forest  biodiversity  outside  the  protected  areas  falls  under  the  six  main  types  of 
management  practices:  i)  community,  ii)  collaborative,  iii)  leasehold,  iv)  religious,  v) 
protection,  and  vi)  government-managed.  Millions  of  households  are  now  directly 
benefiting from forest under the widely acclaimed community-based forest management 
and participatory protected area management programs.  
75. 
Increasing  high  demand  of  agriculture  land  and  high  dependency  on  forests  for 
meeting subsistence needs like fuel, fodder, construction materials have caused substantial 
degradation of forests, particularly in the Terai and Siwalik regions.  
76.  Non  Timber  Forest  Products  (NTFPs)  together  with  Medicinal  and  Aromatic  Plants 
(MAPs) play a critical role in meeting the food and healthcare requirement of a significant 
portion  of  rural  people,  mostly  in  the  mountains.  Several  valuable  herbs  like  Swertia 
Chirata,  Nardostachys  grandiflora,  and  Cordyceps  sinenis  have  generated  considerable 
employment  opportunities  and  income  for  local  people  in  remote  areas.  However,  few 
commercially  valuable  NTFPs,  especially  medicinal  plants  like  Aconitum  species, 
Dactylorhiza  hatagirea,  Ephedra  grardiana,  Nardostachys  grandiflora,  and  Valeriana 
wallichii are facing unsustainable exploitation34.  
77.  Water resources (WECS, 2011): Nepal is rich in water resources. There are about 
6,000 rivers having drainage area of 191,000 sq. km, 74 % of which lies in Nepal alone. 
There are 33 rivers having their drainage  areas exceeding 1,000 sq.  km.  If this natural 
resource is properly harnessed, it could generate hydropower; provide water for irrigation, 
industrial uses and supply water for domestic purposes.  
78.  Rivers  of  Nepal  can  be  broadly  classified  into  three  types,  in  accordance  to  their 
origins: The first category comprises of the four main river systems of the country: Koshi, 
Gandaki,  Karnali  and  Mahakali  river  systems,  all  of  them  originating  from  glaciers  and 
snow-fed  lakes.  Rivers  of  the  second  category  originate  from  Mahabharat  range  which 
includes Babai, West Rapti, Bagmati, Kamala, Kankai and Mechi etc. Streams and rivulets 
32 DFRS, 2015. State of Nepal's Forests. Forest Resource Assessment (FRA) Nepal, Department of 
Forest Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
33 Stainton, J.D.A. (1972)  Forests of Nepal. John Murray, London. 
34 http://www.floraofnepal.org/countryinformation/listedplants/medicinal accessed on October 12, 2019 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
originating  mostly  from  the  Chure  hills  make  up  the  third  category;  these  rivers  cause 
flash floods during monsoon rains and remain without any flow or very little flow during 
the dry season. 
79.  Currently,  about  10%  of  total  precipitation  in  Nepal  falls  as  snow,  about  23%  of 
Nepal’s total area lie above the permanent snowline of 5000 m., about 3.6% of Nepal’s 
total areas are  covered by glaciers. There are  3,252 glaciers  covering an area  of 5,323 
sq.km with an estimated ice reserve of 481 km3. There are 2,323 glacial lakes in Nepal 
covering an area of 75 sq.km. The surface water available in the country is estimated to 
be about 225 billion m3(BCM) per annum or equivalent to an average flow of 7,125 m3/s, 
out of which only 15 BCM per annum is in use. Around 95.9% of 15 BCM has been used 
for agriculture, 3.8% for domestic purpose and only about 0.3% for industry. It is observed 
that around 78% of the average flow of the country is available in the first category river 
basins, 9 % in the second category basins and 13 % in the numerous small southern rivers 
of the Terai. Studies have shown that the first Category Rivers have surplus flow but the 
second category rivers have deficit flow in the dry season. 
In addition to surface water, a large volume of water is available in the shallow and 
80. 
deep aquifers which are estimated to be 8.8 BCM annually which can be used for irrigation 
and domestic water supplies. 
81.  According to the precipitation trend analysis, the annual average precipitation over 
Nepal  is  decreasing  at  the  rate  of  9.8  mm/decade,  however  the  Koshi  basin  shows 
increasing trend. Trend of the annual discharge of three major River basins Koshi, Gandaki 
and Karnali indicates that the discharges in these major basins are decreasing annually 
but, the annual discharges in southern basins were in increasing trend.  
82.  Analyses of monthly flow trend of some of the rivers indicate that the contribution of 
snow melt in runoff is in increasing trend for snow-fed rivers, similarly for non snow-fed 
rivers, dry season flows are decreasing and wet season flows are increasing. The impact 
on snow and glacier is found to be very high. Negative trends are observed in the glacier 
mass balance. Glacial Lakes are expanding and the threats of Glacial lake Outburst Floods 
(GLOF) are ever increasing. 
83.  Annex 4 provides a summary of the average precipitation and mean temperature of 
Nepal for different seasons during the reference period (1981-2010). 
84.  Protected  Areas:  Protected  areas  remain  the  dominant  approach  to  biodiversity 
conservation  in  Nepal.  Out  of  the  total  forest  area,  4.39  million  hectors  (82.68%)  lies 
outside the Protected Areas (PA) and 17.32% inside the PAs together with core areas and 
buffer zones. These include 12 national parks, one wildlife reserve, one hunting reserve 
and six conservation areas, and buffer zones. The main focus of the national parks and 
wildlife  reserves  is  conservation  of  flagship  wild  fauna,  such  as  tiger,  rhinoceros,  Asian 
elephant, snow leopard and red panda. The key threatening reasons for the protected area 
biodiversity are i) illegal hunting and trade of important wildlife species, ii) human-wildlife 
conflict, iii) invasion by alien species of flora, iv) intrusion of tree species in to grassland, 
and v) encroachment of forest areas for cultivation and settlement (CBD, 2014).  
85.  Figure 2 below shows the location of protected areas with their buffer zones.  Five 
national parks in Terai and Siwalik regions, and two national parks and one conservation 
area in Mid and High Mountain fall under the proposed 28 programme districts. Starting 
from  the  East,  Terai  and  Siwalik  regions  have  Koshi  Tappu  National  Park  (State  one; 
Districts:  Sunsari,  Saptari,  and  Udayapur),  Parsa  National  Park  (States  two  and  three; 
Districts: Chitwan, Makawanpur, Parsa and Bara), Chitwan National Park (States three and 
Gandaki; Districts: Chitwan, Nawalparasi East, Makawanpur and  Parsa), Banke National 
Park (States five and Karnali; Districts: Banke, Dang and Salyan), and Bardiya National 
Park (State Five, District: Bardiya). Likewise, Mid and High Mountain, covering some parts 
of High Himal, have Shivapuri National Park (State three; Districts: Kathmandu, Nuwakot, 
Sindhupalchok), Langtang National Park (State three; Districts: Nuwakot, Sindhupalchok 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
and  Rasuwa)  and  Gaurishankar  Conservation  Area  (State  Three;  Districts:  Ramechhap, 
Dolakha, and Sindhupalchok).  
86.  The  programme  will  not  work  in  the  sensitive  ecological  sites  and  habitats  of 
endangered wild animals. Programme will ensure Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) 
if planned to undertake any activities in buffer zone areas, with consent of the responsible 
authorities. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Figure 2: Map - Protected Areas of Nepal (adapted from NTNC, 2018) 
87.  Climatic zones: Nepal's climate varies significantly from north to south and east to 
west.  The  climate  zones  in  country  are  categorized  by  temperature  regimes  based  on 
altitudinal ranges. These climatic zones are subtropical (less than 1,000 meter elevation), 
warm-temperate  (1,000-2,000  meter  elevation),  cool-temperate  (2,000-3,000  meter 
elevation),  alpine  (3,000-4,000  meter  elevation)  and  arctic  (more  than  4,500  meter 
elevation)  (DFRS,  2015).  The  climate  is  characterized  into  four  different  seasons:  pre-
monsoon (March-May), monsoon (June-September), post-monsoon (October-November) 
and winter (December-February). Central and mid hill areas have recorded highest rainfall, 
while the annual rainfall is approximately 1800 mm. Temperature tends to decrease from 
south  to  north  and  decrease  with  altitude.  The  country  faces  the  highest  temperatures 
during  the  pre-monsoon  period  reaching  over  40  0C  during  the  day  in  Terai  region  and 
other low lands - and winter is the coldest season with temperatures in the region of -10 
0C in Himalayan areas to 150C in Terai35.  
4.  Environmental assessment 
88.  The  market  driven  agriculture,  livestock,  horticulture,  and  fisheries  supply  chains 
proposed  as  part  of  the  Programme  aiming  to  substitute  imports,  generally  demand  a 
substantial  amount  of  cultivable  land,  soil  nutrient,  fodder,  and  water  resources.  Thus, 
imposing pressure on the environment if not properly managed ranging from degradation 
of  forest  resources  through  the  possible  increased  pressure  for  fodder  and  timber 
extraction for livestock production, processing of crop and meat, and related infrastructure 
development. An increase of livestock numbers and intensive agricultural practices could 
exceed the carrying capacity of the  land which could increase water resource depletion, 
rise pollution due to use of chemicals and pesticides, degrade soil quality, accelerate soil 
35Ministry of Environment, 2010. National Adaptation Program of Action to Climate Change. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
erosion and landslides, and increase pressure on natural resources. Furthermore, there is 
also a threat of forest encroachment to expand cultivation area and settlement expansion. 
The  Programme  has  carefully  considered  these  risks  and  identified  specific  mitigation 
measures (see Table 4 and ESMP matrix).  
89.  Firstly,  it  is  expected  to  increase  cropping  area  in  the  programme  sites  but  only 
through  the  reintroduction  of  cropping  in  abandoned  farm  land  in  villages,  primarily 
through land rental or purchase or, in the future, potential via the local land banks currently 
under  consideration  by  different  branches  of  government.  The  concept  of  land  bank  is 
planned to cultivate previously owned arable land now left largely barren (in part due to 
out  migration).  Under  this  type  of  land,  landowners  can  deposit  uncultivated  land  for  a 
certain  time  in  the  land  bank  and  interested  people  or  group  can  lease  the  land  for 
production.  Studies  suggest  significant  areas  of  land  have  been  left  fallow  due  to  less 
production, lack of investment and trend of youth outmigration. A study by Paudel at el 
(2012) has reported abandoned farmland in studied High hill, Mid hill and Basin area as 
44%, 23% and 33% of farming lands respectively. The study found land abandoned trend 
was higher in relatively poor families. The barren land percentages in studied area were 
49% by the poor and 17% ultra-poor compared to 17.7% rich and 16.3% rich household36. 
This  seems  to  indicate  that  there  are  strong  opportunities  to  utilize  those  lands  in 
expanding the commercial value chain approach.  
90.  Secondly,  VITA  will  only  support  construction  and/or  rehabilitation  of  small-scale 
infrastructure that has minimal and localised environmental risks and impacts that will be 
mitigated by known measures included in ESMP.  
91.  Lastly, the livestock will be promoted based on stall-fed production and the livestock 
will not be allowed to free graze on rangeland or forests and thus compromise the existing 
biodiversity.  A  key  first  priority  in  supported  livestock  clusters  will  be  the  promotion  of 
planting  improved  fodder  and  forage  to  provide  more  secure  and  sustainable  feed 
resources  in  advance  of  expansion  of  herd  sizes.  To  ensure  livestock  are  not  promoted 
beyond  the  sustainable  carrying  capacity  of  the  local  resource  based,  carrying  capacity 
assessment will be completed for all proposed ruminant-based livestock clusters prior to 
field interventions beginning. 
92.  The  combined  impacts  of  climate  change,  unmanaged  settlement  expansion, 
increased  agricultural  intensity  and  infrastructure  development  in  mid-hill  areas  have 
threatened  existing  water  sources.  It  is  expected  that  the  additional  demand  due  to 
production and processing envisaged under the programme will increase the pressure on 
what  are  already  noted  in  Nepal  to  be  vulnerable  water  resources.  To  mitigate  against 
potential threats the programme will adopt a three-pronged approach:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
For horticulture and orchards crops, the programme will promote investments in 
water efficient technologies such as drip irrigation, micro-sprinkles, in-field 
catchment ponds and mulching to increase soil water retention.  
For more water intensive crops, such as rice, the programme will only support 
clusters served by functioning irrigation schemes.  
For livestock and other production, the programme will promote investment in 
multi-use water supply, including the capture and reuse of domestic water for 
agriculture.  
93.  The increasing use of pesticides, medicines and chemical fertilizer is another threat 
to  environment.  The  commercial  supply  chain  of  crops,  horticulture,  essential  oils, 
livestock and fisheries potentially increases the use of these items.  The programme will 
promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach via local service markets which will 
36 Paudel, N.S., Bastakoti, B.P., Karki, R., and Bista, R. 2012. Drivers and Dynamics of Agrarian Transformation in 
Nepal: Review of Broader Socio-economic Issues Around Nepalese Agricultural Development. Kathmandu: 
ForestAction Nepal. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
allow farmers to manage diseases, insects, weeds and other pests in a cost-effective and 
environmentally sound way. IPM was first introduced in Nepal by FAO in 1996 and is well 
known. It helps farmers to sustainably maximize production and minimize losses  due to 
insects, weeds and diseases. It is a flexible system that makes good use of local resources 
and  the  latest  research,  technology,  knowledge  and  experience37.  Programme  will 
encourage the use of farmyard manure, organic and mineral fertilizers; and bio-medicines.  
94.  The programme will promote sustainable agriculture and livestock practices limiting 
the use of agrochemicals and medicines, promote environmental stewardship (for example 
in the promotion of the increased planting of forage and fodder trees to reduce pressure 
of  feed  collection  and  over-grazing  in  natural  forests),  enhance  quality  of  life  for  farm 
families  and  communities  and  increase  the  production.  At  the  smallholder  farmer  level, 
the  programme  will  support  a  portfolio  of  crops  and  livestock  that  both  have  market 
demand  and  are  suitable  for  local  agro-ecological  zones  and  climatic  conditions. 
Environmental  management,  resource  use  efficiency  and  climate  adaptation  will  be 
integrated into the investment support to farmers, especially via the farm business skills 
training  programmes  as  well  as  via  the  development  of  suitably  skilled  local  technical 
service providers. These will support farmer to understand and better consider sustainable 
agriculture  and  livestock  practices  when  making  their  production  and  farm  investment 
decisions. Secondly, with better links to local technical service providers they will have the 
means to be able to identify and implement their adaptation related investments in their 
farms  and  communities.  At  the  same  time  the  long-term  approach  to  mentoring  and 
training in business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve smallholders’ 
potential to sustain the benefits from Programme interventions even when the Programme 
support ends. 
95. 
Increased waste stream and pollution from agriculture and livestock farms as well 
as  processing  units  is  another  potential  environmental  impact  from  the  designed 
Programme. The Programme should coordinate and collaborate with organizations working 
to recycle agriculture and livestock wastage. The programme will build on the experience 
from HVAP in this regard that supported the development of a SME in Surkhet producing 
organic compost from municipal and market waste. It could be translated as an opportunity 
for income generation  and mitigate the  environmental impacts related  to collection and 
disposal of solid waste. Programme can also promote new technologies to reduce the waste 
and  pollution.  As  far  as  possible,  the  use  of  renewable  energy  technologies  for  the 
production,  processing  and  storage  will  be  promoted  via  local  support  markets  and 
commercial  providers  to  help  to  reduce  existing  levels  of  pollution.  Similarly,  the 
Programme  will  promote  the  use  of  and  supply  markets  for  solar  dryers,  coolers,  light 
systems, and energy for the processing aspects of VITA The programme will learn from 
the experience of the recent Sustainable Renewable Energy Technologies (SRET) project 
in  Cambodia  that  has  adopted  market-based  approaches  for  the  promotion  of  such 
technologies.  These  will  be  incorporated  into  the  support  market  development  scheme 
under Component 1. 
96.  The  table  below  summarizes  environmental  impact  of  the  major  programme 
activities and the proposed solution measures.  
37https://croplife.org/wp-content/uploads/pdf_files/Integrated-pest-management.pdf  Accessed on 
23/09/2019 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Table 4: Environmental Assessment of major programme interventions 
Supply chain / 
activity 
Vegetable  
SN 
1 
2  Goat  
3  Milk 
4 
Pond base fish 
farming  
Potential impacts on 
Environment  
Increased soil erosion 
due to intensive 
agriculture and 
topography in hilly areas 
Pesticide and chemical 
fertilizer Infiltration/ 
leaching/ run-off 
Increase in number of 
goats may increase 
pressure on natural 
resources 
(Positive consequences:  
Reduce open grazing, 
reduce exposure to 
vulnerable land, reduce 
local environmental 
pollution, improve 
biodiversity/greenery, 
improve soil fertility due 
to use of organic 
manure) 
Increase in number of 
cow/buffalos may create 
additional pressure on 
natural resources for 
feed and from pollution 
(Positive: reduced 
pressure on natural 
environment, reduce 
pollution from waste, 
improved soil fertility, 
crop residues and waste 
reduction) 
Pollution from the pond: 
Overuse of medicine 
and feed (leakage) 
Invasive species 
interlocution  
Risk 
signif-
icance   Mitigation/Adaptation measures  
Low  
Low to 
medium  
Low  
i) Mulching, cover and mix cropping, ii) 
right balance of organic and inorganic 
fertilizer, iii) improve terracing and 
hedgerow plantation  
i) Training and advice on proper use of 
pesticide and fertilizers, ii) easy access 
to bio-fertilizer and bio-pesticide, iii) to 
inform fertilizer application and reduce 
over application iv) increase the use of 
organic matter to soil, and v) 
integrated pest management  
i) Shift to stall feeding and practice cut 
and carry feed production, ii) improved 
shed production with waste (Urine, 
pellet, dung) capture to produce 
organic manure and pesticides, iii) Pre-
assessment of carrying capacity of goat 
at ward / municipality level, iv) no 
support to community that not ready to 
transform to stall feeding with follow-
up monitoring v) Better use of bio-
residues(silage) 
Low  
i) Increase the production of own feed 
resources by additional plantation of 
fodder and forage, ii) hay/silage 
production from crop residues, iii)  
use of wider availability of sexed semen 
for the better breed production and 
reduce the number of cattle's iv) 
improved shed management to 
increase capture and reuse of both 
urine and dung as productive resource. 
Medium 
i) Improved pond management to keep 
water healthy including managing 
proper aeration to keep the water 
healthy and hence reduce use of 
antibiotics and medicines and, ii) 
adequate waste water management 
system, iii) stocking of multiple 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Supply chain / 
activity 
Potential impacts on 
Environment  
SN 
Risk 
signif-
icance   Mitigation/Adaptation measures  
5 
Banana 
Monocroping – reducing 
local bio-diversity and 
increase disease risks, 
hence increased used of 
chemicals and pesticides 
Increase use of Fertilizer 
and Pesticides 
Demand more use of 
local water resulting 
pressure in water 
resources  
Medium  
Medium 
Low  
complementary species in ponds to 
maximize the benefit – e.g. three 
species mixed like surface feeder, mid 
feeder and bottom feeder, iv) 
integrated fish farming e.g. with ducks 
and pigs for proper utilization of 
resources and waste 
i) Growing different banana varieties, 
ii) intercropping  
i) Enforce pesticide testing in market, 
ii) training farmer on good agriculture 
practice and IPM 
i) Proper site selection having year 
around water availability and adequate 
irrigation mechanism, ii) promote water 
efficient technologies, iii) proper 
agriculture management  
6 
Seed Potato  
Increase the use of 
Fertilizer and Pesticides 
Improper agriculture 
practices may cause soil 
erosion  
Increased use of 
Fertilizer and Pesticides 
7 
Cereal seed 
(Maize and 
Paddy) 
Medium   Proper training farmer on good 
agriculture practice and IPM, regular 
soil testing to inform fertilizer 
application, mulching 
Medium   Cover crops, green manure, intercrop, 
rotation of crops  
Medium   Proper training farmer on good 
Improper agriculture 
practices may cause soil 
erosion and landslides  
Not any negative impact     
Low  
Citrus Fruit  
Honey 
Not any negative impact     
8 
9 
10  MAPs 
Improper agriculture 
practices may cause soil 
erosion  
Over exploitation of wild 
resources for some 
species 
Very 
low  
Medium 
agriculture practice and IPM, regular 
soil testing to inform fertilizer 
application  
Green manure, inter crop, rotation of 
crops, low tillage field preparation 
Mulching, integrating cover crops  
Positive: Supports in pollination which 
boosts production  
Less tillage operation, mulching, mixed 
cropping, Terracing, hedgerow 
plantation  
i) Carrying capacity assessment prior to 
cluster start-up, ii) only supporting 
cluster with sufficient carrying capacity 
or exclusive domestic production of 
target species. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Supply chain / 
activity 
SN 
11  Spice (Ginger/ 
Turmeric) 
12  Others 
(backyard 
Poultry) 
13 
Infrastructure 
Potential impacts on 
Environment  
Improper agriculture 
practices may cause soil 
erosion and landslides  
Increased wastage  
Risk 
signif-
icance   Mitigation/Adaptation measures  
Very 
low  
Less tillage operation, mulching, mixed 
cropping, Terracing, hedgerow 
plantation  
Medium   Improved management practices 
Medium  
Improper site selection, 
design, materials and 
construction activities 
may result soil erosion 
and landslide  
integrating waste management and 
maintaining hygiene 
i) Climate resilient infrastructure 
appropriate site selection, design, 
construction approach/materials, and 
the provision of post maintenance, ii) 
Programme will not support the 
activities that includes the road 
construction of more than 10 km length 
and water structure (irrigation) for 
more than 100 ha 
5.  Climate status and trend 
97.  This section presents the status, trend and projected scenarios of the climate change 
and analyses its impacts in programme areas and interventions. It also includes the district 
climate vulnerability, climate extreme events trends, and scenarios.  
98.  Data  sources:  The  core  of  this  analysis  is  based  on  three  detailed  recent  studies 
conducted by the Government of Nepal with the support of research organizations and are 
the source of all data in this section, unless stated otherwise, i) Observed Climate Trend 
Analysis of Nepal (DHM, 2017), ii) Climate Change Scenarios of Nepal (MoFE, 2018), and 
iii)  Climate  Change  Vulnerability  Mapping  for  Nepal  (MoPE,  2010).  Climate  hazards 
information is gathered using different available publications.  
i) 
DHM, 2017 Observed Climate Trend Analysis of Nepal uses two types of data: i) Daily 
temperature data from 93 climate stations; ii) for precipitation analysis, 0.05 degree 
APHRODITE  (Yatagaietal.,  2009,  2012)  daily  gridded  data  issued.  Annual  and 
seasonal data are calculated by averaging each time series data (for precipitation, 
maximum and minimum temperatures) for the period from 1981-2010. The  study 
has used the daily data from 1971 to 2014, both for temperature and rainfall trend 
analysis based on 1km×1km for temperature and 5km×5km for precipitation daily 
gridded data set.  
ii)  MOFE, 2018. Climate change scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan (NAP). 
Ministry of Forests and Environment, Kathmandu. The Fifth Assessment Report has 
identified four scenarios, or Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)- RCP 2.6, 
RCP 4.5, RCP 6, and RCP 8.5. Each represents different volumes of greenhouse gas 
emissions, and hence varied levels of their concentration in the atmosphere in the 
year 2100, implying a particular development trajectory. This report has chosen two 
possible trajectories- RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 as representations of future scenarios for 
the  medium  term  (2016-2046).  Climate  scenarios  for  temperature  (mean, 
maximum, and minimum) and precipitation were developed for the whole Nepal at 
10 km resolution. The precipitation and temperature scenarios have been presented 
compared with the reference period (1981-2010).  
iii)  MoPE, 2010 Climate Change Vulnerability Mapping for Nepal provides information on 
vulnerability  to  climate  change  and  its  magnitude  in  Nepal.  This  assessment  was 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
carried  out  by  overlaying  climate  risk/exposure,  sensitivity,  and  adaptive  capacity 
maps following the vulnerability assessment framework of the United Nation’s Inter-
governmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC).  It  has  used  data  on  the  spatial 
distribution  of  carious  climate-related  risks/exposure  in  75  districts  of  Nepal.  The 
SECAP note has adapted the district vulnerability mapping from this report.  
99.  Findings  and  analysis: The annual average precipitation  from 1981 to  2010  shows 
Siwalik region has received the highest average rainfall of 1700 mm per year followed by 
the Mid-Mountain (1627mm) and Terai (1600 mm). High Himal has least rainfall averaging 
slightly less than 700 mm per year. More than two-third amount of annual rainfall occurs 
in  monsoon  season  for  all  regions.  Both  maximum  and  minimum  annual  temperature 
decreases with the increase in elevation from south to north. Terai and Siwalik regions are 
among the hottest regions with average annual maximum temperature with 30.8 and 28.5 
degrees Celsius (0C), and minimum of 18.8 and 17.10C respectively.  
100.  The overall annual and seasonal maximum temperatures reported to have positive 
trend in the country. The annual maximum temperature is increasing at the rate of 0.056 
0C  and  minimum  temperature  is  rising  at  the  rate  of  0.02  0C  per  year.  The  minimum 
temperature,  however,  has  reported  increasing  only  in  monsoon  season.  The  trend  of 
annual maximum temperature is increasing with the elevation from South to North. Terai 
and Siwalik regions have increasing trend of 0.021 and 0.03 0C while Mid-Mountain, High 
Mountain  and  High  Himal  are  becoming  hotter  by  0.052,  0.068  and  0.860C  each  year 
respectively. The minimum annual temperature has opposite trend with respect to increase 
in elevation, trend is higher in Terai (0.018 0C) and Siwalik (0.016 0C) than Mid mountain 
(0.010C),  High  Mountain  (-0.0050C)  and  High  Himal  (-0.0150C);  though  trends  in  High 
Mountain  and  High  Himal  are  insignificant38.  Unlike  the  clear  trend  of  temperature,  the 
trend of overall precipitation is less clear. only in a few districts like Mahottari, Saptari in 
Terai, the pre-monsoon and monsoon precipitations show upwards trends  by nearly 1.5 
mm  per  year  while  pre-monsoon  precipitation  shows  a  negative  trend  in  the  high 
Himalayan  region.  Comparing  to  the  physiographic  regions,  only  Terai  shows  a  positive 
trend  of  0.49  mm  per  year  and  other  all  regions  have  negative  trends:  Siwalik  -1.48 
mm/yr, Mid Mountain -1.58 mm/yr, High Mountain -3.17 mm/yr and High Himalays -1.46 
mm/yr (DHM, 2017).  
101.  MoFE,  2018  suggests  predictions  for  medium  (2016-2045)  and  long  (2035-2065) 
term  climate  change  scenarios  for  Nepal  corresponding  to  the  2030s  and  2050s 
respectively-.  Its  findings  suggest  that  temperature  variables  are  expected  to  increase 
continuously throughout the twenty-first century. Mean temperature could rise by 0.9-1.1 
0C  in  the  medium-term  and  1.3-1.80C  in  the  long-term  periods.  The  temperature  is 
projected to increase for all seasons, the highest rates of mean temperature increase is 
expected for the post monsoon and winter seasons. Average annual precipitation is likely 
to increase by 2-6% in the medium-term and 8-12% in the long term periods compared 
to reference period’s (1981-2010) average of 1830 mm (MoFE, 2018).  
102.  Climate extreme indices describe the changes in five extreme events for precipitation 
and six for the temperature. The number of very wet and extremely wet days has predicted 
to  increase  by  0.3  to  2.2  days  and  0.9  to  1  day  respectively  in  medium  term.  It  may 
additionally support to current trend of landslide and erosion. The number of rainy days is 
decreasing in both scenarios by 3 to 1.6 days. Warm days, warm nights and warm spell 
duration are seem to be increased in a good number of days which will attribute the overall 
rise in temperature in future periods. The prediction in decrease of cold nights and days 
might be associated with the increase in temperature. The elaboration of indices is listed 
in annex VII.  
38 all ‘insignificant trend’ are significant to 95% confidence level unless stated otherwise, 
same applies to the significant which is the significant to 95% or higher confidence level  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Table 5: Extreme events scenarios 
Indices 
Very wet (rainy) days  
Extremely wet days  
Number of rainy days  
Consecutive dry days  
Consecutive wet days  
Warm days 
Warm nights 
Cold days 
Cold nights 
Warm spell duration 
index 
Cold spell duration index 
No of annual 
days in 
reference period  
(1981-2010) 
18.1 
3.5 
166.4 
45.3 
78.1 
36.5 
36.5 
36.5 
36.5 
17.6 
20.3 
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
Medium-term  Medium-term 
% 
Days  % 
Days 
1.5 
26.3 
-1.8 
6 
-4.2 
64.5 
81.4 
0.3 
0.9 
-3 
2.7 
-3.3 
23.9 
30.5 
12.1 
28 
-0.9 
-1.6 
3.1 
71.4 
101 
-42 
-15.4 
-40.7 
-15 
-55.8 
-54.1 
110 
19.3 
157.4 
2.2 
1 
-1.6 
-0.7 
2.5 
26.4 
37.8 
-20.5 
-19.9 
27.6 
-51.8 
-10.5 
-55.1 
-11.2 
103.  VITA will primarily focus in twenty-eight districts of states two (8), three (8) and five 
(12). In States one and six, the programme will primarily provide financing to farmers and 
MSMEs in partnership with the ongoing IFAD funded projects namely Rural Enterprises and 
Remittances  Project  (RERP)  in  State  one  and  Agriculture  Sector  Development  Project 
(ASDP) in State six. 
Figure 3: VITA working districts and physiographic zones 
104.  The selected programme working districts lie in different physiographic zones ranging 
from low land (Terai) to the High Mountains, and from the east to west of Nepal. Most of 
the  districts  (26)  stretch  into  two  or  more  physiographic  zones.  To  improve  clarity,  this 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
SECAP note has clustered programme working districts into two physiographic zones39 that 
share similar climate status and trend analysis; i) Terai and Siwalik, and ii) Mid and High 
mountains.  Some  of  the  districts  in  which  the  programme  will  be  working  also  include 
some  High  Himal  areas.  However,  the  programme  will  not  have  interventions  in  these 
locations.  The  programme  will  only  have  operations  in  the  Terai/Siwalik  and  Mid/High 
Mountains regions. 
105.  In addition, to provide more in-depth analysis where relevant, the two main zones 
of Terai/Siwalik and Mid/High Mountain are further divided into three east-west zones given 
some variation in climate status and trends along this east-west axis.  
Table 6 Programme priority district list 
East-
west 
zone 
Terai and Siwalik 
Physiographic regions/districts  
Mid and High 
Mountain  
High Himal 
Provinces 
Eastern  Two 
Central 
Three 
Saptari, Siraha, 
Dhanusha, Mahottari, 
Sarlahi,Rautahat, 
Bara,Parsa 
Chitwan 
Western  Five 
Nawalparasi East, 
Banke, Bardiya, 
Dang, Kapilvastu, 
Rupandehi 
Makawanpur,Sindhuli, 
Dhading, 
SindhupalchokKavre, 
Nuwakot,Dolakha 
Arghakhanchi, Palpa, 
Pyuthan, Rolpa, Rukum 
East, Gulmi 
Terai and Siwalik 
106.  Terai and Siwalik zones are the southern part of Nepal stretching from East to West. 
It  consists  of  gently  sloping  recent  and  post-Pleistocene  alluvial  deposits  which  form  a 
piedmont plain south of the Himalayas. It is bordered by the Indian Gangetic plain in the 
south  and  the  Siwalik  Physiographic  region  in  the  north.  Terai  is  located  in  sub-tropical 
climatic zone characterized by hot and humid summers, intense monsoon rain, and dry 
winters. 40 
107.  Siwalik  is  the  youngest  mountain  range  in  the  Himalayas,  a  narrow  region  of 
transition from Terai to Mountains, typically only 10-50 km width. Just north of the Terai, 
it runs the entire length of southern Nepal, from east to west, skirting the southern flanks 
of  the  Himalayas.  Low  elevations  fall  in  the  sub-tropical  climate  zone  whereas  high  hill 
spurs  fall  in  the  warm  temperate  climatic  zones.  Since  the  Siwalik  hills  are  structurally 
weak  and  highly  vulnerable  to  erosion  and  other  hazards;  this  fragility  poses  a  big 
challenge not just for people in Siwalik but for those who live in downstream lowland areas 
in the Terai. In general, this region has steep and broken terrain, and shallow, droughty 
soils  with  low  surface  infiltration  and  percolation  rates  making  it  the  most  erodible  and 
fragile.  
39 Based on the DFRS, 2015. State of Nepal’s Forests. Forest Resource Assessment (FRA) Nepal. Department of 
Forest Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmanu Nepal; and it’s sub-reports.  
40 DFRS. 2014b. Churia Forests of Nepal. Forest Resource Assessment Nepal Project, Kathmandu. Department 
of Forest Research and Survey 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
108.  VITA will be working in fifteen districts of Terai and Siwalik regions extending from 
east to west of Nepal. All the districts are stretched from Terai to Siwalik regions, except 
Chitwan and Banke which are confined only in Siwalik.  
Table 7: Programme locations: Terai and Siwalik 
East west Zone 
Provinces  Districts  
Eastern and Central  
Two 
Central  
Western  
Three 
Five 
Saptari, Siraha, Dhanusha, Mahottari, 
Sarlahi,Rautahat, Bara,Parsa 
Chitwan 
Nawalarasi East, Banke, Bardiya, Dang, Kapilvastu, 
Rupandehi 
Trends and Scenario 
a) Precipitation  
109.  The annual average precipitation in VITA working Terai and Siwalik districts ranges 
from slightly over 1200 (Banke district) to 1953 (Nawalparasi district) mm per year with 
the average of 1515 mm per year. Dhanusa, Mahottari, and Siraha are among the lowest 
annual  rainfall  districts  with  nearly  1300  mm  and  Bara,  Chiwan,  and  Rupandehi  have 
highest rainfall over the 1600 mm. The average annual rainfall in VITA working western 
districts  is  recorded  slightly  higher  with  average  of  1561  mm  than  the  eastern  districts 
having  average  rainfall  of  1447  mm.  Monsoon  rain  serves  more  than  80%  of  the  total 
rainfall in this region while winter has lowest precipitation in all districts.  
110.  The annual precipitation is increasing in Terai region at the rate of 0.49 mm while 
Siwalik  is  facing  decreasing  rainfall  by  1.48  mm  per  annum.  Winter  and  pre-monsoon 
rainfall has positive trend and post monsoon rainfall is decreasing for both regions.  
111.  Winter annual precipitation has negative trend by nearly 0.2 mm for all the east and 
central  districts  while  western  districts  have  positive  trend  of  0.18  (Rupandehi)  to  0.41 
(Bardiya) mm per  year. Post monsoon rainfall trend is negative for all districts, likewise 
monsoon  precipitation  trend  is  also  negative  except  Chitwan,  Nawalparasi,  Banke  and 
Bardiya districts. 
112.  The  districts  are  predicted  to  be  wetter  in  upcoming  years.  It  is  predicted  that 
precipitation will increase by 2.1-5.4% in Terai and 1.6-5.8% in Siwaliks for the medium 
term (2016-2045) than the reference period of 1981-2010.  
113.  The trend of extremely wet days is neutral, neither increasing nor decreasing. Rainy 
days are increasing in districts but only 0.1 to 0.3 days a year, except Chitwan and Dang 
where rainy days are neutral and a negative trend of 0.1 days a year respectively. Likewise 
consecutive wet and very wet days are mostly positive in districts but in nominal rate of 
0.1 to 0.3 days a year.  
114.  At  present,  the  key  water  related  problems  of  Terai  and  Siwalik  are  landslide  and 
flood. Siwalik hills are structurally fragile and highly vulnerable to landslide and erosions 
posing threat to lowlands of Terai.  Increasing trends of rainy, consecutive wet and  very 
wet  days  may  additionally  support  to  the  current  trend  of  erosion  and  landslide  in  this 
region.  
b) Temperature 
115.  The normal maximum temperature is highest in Terai and Siwalik compared to other 
physiographic regions. The maximum temperate is averaged between 200C-250C in winter 
season, 300C-350C in pre-monsoon, monsoon and post monsoon seasons. With the annual 
average of above 300C, Terai district has the highest annual maximum temperature. The 
normal minimum temperature in ranges in winter from 100C to 150C, pre-monsoon 150C 
to 200C, monsoon 300C to 350C, and post monsoon 15-200C. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
116.  The  average  minimum  and  maximum  temperatures  of  Terai  and  Siwalik  districts 
throughout the east to west do not show any significant differences. The maximum annual 
average temperature was recorded almost similar to the average temperature of Terai and 
Siwalik.  Few  districts  like  Rautahat  (21.7),  Sarlahi  (15.2),  and  Dang  (14.1)  have  low 
annual average maximum temperature than the regional average. Similar to the maximum 
temperature, average annual minimum temperature is also highest in Terai for all seasons. 
The minimum annual average temperature for districts ranges from 17 to 18 oC while few 
districts  such  as  Rautahat  (10.5),  Sarlahi  (6),  and  Dang  (3.4)  have  recorded  lower 
temperature than the regional average.  
117.  Annual trend is higher with the increase in elevation that is increasing from south to 
north. Terai is warming at the rate of 0.0210C per year and Siwalik shows a positive trend 
of 0.0300C. The seasonal and annual maximum temperature trends show increases in all 
regions, expect Terai in winter season. The reason for negative trend might be due to the 
long episode of fog events in winter since the last decade.  
Table 8: Maximum Temperature trend - Terai and Siwalik 
Physiographic 
Regions 
Terai  
Winter 
Pre-
monsoon 
Monsoon 
Post-
monsoon 
Annual 
Trend 
(oC/y) 
-0.004 
α 
0 
α 
0 
Trend 
(oC/y) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/y) 
Trend 
(oC/y) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/y) 
α 
0.018  ***  0.036 
** 
0.028 
*** 
0.021 
Siwaliks  
0.010 
Note: * 95%, ** 99% and *** 99.9% Significant; '+' & '0': 
Insignificant at 95% 
0.031  ***  0.040 
0 
* 
*** 
0.033 
*** 
0.030 
118.  The trend of minimum temperature increment is also positive in all seasons in both 
regions.  Minimum  temperature  increment  trend  shows  a  pattern  of  decreasing  with  the 
increase  in  elevation.  Post  monsoon  trends  for  both  reasons  were  insignificant  at  95% 
confidence  level  while  other  were  significant  at  95%  or  higher  confidence  level.  Figure 
three shows the minimum temperature increment trend is higher in both regions compared 
to the maximum temperature.  
Table 9 Minimum temperature trend - Terai and Siwalik 
Physiographic 
Regions 
Winter 
Pre- 
monsoon 
Monsoon 
Post- 
monsoon 
Annual 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α  Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
Tarai 
Siwaliks 
**  0.025 
*  0.015 
***  0.015 
0  0.013 
***  0.018 
* 
0.016 
*  0.013 
***  0.015 
0  0.013 
***  0.016 
119.  The minimum temperature increment is higher in eastern districts averaging 0.024 
than that of western districts’ average of 0.013 oC per year.  
120.  Change in temperature  is likely to be positive in all districts under both scenarios. 
Terai and Siwalik are expected to warm by 0.93 to 1.11 oC in medium term.  
121.  Extreme climate trends: Warm days are increasing at the average rate of 3.36 days 
per year while number of cool days is mostly decreasing in districts ranging from 0.1 to 
0.4 days per year. Sarlahi and Nawalparasi districts are neutral in cold days’ trend while 
Parsa  and  Rautahat  have  increasing  cold  days  at  the  rate  of  0.1  and  0.2  days  a  year 
respectively.  Warm  spell  duration  is  slightly  increasing  up  to  0.2  days  a  year  except  in 
Rautahat  where  trend  is  noticed  decreasing  by  0.1  days  a  year.  Warms  nights  are 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
increasing  at  the  average  rate  of  0.58  days  a  year  in  districts  and  cold  nights  are 
decreasing by 0.1 to 0.6 days a year. Cold spell duration is decreasing up to the 0.2 days 
a year, a few western districts namely Bardiya and Dang have positive trend of 0.1 and 
0.2 days respectively and other central and western districts have neutral trend.  
122.  The rise in temperature and the prolonging trend of warm and consecutive dry days 
in these regions may impact on value chain by additionally making favourable situation for 
disease and pest, demand more water and increase heat stress to the livestock. According 
to the agriculture specialist, the rise in temperature will have positive impact on overall 
production of vegetable, crops and honey in this region.  
c) Districts climate vulnerability  
123.  Among the 15 selected VITA districts in Terai and Siwalik regions, eight districts are 
moderate to very low in all given six and a combined vulnerability indices. Bara  falls  in 
high  vulnerable  category  for  rainfall  and  temperature,  and  flood  and  is  categorized  as 
moderate  for  overall  vulnerability  indices.  Out  of  the  rest  six  districts,  Saptari  is 
categorized as overall very high vulnerable districts and the remaining five fall under the 
high category.  
 Table 10 District vulnerability – Terai and Siwalik 
Districts  
Rainfall 
temp 
Ecological  Landslide  Flood 
Draught  GLOF 
Overall 
Bara 
Dhanusa 
Mahottari 
Parsa 
Saptari 
Siraha 
Chitawan 
Sarlahi 
Rautahat 
Nawalparasi 
Banke 
Bardiya 
Dang 
Kapilbastu 
Rupandehi 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Very High  Moderate 
Very High 
High 
Very High 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Moderate 
Very Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Very Low 
Low 
High 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low  Moderate 
Very Low 
Very Low  Moderate 
Very Low 
Very Low  Moderate 
Very Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Very Low  Moderate 
High 
High 
Very Low  High 
Very High  Moderate  Very Low  High 
High 
Very Low  High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Very High  Very Low 
Very High  Very Low  High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Moderate  Very Low  Moderate 
Moderate  Very Low  Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate  Very Low 
Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Moderate  Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low  Very Low 
High 
Low 
Very High 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Mid and High Mountain  
124.  Mid Mountain lie north of Siwalik along the southern flanks of the Himalaya covering 
55  districts.  Mid-mountain’s  climate  ranges  from  sub-tropical  in  river  valleys  to  warm 
temperature  in  valleys  to  cool  temperature  in  the  high  hills.  These  are  the  barriers  to 
monsoon clouds, hence high precipitation occur on the southern slopes of the mountains. 
The High Mountain ranges from warm-temperature in the valleys to cool-temperature in 
the higher hill and Arctic in the mountainous region (DFRS 2014 a,b).  
125.  Table below presents the list of districts that ranges from mid to high-mountain. VITA 
aims to work in the mid-mountain districts and also in the lower part of high-mountain 
districts those with the access of road and irrigation.  
Table 11: Mid and High Mountain districts 
Provinces   Districts  
Three 
Dolakha, Sindhupalchok, Makawanpur, Sindhuli,  Dhading, 
Nuwakot,Kavre 
Arghakhanchi, Palpa,Pyuthan, Rolpa, Rukum East, Gulmi 
Five 
Zones 
Center  
West  
Trend and Scenario 
a) Precipitation  
126.  The average annual precipitation in Mid and High Mountains are 1628 and 1528 mm 
per year respectively.  Similar to Terai and Siwalik regions, monsoon serves nearly 80% 
of the rainfall followed by Pre monsoon 13% and 3 to 4% in winter and post monsoon. 
VITA working districts in these two regions have the annual rainfall ranging from 1292 mm 
(Rukum) to 2186 mm a year in Nuwakot.   
127.  The  overall  precipitation  shows  negative  trends  for  both  mid  and  high-  mountain 
regions. Mid Mountain has a decreasing trend of 1.58 mm a year while High Mountain is 
facing 3.17 mm per year decline. All the seasons have a negative trend of rainfall from 0.4 
to  1.2  mm  per  year  except  winter  and  pre-monsoon  in  mid-mountain  regions  where 
precipitation recorded increasing at the trend of 0.03 mm per year.  
128.  The precipitation is predicted to increase in both regions under both scenarios, RCP 
4.5 and RCP 8.5. The medium term (2016-2045) change in precipitation ranges from 2.1 
to 5.8% for mid-mountain and 1.7 to 6.3% in high-mountain. Increase in precipitation will 
be a good relief in agriculture and livestock farming in mid to high-mountain areas which 
has negative precipitation trend in past three decades. Relative to Terai and Siwalik area, 
this  area  has  less  access  in  irrigation  and  more  dependency  on  rainfall.  A  predicted 
increase in precipitation will be helpful for the proposed VITA interventions 
129.  The  trend  of  rainy  days  is  neutral  in  Makawanpur  and  Sindhuli  districts,  and  is 
decreasing in Dolakha by 0.2 days and in Nuwakot and Dhading districts by 0.3 days. The 
rest of the districts have increasing trend of 0.1 to 0.5 days a year. The consecutive dry 
days are neutral in Makawanpur, Sindhupalchok and Kavre districts, are increasing from 
0.2  to  0.6  days  a  year  in  central  districts  while  the  western  districts  are  facing  decline 
trend of 0.2 to 0.4 days a year. Consecutive wet days have mixed trends, neutral in three 
VITA working districts (Makawanpur, Sinduli, and Palpa), decreasing by 0.2 to 0.3 days a 
year for Dolakha, Nuwakot and Dhading and the rest districts have a positive trend of 0.2 
to 0.7 days a year. Very wet and extremely wet days are either neutral or decreasing by 
0.1 to 0.3 days per year.  
b) Temperature  
130.  The annual average maximum temperatures of mid and high mountains are 24.6 0C 
and 17.6  0C and the minimum drops down to 13.3 and 6.60C respectively. Both regions 
have highest average temperature in monsoon followed by post and pre monsoon periods.   
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
131.  Western VITA working districts have slightly higher maximum temperature averaging 
270C  than  the  average  of  240C  in  central  district.  Dolakha  with  average  of  14.80C  has 
lowest  maximum  temperature  while  Rolpa  has  the  highest  with  30.80C.    The  minimum 
temperature in district has recorded up to 50C (Dolakha) and Rolpa as a highest with nearly 
190C.  
132.  The  warming  trend  of  high-mountain  is  higher  than  the  mid-mountain.  Maximum 
temperature  trend  of  high-mountain  is  positive  in  all  seasons  but  the  minimum 
temperature is slightly positive only in monsoon. The maximum temperature is increasing 
by 0.0520C while minimum temperature is decreasing by 0.005 0C per year.  
Table 12 Maximum temperature trend – Mid and High Mountain 
Physiographic 
Regions 
Winter 
Pre- 
monsoon 
Monsoon 
Post- 
monsoon 
Annual 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
Mid Mountain 
***  0.046 
*** 
0.049 
***  0.055 
*** 
0.052 
*** 
0.052 
High Mountains 
High Himalayas 
***  0.070 
***  0.101 
*** 
*** 
0.062 
0.076 
***  0.064 
***  0.072 
*** 
*** 
0.064 
0.085 
*** 
*** 
0.068 
0.086 
Note: Significant: * 95% CL, ** 99% CL and *** 99.9% CL ; insignificant at 95% CL : + , 0 
133.  Both  maximum  and  minimum  temperature  have  positive  trend  in  mid-mountain 
region. The increment trend of maximum temperature  (0.050C) is recorded higher than 
the minimum temperature increment trend of 0.0100C.   
Table 13 Minimum temperature trend – Mid and High Mountain 
Physiographic 
Regions 
Winter 
Pre- 
monsoon 
monsoon 
Post- 
monsoon 
Annual 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
α 
Trend 
(oC/yr) 
Mid Mountain 
High  M ountains 
High Himalayas 
0 
0.004 
+ 
** 
-0.018 
-0.056 
0 
0 
+ 
0.004 
** 
0.014 
0  0.006 
-0.011 
-0.021 
* 
0 
0.013 
0.013 
0 
-0.013 
+  -0.025 
* 
0 
+ 
0.010 
-0.005 
-0.015 
134.  The  maximum  temperature  trend  is  positive  for  all  VITA  working  districts  in  all 
seasons. The average ranges from 0.034 (Arghakanchi) to 0.0640C (Rukum) in districts. 
Unlike maximum temperature trend, minimum temperature trend was not significant for 
all seasons   
135.  Temperature  is  predicted  to  increase  in  both  mid  and  high  mountain  areas.    Mid 
mountain  seems  warmer  by  0.9  to  1.060C  in  medium  term  (2016-2045)  and  the  High 
Mountain  is  expected  to  face  increase  in  temperature  by  0.89  to  1.040C.    Increase  in 
temperature will have mixed impacts in mountain areas. Studies have shown vegetation 
shift toward the uphill side due to increase in temperature resulting new species in hill and 
mountain areas. This is creating an opportunity to introduce new varieties at those sites 
and the other hand also affecting by the presence of new invasive species. Temperature 
increase has shown impact on the crop’s maturity duration reducing the time to harvest.  
136.  Warm days and warm nights are increasing in all Programme working districts by 0.5 
to  1.3  days  a  year.    Warm  spell  duration  is  increasing  by  0.2  to  0.4  days  a  year  in  all 
districts  and  cold  spell  has  mostly  neutral  or  increased  up  to  0.2  days  a  year  expect 
Sindhuli, Kavre and Rolpa where it has decreasing trend of 0.1 to 0.2 days. Cool days are 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
decreasing in all districts by 0.3 to 1.1 days a year and the cool nights have shown a mixed 
trend.  
c) District climate vulnerability  
137.  The combined vulnerability of four districts out of 13 mid and high mountain districts, 
are categorized low to very low category. Another five districts are ‘moderate’ and one is 
‘low’  vulnerable  in  combined  indices  however  ranked  ‘high’  vulnerable  in  at  least  one 
vulnerability indices.  Dhading is ranked ‘high’ and Dolakha is categorized as ‘very high’ 
vulnerable districts. 
Table 14 District's vulnerability 
Districts  
Rainfall 
temp 
Moderate 
Very High 
Moderate 
Nuwakot 
Makwanpur 
Sindhuli 
Sindhupalchok  High 
Moderate 
Rolpa 
High 
Rukum 
Moderate 
Dhading 
High 
Dolakha 
Very Low 
Pyuthan 
Gulmi 
Very Low 
Arghakhanchi  Very Low 
Very Low 
Palpa 
Ecological  Landslide  Flood 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Combined 
Draught  GLOF 
Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
Moderate  Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
Moderate 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Very Low 
Very Low  High 
Moderate 
Very Low 
Very Low  High 
High 
High 
Very Low  High 
Very High 
Very Low  High 
Very High 
Low 
Very Low  Moderate  Very Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Very Low  Moderate  Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Very Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Conclusions on climate trends and implications 
138.  Rainfall 
i) 
Over the 25 year time horizon of programme impacts, the expected cumulative total 
change in annual rainfall are very small to small – from +0.8% in the Terai to -4.9% 
in the High Hills where annual rainfall would remain around 1450mm per year. Only 
the Terai region shows a positive precipitation trend of 0.49 mm per year with respect 
to average rainfall of 1600 mm per year, the rest of the regions have negative trend. 
The  highest  negative  trend  is  in  high-mountain  (-3.17  mm/year  versus  1528 
mm/year)  followed  by  mid-mountain  (-1.58mm/year  versus  1628/year  average 
rainfall)  and  Siwaliks  (-1.48  mm/year  versus  1708mm/year  average  rainfall).  The 
pattern of decreasing rainfall trend with elevation is noticed in annual precipitation 
trend. In terms of the relative change High Mountain shows the greatest change at 
0.021% decrease per year.  
ii) 
The  relatively  small  changes  in  total  annual  rainfall  are  expected  to  have  minimal 
impacts on the programme interventions or sustainability of impacts. 
139.  Temperature 
i) 
Maximum annual temperature is increasing in all Programme working districts. The 
temperature trend increases northward with the increase in elevation. Terai has the 
lowest positive trend (0.021  0C/year) while the High  Himal region has the highest 
increasing trend of 0.086 0C per annum.  
ii)  Minimum  annual  temperature  is  increasing  in  Terai  to  mid-mountain  districts.  The 
annual  minimum  temperature  trends  show  opposite  to  the  pattern  of  maximum 
temperature trend in relation to elevation. The trends are positive in lower elevation 
districts and negative in higher elevation districts.  
iii)  Average annual temperature will continue to rise by about 0.9-1.10C in the medium-
term period and 1.2-1.80C in the long period. The rise in temperature will be sharper 
in the high mountains than lower elevation.  
iv)  Over the medium to longer term, the increase in temperature over the Programme 
intervention areas will have some positive changes, such as the opportunity to grow 
additional varieties of vegetable, and other agricultural species in hilly areas, shorten 
the maturity and harvesting time, and increase in production in hilly areas. On the 
other hand, it has been noticed that the increase in temperature  can increase the 
diseases,  insects  and  pests  in  agriculture  and  livestock.  Hilly  areas  may  be 
additionally impacted by the new diseases, insects and pest. Among the proposed 
VITA commodities; vegetable, seed potato, cereal seeds, spice, citrus fruit, and goat 
meat may have some impacts from increase in disease and pest load while the milk 
production  may  be  lowered  season  due  to  the  heat  stress,  especially  in  the  lean. 
Increase in heat will prolong the season to collect food for bees hence it is expected 
to increase in honey production. Banana, pond base fisheries are reported to be less 
impacted by increase of 10C temperature.  
140.  Extreme events 
i) 
The  trends  of  extreme  events  are  mixed  in  different  districts.  Rainy  days  are 
increasing  in  average  0.2-0.3  days  expect  in  few  districts  like  Dang,  Dhading  and 
Nuwakot where it is decreasing by 0.2 to 0.3 days a year. Consecutive dry days are 
decreasing in an average of 0.2-0.3 day per annum and consecutive wet days are 
increasing in same range. Very wet days are in nominal negative trend of 0.1-0.3 
days per annual where as extremely wet day shows neutral trend. Warm days are 
increasing  by  0.2-1.3  days  a  year  and  cool  days  are  decreasing  by  almost  same 
trend. Warm nights are increasing with the average of 0.4-0.6 days a year and the 
cool nights have the same but decreasing trend. Warm spell is increasing by average 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
0.3-0.5 days per annum and cool spell duration has mixed trend in districts ranging 
between -0.2 to +0.2 days a year.  
ii) 
In the medium term (2016-2046), it is predicted to increase very wet and extremely 
wet days by 0.3 to 2.2 and 0.9 to 1 days with respect to annual days of 18.1 and 3.5 
days respectively. The number of rainy days will decrease by 1 to 3 days from the 
reference  period  of  166.4  days  a  year,  and  consecutive  wet  days  is  expected  to 
change between -4.2 to + 2.5 days from 78.1 days.  
iii)  Over  the  25  year  horizon  of  programme  impacts,  such  changes  in  number  and 
duration  of  extreme  events  are  relatively  small  given  the  inherent  variability  of 
Nepal’s weather from year to year, and so are expected to have minimal effects on 
programmes impacts. 
Impact of Climate Change on VITA interventions  
141.  The key climate risks to the selected value chain commodities due to the predicted 
increase  in  temperature  by  nearly  1.10C  over  the  medium-term  period  (2016-2046), 
particularly at higher elevations, are  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
the increase and intensification of new and existing diseases, pest and insects 
by  making  favourable  temperature  from  them  to  grow  and  spread  over  the 
existing and even new areas (higher altitude), it has predicted to impact all the 
selected agriculture value chains and livestock like goat, and milk;  
greater  variability  in  rainfall  patterns  within  the  year  combined  with  increase 
water demand for production leading to increasing risks for rainfed production  
increased heat stress to cattle reducing the milk production in the lean season 
and also to the poultry form impacting the growth of chickens;  
142.  Along  with  these,  it  the  predicted  temperature  increment  has  also  some  positive 
impacts on value chains including: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
creating opportunities of new vegetable and crop varieties in higher altitude; 
increasing yields and extend production seasons of vegetable and crops;  
favourable  condition  for  bees  to  collect  more  raw  materials  in  extended 
production seasons resulting increase in honey production.  
143.  The  number  of  warm  days,  warm  nights  and  warm  spell  duration  index  are  in 
increasing trend and also predicted to increase in medium term period. This may create 
problems of temporary water availability the proposed commodities in locations with less 
secure water resources or water storage.  
144.  The degree of rainfall change seems nominal in districts and may not have noticeable 
impacts on the selected value chains. The predicted increase in wet days (0.3 to 2.2 days) 
and extremely wet days (0.9 to 1 days) over the medium term period may induce some 
additional flooding and landslides; however the increase number of days and impacts over 
the thirty years is minimal.  
145.  The table below summarizes the potential impact of climate change to the proposed 
commodities and the solution measures planned by the Programme. It has been compiled 
through discussion with production experts of the likely technical impacts on production of 
the above climate changes:  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Table 15 Impacts of Climate Change on commodities 
SN  Commodity   Climate risk to 
1  Vegetable  
2  Goat  
supply chain  
Irregular rainfall 
and consecutive dry 
days may cause 
temporary shortage 
of water  
Concentrated and 
heavy rainfall may 
accelerate flood and 
landslide  
Increase in 
temperature may 
result more pest, 
diseases and 
insects   
Hailstone and 
storms – physical 
damage to fruiting 
crops 
Increase in 
temperature may 
change in disease 
timing and 
outbreaks  
Risk 
significance 
Low to 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low to 
Medium 
3  Milk 
Increase in 
temperature may 
change in disease 
timing and 
outbreaks  
Low to 
Medium 
Medium 
Increase in 
temperature may 
rise the heat stress 
on animals resulting 
decrease in milk 
production, 
especially in lean 
season (30-40%, 
natural level) 
Solution measures  
i) Establish and maintenance of small 
irrigation system, ii) promotion of water 
efficient technologies, infield water 
harvesting, conservation ponds, 
mulching iii) green house tunnel with 
drip irrigation  
i) Appropriate site selection: traditional 
site selection by farmer, ii) promotion of 
better practices like terracing, 
agroforestry, hedgerow plantation  
i) Disease risk monitoring, ii) easy access 
and promote disease resistant and better 
varieties, iii) reduce monocropping and 
promote diversification in cropping, iv) 
provision of nets in green house, v) 
integrated pest management    
i) protect using nets and poly tunnels, ii) 
multilayer farming, and iii) crop 
insurance  
i) Provision of proper monitoring, ii) 
improved breed selection and good 
husbandry,  iii) easy access and effective 
animal health services, iv) forage based 
feeding, v) improved biosecurity via stall 
based production system, vi) livestock 
insurance, vii) policy engagement on 
surveillance and monitoring and vaccine 
supply 
ii) Provision of proper monitoring, ii) 
improved breed selection and good 
husbandry,  iii) easy access and effective 
animal health services, iv) forage based 
feeding, v) improved biosecurity via stall 
based production system, vi) livestock 
insurance, vii) policy engagement on 
surveillance and monitoring and vaccine 
supply 
i) proper selection of breed as per the 
locality that helps to adjust with 
temperature, ii) good management 
practice and easy access of medicine, iii) 
milk shortage during summer: increase 
investment on processing (milk powder, 
UHT) that allows storage to milk supply 
from flush to lean season;  iv) Improved  
fodder and feeder production and feeding 
practices  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
SN  Commodity   Climate risk to 
4 
Pond based 
fish farming   
supply chain  
Increase in the 
number of wet and 
extremely wet days 
may cause flood 
Risk 
significance 
Medium  
Increase in 
temperature  
Low   
5  Banana 
Wind, Storm, 
Hailstone 
Medium  
6  Seed Potato   Water shortage due 
Low  
to irregular rainfall 
and long dry spell 
7  Cereal seed 
(Maize and 
Paddy) 
Medium  
Increase in 
temperature may 
cause epidemic 
disease outbreak of 
Blight 
Increase in 
consecutive dry 
days may cause 
demand of more  
water  
Increase in 
temperature may 
increase diseases 
and pest  
Low  
Medium  
Increase in number 
of extremely wet 
days may cause 
flood and landslide  
Medium  
Solution measures  
i) Additional works to protect ponds like 
raised banks, ii) alternatives to avoid 
loss of fish due to flood by managing fish 
nets or making store tanks inside of the 
pond, iii) provision of fish / restocking 
insurance   
i) select appropriate variety of fish as per 
the locality, ii) improve management 
practices by adding shade nets and pond 
bank plantation, iii) Improved aeration of 
ponds to improve water and fish heath 
and tolerance to heat stress  
This is a natural phenomena, increase in 
rainy days may increase the frequency of 
wind, storm and hailstone. The 
Programme will promote i) wind break 
plantation, ii) pole support to banana, iii) 
Improve solid mound to strength plant, 
and iv) crop insurance   
i) Proper site selection: areas with 
already available irrigation facilities, ii) 
addition measures to increase water 
availability by promoting water 
catchment pond, and construction or 
maintenance of small scale irrigation  
i) adoption of integrated pest 
management practice, ii)  promote a 
good soil health management by crop 
rotation, intercropping, mulching, proper 
selection of varieties etc, iii) provision of 
crop insurance iv) site selection, 
including focus on clusters in higher 
elevations with prolonged cold periods to 
reduce disease load. 
i) site selection: areas with adequate 
irrigation facilities, ii) drought resistant 
varieties  
i) adoption of integrated pest 
management practice, ii)  promote a 
good soil health management by crop 
rotation, intercropping, mulching, proper 
selection of varieties etc, iii) provision of 
crop insurance  
i) site selection: areas with lower risk of 
flooding ii) Variety selection for increased 
flood tolerance, iii) adjustment to 
planting schedules, including with 
improved medium term weather 
forecasts iv) Crop insurance  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
SN  Commodity   Climate risk to 
8  Citrus Fruit  
supply chain  
Increase the 
temperature may 
increase insect and 
diseases infestation 
Risk 
significance 
Low  
Solution measures  
i) suitable varieties selection, ii) 
intercropping and mix cropping to avoid 
more damage, iii) use of biopesticides , 
iv) facilitate to ease the access on new 
technologies v) promotion of fruit-bag 
production systems to reduce pest load 
and pesticide usage 
Increase in warm days may increase the 
production of honey  
Low  
i) site selection with adequate facility of 
irrigation, ii) varieties selection   
Medium  
Medium  
i) suitable varieties selection, ii) 
intercropping and mix cropping to avoid 
more damage, iii) use of biopesticides, 
iv) facilitate to ease the access on new 
technologies 
i) proper vaccination, ii) proper 
management to adjust external 
temperature, iii) insurance  
9  Honey 
10  MAPs 
11  Spice 
(Ginger/ 
Turmeric) 
12  Others 
(backyard 
Poultry) 
Increase the 
number of 
consecutive dry 
days demands more 
water  
Increase the 
temperature may 
increase insect and 
diseases infestation 
Increase the 
temperature may 
increase insect and 
diseases infestation 
146.  At  the  input  and  production  stage,  strategies  for  supporting  climate-smart  supply 
chains include the following: improving access to input markets, supporting diversification 
and value addition, provision of climate-smart production technologies, dissemination of 
climate information services, and making financial and insurance services available. At the 
harvesting,  processing  and  marketing  stages,  useful  interventions  would  include 
strengthening farmer organization to invest in their own facilities for storage or processing 
and  improving  access  to  output  markets.  Finally,  climate-change  adaptation  along  the 
supply chain would be improved by strengthening existing institutions, exploring public-
private partnerships and adopting coherent local policies. 
147.  An intervention's climate-smartness depends on whether it leads to adaptation and 
mitigation  benefits  in  the  specific  local  climate,  biophysical,  socio-economic  and 
development context41. Climate smart agriculture (CSA) aims to: a) sustainably increase 
production  and  income;  b)  adapt  and  build  resilience  to  climate  variability;  and  c) 
mitigate/reduce and/or remove greenhouse gas emission from agriculture practices42.  
148.  A  key  focus  of  the  Programme  will  be  to  increasingly  mainstream  climate 
consideration into production and investment decisions in the supported supply chains. At 
the farm level, this will be achieved by including dedicated modules within the business 
skills training program to provide farmers with practical knowledge and skills of where to 
access climate information and how to use it into their production and investment decision. 
These modules will draw on approaches such as tools under the Participatory Integrated 
41Williams TO, Mul M, Cofie OO (2015) Climate smart agriculture in the African context. Background Paper. 
Feeding Africa Conference 21-23 Oct 2015 
42Food and Agriculture Organization (2013) Climate smart agriculture sourcebook. FAO, Rome. 
http://www.fao.org/3/i3325e/i3325e.pdf  accessed on 08/09/2019  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Climate Services for Agriculture43 (PICSA) approach. This will include sessions on historical 
climatic trends and analysis of seasonal forecasts, its impacts on agricultural production, 
and  alternative  and  innovative  solutions  to  cope  with  current  climate  and  weather 
conditions. To  validate their choice of production, farmers will be supported to  compare 
their chosen product to several appropriate alternative options (crops, livestock and other 
livelihoods)  evaluated  through  a  simple  cost  benefit  analysis.  The  objective  being  that 
farmers  make  climate  informed  investment  choices,  factoring  in  ‘no  regret’  adaptations 
into their investment plans. The PICSA approach, or similar, will be customized to bring in 
a strong financing angle as part of the investment choices discussion, and train the farmers 
on  using  available  climate  information  services  as  part  of  their  business  as  usual,  i.e. 
consulting the seasonal forecast to decide which crops to grow and when to plant.  
149.  A  second  area  of  intervention  in  Component  1  is  to  improve  the  capacity  and 
coverage  of  service  providers  of  improved  climate-smart  technical  services  and 
technologies to ensure farmers have far easier access to such technologies. 
150.  At the institutional level, through Component 2, VITA will support banks and financial 
institutions  to  strengthening  their  climate  risk  assessment  tools  as  part  of  their 
mainstream  agricultural  loan  appraisal  processes.  This  will  include  banks  providing 
feedback to prospective farmer and MSME clients on any  elements  of their investments 
plans  which  may  create  heightened  risk  and  then  facilitating  links  to  technical  service 
providers  that  can  provide  further  specific  advice  and  equipment  to  improve  the  farm 
investments and its resilience to potential climate risks. 
6.  Climate change mitigation 
151.  Nepal is one among the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) with negligible (0.027%) 
share in global greenhouse gas emission but stands 4th in the world-wide ranking in terms 
of Climate Vulnerability Index. The emissions from agriculture sectors remain below 22000 
Gigagrams per year, see figures below44.  
Emissions (CO2 equivalent ), Agriculture 
total 
(1990-2014)
s
m
a
r
g
a
g
i
G
23000
22000
21000
20000
19000
18000
17000
16000
15000
14000
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Figure 4 Agriculture total emission, Nepal (FAOSTAT) 
43 See https://ccafs.cgiar.org/publications/participatory-integrated-climate-services-agriculture-picsa-field-
manual 
44faostat.org  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Burning-crop residue 
1%
Cultivation of Organic 
Soils
2%
Crop Residues
3%
Manure applied to 
Soils
3%
Manure left on 
Pasture
12%
Synthetic Fertilizers
2%
Rice Cultivation
18%
Manure Management
5%
Enteric Fermentation
54%
Emission by Agricultural sector
CO2 equivalent 
1990-2016 Average
Figure 5 Sectorial Agriculture emission (FAOSTAT) 
2.3 Target group profiles  
152.  The  Programme  will  target  small-scale  producers  and  labourers  involved  in  the 
selected  supply  chains.  Inclusion  of  small  farmers  and  food  insecure  population  will  be 
ensured  by  selecting  supply  chains  that  have  promise  to  benefit  the  largest  number  of 
poor and by promoting efficient and climate resilient technologies and climate resilient and 
profitable crop varieties and value chain commodity that benefit the intended target group 
most. Keeping in view of a large temporary economic migration in rural areas, attention 
will be paid to address the specific needs of the households headed de facto by women. 
This will involve selection of crops/livestock with high returns on labour and technologies 
that  are  labour  saving  and  help  reducing  drudgery  of  women.  Similarly,  disadvantaged 
households  including  Dalits,  Janajatis,  landless  and  other  disadvantaged  groups  will  be 
specifically targeted by the Programme.  
153.  Rural youth will also be a priority target groups, especially young women. Measure 
will include leveraging the NRB’s interest rate subsidy and collateral free credit mechanism 
to promote youth investment in farming as a businesses, and the programme will facilitate 
their involvement in producer groups, access to productive land for rent, business skills 
training and ICT based networking will be promoted. Youth will also be a key target for the 
support  market  development,  for  their  development  as  service  providers  in  their 
communities.  
154.  The  Programme  will  develop  mechanisms  such  as  beneficiary  selection  criteria 
favourable  for  poor  people,  time  and  venue  selection  for  activities  considering  the 
availability  of  marginalized  people;  timely  and  regular  assessment  of  poor  people 
participation; and benefit provisions that will ensure the participation of poor households 
in appropriate value chains. This will be achieved in part by expanding local agriculture 
employment  opportunities  associated  with  supply  chain-driven  growth.  The  programme 
will explicitly use a graduation approach for mobilization of poorer and more risk averse 
individuals, facilitating them to join producer groups ready to do so, enabling them to work 
alongside and learn from their more experienced neighbours while being able to benefit 
from the improved access to markets and services via the group. 
155.  A secondary target group will be the micro, small and medium entrepreneur (MSME) 
and  producer  groups  also  active  in  the  targeted  supply  chains.  New  technology  will  be 
introduced among first movers with addressing the risk bearing mechanisms and mobilize 
other  groups  with  demonstration  of  process,  results  and  profits.  Self-reflective  tools  to 
analyse the associated risks and challenges will be introduced through the Heifer Corner 
Stone approach and GALS ‘lite’ as part of the business skills training which will facilitate 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
more  the  vulnerable  sections  and  all  producers  to  be  aware  on  these  risks  and  find 
alternative ways for safe and effective investment. 
156.  A more detailed profile and analysis of the opportunities and constraints faced by the 
numerous different sub-groups differentiated by gender, age, socio-ethnicity, location and 
wealth status is included in Annex 8. 
7.  Institutional analysis 
Policy and regulatory framework 
157.  The implementation of all supply chain activities will be governed by the Constitution 
of  Nepal  and  environmental  acts,  rules,  policies  and  regulations  of  the  Government  of 
Nepal.  These  laws  and  regulations  guide  the  activities  to  minimize  or  mitigate  likely 
impacts  on  the  society  and  environment.  Additionally,  VITA  will  comply  with  the  IFAD 
safeguard policies.  
158.  The  constitution  of  Nepal,  2015  lists  the  fundamental  rights  and  duties  of  the 
country’s citizens that the Programme needs to respect while implementing its subproject 
activities; those includes:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Right to equality 
Right to clean environment  
Right relating to food  
Rights to housing  
Rights of child  
Right to social security  
159.  Furthermore,  the  constitution  imposes  restrictions  on  the  programme  activities  to 
prevent negative impacts on environment and biodiversity through the provisions;  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
Protect,  promote,  and  make  environmental  friendly  and  sustainable  use  of 
natural resources available in the country, in consonance with national interest 
and  adopting  the  concept  of  intergenerational  equity,  and  make  equitable 
distribution  of  fruits,  according  priority  and  preferential  right  to  the  local 
communities,  
Make multi-purpose development of water  resources, while according priority 
to domestic investment based on public participation,  
Ensure reliable supply of energy in an affordable and easy manner, and make 
proper  use  of  energy,  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  basic  needs  of  citizens,  by 
generating and developing renewable energy,  
Develop sustainable and reliable irrigation by making control of water induced 
disasters, and river management,  
Conserve,  promote,  and  make  sustainable  use  of,  forests,  wildlife,  birds, 
vegetation and bio-diversity, by mitigating possible risks to environment from 
industrial and physical development, while raising awareness of general public 
about environment cleanliness,  
Maintain the forest area in necessary lands for ecological balance,  
Adopt appropriate measures to abolish or mitigate existing or possible adverse 
environmental impacts on the nature, environment or biological diversity,  
Pursue the principles of environmentally sustainable development such as the 
principles  of  polluter  pays,  of  precaution  in  environmental  protection  and  of 
prior informed consent, and  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
ix) 
Make advance warning, preparedness, rescue, relief and rehabilitation in order 
to mitigate risks from natural disasters. 
160.  Nepal has recently transformed from  a unitary to federal government system with 
one federal government, seven State governments and 753 local governments (460 rural 
municipalities  and  293  urban  municipalities).  As  municipalities  have  now  devolved 
authority  for  local  development,  VITA  has  to  be  familiar  and  aligned  with  the  Local 
Government  Operation  Act  2017.  This  act  mandates  municipalities  to  formulate, 
implement, monitor, evaluate and regulate policy, legislation, standards, norms related to 
the development projects and programs. Specifically, the act mandates local governments 
to implement the projects and delivery of services related to (a) agriculture and animal 
husbandry  (b) 
legislations,  standards,  planning, 
implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  agricultural  production  management  (b) 
agricultural  and  livestock  market  information,  infrastructure  construction  of  market  and 
weekly  market,  construction  of  small  irrigation,  training,  technology  extension  and 
dissemination,  agricultural  inputs  supply  and  capacity  development  of  farmers,  in  their 
respective constituencies. 
formulation  of 
local  policies, 
161.  Environment  Protection  Act  1996  and  the  corresponding  Environment 
Protection  Rule  1997  regulate  environmental  issues.  The  act  has  listed  the  types  of 
project that requires an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) or Environmental Impact 
Assessment  (EIA)  in  the  prescribed  manner.  The  act  has  the  provision  of  a  separate 
Environment Protection Council to issue guidelines and provide views and suggestions to 
the Government of Nepal. Similarly, various committees may also be formed to handle the 
technical  work.  An  Environmental  Protection  Fund  is  also  established  by  the  Act.  A 
provision  is  also  provided  in  the  Act  for  compensation  to  the  persons  affected  by 
environmental pollution. 
162.  The Government of Nepal has formulated a Climate Change Policy in 2011 with 
the aim to improve livelihoods by mitigating and adapting to the adverse impacts of climate 
change,  adopting  a  low-carbon  emissions  socio-economic  development  path  and 
supporting  and  collaborating  in  the  spirits  of  county’s  commitments  to  national  and 
international agreements related to climate change. VITA should be familiar with policy’s 
key approaches: i) climate adaptation and risk reduction, ii) Low carbon development and 
climate resilience, iii) Access to financial resources and utilization, iv) Capacity building, 
people’s  participation  and  empowerment,  v)  Technology  development,  transfer  and 
utilization, and vi) climate friendly natural resource management.  
163.  VITA will promote sustainable agriculture and livestock practices. The use of chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides will be monitored for compliance with the prevailing regulations. 
Pesticides  Act,  2048  (1991)  and  Regulations,  2050  (1993)  regulates  use  of 
pesticides and as per the Pesticides Regulation 1993, the registration agency is responsible 
to evaluate the impacts of pesticides on human, animal, and environment. The authority 
can punish at any time if the general use of pesticides is found to make adverse impacts 
on human, animal, and environment. 
164.  The Programme may require to import plant products or medium for growing plants, 
for example for varietal trials. Plant Protection Act, 1972 and Regulation, 1974 has 
made it mandatory for the request of permission from the designated authorities to import 
plant products, biological control agents, beneficial insects, and medium for growing plants 
such as soil. The government may declare certain areas as pest infested areas and adopt 
necessary measures to destroy pests in those areas.  
165.  Selected  Programme  activities  directly  relate  to  the  water  use  and  management. 
Water  Resource  Act,  1992  and  Regulation,  2000  governs  the  water  resource 
management in Nepal. It declares the order of priority of water use; vests ownership of 
water; controls water pollution; and provides for the formation of Water Use Association 
(WUA) and system of licensing. The regulation sets out the procedure to register a WUA 
and to obtain a license and sets out the rights and obligations of WUA and licence holders.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
166.  Programme may have to require importing high varieties of livestock from India or 
other  countries.  Animal  Health  and  Animal  Services  Act,  2055  (1998)  and 
Regulations,  2056  (1999)  regulates  the  import  of  livestock.  The  Act  has  made 
requirement to obtain quarantine certificates from designated authorities for any individual 
or organizations importing animal and animal products.  
167.  VITA has targeted to strengthen meat and fisheries supply chains. The hygiene and 
quality of meat are regulated by Slaughterhouse and Meat Inspection Act, 2055 (1998) 
and  Regulations,  2056  (1999)  through  proper  management  of  slaughterhouse  and 
meat  sale.  This  Act  prohibits  establishing  a  slaughterhouse  or  becoming  a  meat  seller 
without obtaining license under this Act.  
168.  Solid wastage is generated at various point along agricultural supply chains. Solid 
Waste Management Act, 2011 outlines the duties of local government to take action to 
control hazardous waste generation, disposal or  collection and has provision for  various 
punitive measures against those engaged in activities detrimental to the intentions of the 
act. The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2013 has provided authority to local bodies 
for  the  segregation,  transportation,  and  disposal  of  solid  waste  as  well  as  operation  of 
sanitary landfill site. Local bodies may also empower Programme for segregating, reducing 
the  solid  wastes  at  its  source,  reuse  and  recycling  use  solid  wastes  and  mobilizes 
community  and  non-governmental  organization 
for  the 
management.  Local  government  also  has  the  authority  to  determine  service  charge  for 
solid waste management.  
for  creating  awareness 
Implementation institutional framework 
169.  Agriculture Development Bank Limited (ADBL) will be the Lead Programme Agency 
on behalf of the Government of Nepal with the responsibility of Programme execution. A 
detailed description of institutional arrangements for Programme implementation has been 
provided  in  the  main  report.  A  steering  committee  will  be  formed  at  the  central  level 
composed  of  members  from  National  Planning  Commission,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Nepal 
Rastra  Bank,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  Development,  state  government 
representatives,  and  financial  sector  representatives.  Heifer  International  with  Heifer 
Nepal  are  expected  to  be  co-financiers  and  implementing  partners  focusing  on  socio-
economic  mobilization  and  supply  chain  development  activities.  Partner  Financial 
Institutions including class A and Class D will be  eligible to apply for  subsidiary lines of 
credit under the Programme and the state and local governments will be the key partners 
to the Programme for overall coordination and investment in enable public infrastructure 
support of local supply chain and cluster development.  
170.  ADBL  is  a  registered  Class  A  commercial  bank  in  which  the  government  has  a 
controlling interest, (100% of preference shares, 51% of ordinary share, 49% public and 
staff). It has has 280 branch offices across the country, around 2,500 staff of which 500 
are agricultural graduates, agronomists and agribusiness experts, and it serves more than 
1.3  million  customers  (1,3  m.  depositors,  154,000  borrowers,  average  loan  size 
NR720,000  of  which  63,000  are  agricultural  borrowers  with  an  average  loan  size  of 
NR480,000).  32% of its current loan portfolio is for agriculture and forestry and 1% fishery 
related. The bank is profitable (net profit is NR4.35 bn. as of July 2019) despite its high 
level operational costs and high costs of loanable funds (with a base rate at 10.58%). 
171.  ADBL's range of financial products and services is quite unique in Nepal (including 
agriculture and livestock insurance, various digital banking options) and diversified. The 
bank  is  also  very  aspirational  to  become  a  market  leader  in  agricultural  value  chain 
financing schemes for smallholder producer inclusive agricultural micro, small and medium 
businesses,  particularly  through  new  technologies  (e.g.  Kishan  Farmers  Card)  and 
platforms  that  will  be  based  on  digitized  solutions  for  packaged  types  of  services.  It  is 
envisaged to capture the footprint from digital transactions and to create records, which 
the bank and partner FIs (like Sana Kishan) can use to analyze  credit risks and process 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
loans,  and  explore  linking  transformative  technologies  in  value  chain  financing  for  their 
clients and set-up digital platforms that can link physical trade with financing 
172.  There are certain capacity gaps in ADBL on specific thematic areas other than the 
finance  where  Programme  needs  to  work.  The  proposed  partnership  with  Heifer  should 
bring substantial expertise in inclusive socio-economic mobilization and targeting the the 
field. In addition, a thematic technical team should be placed in all layers of Programme 
implementing  offices  as  required.  Programme  should  especially  hire  monitoring  and 
evaluation experts and officers, supply chain experts, Gender Equity and Social Inclusion 
(GESI) expert and Nutrition specialist.  
173.  ADBL deputed staff and hired staff regularly need capacity building and awareness 
events on Climate Change and Environmental aspects. Analysing the climate change and 
environmental related workload, Programme should recruit a climate resilience specialist 
at the centre level plus addition short term specialist technical assistance on these areas 
as needed.  
ADBL’s approach to environmental, climate and social sustainability  
Current status 
174.  ADBL’s  environmental,  social  (E&S)  and  climatic  variability  risks  management 
(ESRM)  systems are principally guided by the instruction issued by Nepal Rashtra Bank 
(NRB), the central bank of the country, to the bank and financial institutions (BFIs)45. The 
core  objective  of  the  guideline  issued  (ESRM  Guideline)  is  to  require  BFIs  to  integrate 
environmental  and  social  risk  management  into  the  overall  credit  risk  management 
process  in  order  to  fully  inform  the  credit  authority  of  E&S  risks  prior  to  the  financing 
decision  regarding  individual  transactions.  The  areas  covered  by  the  Guidelines  are 
comprehensive and includes environmental aspects, including air, water, solid wastes, bio-
diversity  and  ecosystem  services;  and  social  aspects,  including  labour  relations  and 
working  condition,  community  health  and  safety,  land  acquisition  and  settlement, 
indigenous  and  vulnerable  populations,  and  cultural  and  natural  heritage.  The  ESMS 
Guideline  requires  all  BFIs  to  develop  and  implement  an  environmental  and  social 
management  system  (ESMS)  consistent  with  local  environmental  and  social  laws  and 
regulation  and  overtime  with  recognized  international  standards  such  as  International 
Finance Corporation’s Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability 
and the Equator Principles. These provisions are amply supported by ADBL’s Strategic Plan 
((2019-2023)  which  identifies  ‘environmentally  friendly  financing  for  sustainable 
development  and  inclusive  growth’  as  second  of  the  four  goals’46.  This  goal  is 
operationalised through its Credit Manual by specifying the requirement to consider during 
loan appraisal process the environmental and social aspects of each projects submitted for 
ADBL financing47.  
175.  On  climate  variability  both  the  Central  Bank  guidelines  and  ADBL’s  operational 
programme  contained  in  annual  implementation  plan  as  approved  by  ADBL’s  Board  of 
Directors  put  emphasis  on  financing  projects  aiming  at  the  development  of  renewable 
energy for which the central bank has put mandatory provision for investing 15% of its 
loan portfolio48. Within this segment of its portfolio ADBL is investing in hydropower, solar 
energy and activities that broadly fall under green financing. On enabling its client to cope 
with  the  risks  caused  by  climate  variability  ADBL  has  been  implementing  groups  and 
45 Nepal Rashtra Bank (NRB), Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and 
Financial Institutions, Kathmandu, May 2018. 
46 ADBL, Strategic Business Plan 2019-2023, Kathmandu 2029, Pg. 8.  
47 ADBL, Loan Procedures 2073 BS, Clause 16.3 (Nga) and (Cha), Appendices 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4, Loan appraisal 
forms.  
48 including for tourism sector; Instruction No 17 - Deprived groups and priority sector lending, Clause 17.1, 
Unified Guidelines, Nepal Rashtra Bank, Kathmandu, October 2019. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
community-based  crop  and  livestock  insurance.  On  handling  sexual  harassment/sexual 
exploitation  and  abuse  (SH/SEA)  ADBL  has  a  zero-tolerance  policy  in  its  internal 
management and has put in place robust  grievance redressal mechanisms including the 
protection of whistle blower49. On discriminatory practices, ADBL is majorly owned by the 
government and thus except affirmative actions required under the Constitution of Nepal, 
no discriminatory practice is permitted.  
176.  In terms of gaps that ADBL needs to be fill, three areas stand out: (i) the SH/SEA 
provision  are  to  be  extended  to  include  the  operation  of  its  clients;  and  (ii)  specific 
provision to be made for making agricultural investments climate resilient, and (iii) adding 
investments for climate proofing for assets created under non-agricultural projects so the 
risks are contained within acceptable level. Additionally, ADBL need to invest on building 
capability  of  its  staff  to  identify  and  assess  the  S&E  and  climate-related  risks  while 
appraising  projects  and  recommending  mitigation  measures  to  the  clients  receiving 
financing from ADBL. 
Recommendations for VITA 
177.  In the light of above, prior to the launching of VITA operations on the ground, ADBL 
will:  (i)  additionally  codify  its  Credit  Manual  to:  (a)  fill  the  gaps  identified  in  Para  177 
above, and (b) elaborate on existing provisions related to environmental, social including 
SH/SEA, and climate variability aspects, along with extensive cross referencing to ADBL’s 
own policies and procedures scattered over a variety of documents and relevant regulatory 
guidelines  issued  by  NRB;  (ii)  developing  training  modules  and  imparting  training  to  all 
credit officers working for VITA on each of the E&S and climate resilience, adaptability and 
climate proofing aspects; and (iii) monitoring closely how well the requirements specified 
are being implemented by also effectively using Bank’s compliance systems. 
178.  The  systems  developed  as  part  of  VITA  initiatives  will  be  applicable  on  bank-wide 
basis in order to enable ADBL to fully comply with the NRB guidelines and demonstrate its 
commitment to pursue an environment friendly and more sustainable as well as equitable 
development  path.  For  imparting  training  to  relevant  VITA  staff  adequate  financial 
allocation  has  been  made  under  the  capacity  enhancement  and  policy  support  sub-
component. 
4. Environmental and social category 
179.  The proposed environmental and social category for this Programme is B, 
based on the IFAD guideline. The Programme; i) would not impact on any sensitive areas 
or result in loss natural habit and biodiversity, Programme intervention will be confined in 
existing cultivated lands; ii) Programme activities will not be located in areas at high risk 
of geophysical hazards, thus the risk to agriculture, livestock and small-scale infrastructure 
are considered to be minimal; iii) the Programme design will be directed at environmentally 
sound and sustainable agriculture and livestock: a) priority will be given to multiple water 
use system for the water use efficiency and strong water management, b) use of fertilizers 
will  be  under  the  guidance  and  supervision  of  trained  service  provider,  smallholders  to 
regularly  test  soils  to  inform  fertilizer  application  and  reduce  over  usage  and  will  be 
encouraged to use the bio-fertilizer as far as possible, c) use of pesticide will be monitored 
and will be under the support and guidance of related technicians, Programme will adopt 
integrated pest management and will also support  strengthened  MRL  supervision in the 
supply chain  d) Programme will work to minimize the waste from agriculture or livestock 
and as far as possible these will be recycled, e) service providers for alternative renewable 
technology will be promoted as part of the support market development activities; iv) in 
rural  areas  the  programme  will  only  support  small  infrastructures;  v)  carrying  capacity 
49 ADBL Employee By-law 2062, Chapter 7: provision of disciplinary action to bank employees and Chapter 8: 
Code of conduct of bank employees. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
assessments will be conducted before and during the Programme intervention to ensure 
that Programme intervention has well respected the carrying capacity and does not further 
deteriorate the environment, especially for livestock and MAPS; vi) Programme will actively 
engage and benefit the vulnerable and socially marginalized communities in Programme’s 
every activities hence the social risk are minimal. Women, youth, indigenous community, 
socially  disadvantaged  groups,  disable  people  will  be  mainstreamed  in  supply  chain, 
building on the successful approaches for this from HVAP. 
5. Climate risk category  
180.  The proposed climate risk category is Moderate Risk. 
181.  The  detailed  analysis  of  the  climate  scenario  and  resulting  risks  and  response 
measure  to  the  main  investment  activities  of  the  programmed,  as  summarized  in  Table 
15,  indicate that the programme is expected to be moderately sensitive to climate risks 
and an integration of climate issues has been undertaken as part of the detailed design. 
This process has resulted in practical adjustments under the programme to reduce losses 
and damages from climate hazards to target beneficiaries, as outlined in the above table, 
and will also strengthen local risk-management capacities.  
182.  The  detailed  analysis  highlights  both  risks  and  benefits  from  climate  change.  The 
three principal risks are, in order of importance: i) the increase and intensification of new 
and existing diseases, pest and insects by making favourable temperature from them to 
grow  and  spread  over  the  existing  and  even  new  areas  (higher  altitude);  ii)  greater 
variability in  rainfall  patterns  within  the  year  combined  with increase  water  demand  for 
production  leading  to  increasing  risks  of  temporary  water  shortages  for  purely  rainfed 
production;  increased  heat  stress  from  a  small  increase  in  the  number  of  warm  days, 
especially in the lean season, to cattle reducing the milk production in the lean season and 
also  to  poultry  impacting  the  growth  of  chickens  during  these  periods.  The  principal 
benefits from climate change are: creating opportunities for production of new vegetable 
and crop varieties in higher altitudes; increasing yields and extended production seasons 
of  vegetable  and  crops;  favourable  condition  for  bees  to  collect  more  raw  materials  in 
extended production seasons resulting increase in honey production.  
183.  Furthermore, the programme has multiple characteristic described for programmes 
of moderate risk, including: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
climate  variability  is  likely  to  affect  agricultural  productivity  (crops,  livestock 
and fisheries) including the associated incidence of pests and diseases for the 
programme target groups; 
investing  in  infrastructure  that  is  exposed  to  infrequent  extreme  weather 
events; 
in 
for  rural 
investing 
institutions (such as farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas; 
institutional  development  and  capacity-building 
interventions which have the potential to become more resilient through the 
adoption of green technologies at a reasonable cost; 
strengthening indigenous climate risk management capabilities; 
integrating  climate  resilience  aspects  through  policy  dialogue  to  improve 
agricultural sector strategies and policies – especially at local and state level 
as well as within the financial services sector. 
vii) 
integration  of  climate  resilience  measures  without  extensive  additional  costs 
(e.g.  improved  construction  practice,  capacity-building  of  financial  service 
providers, farmers and MSME, expansion of climate resilience know-how and 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
technologies through the development of suitable skilled local service providers 
and including climate risk issues in policy processes). 
184.  Notwithstanding  the  above,  the  general  programme  areas  at  the  district  level 
encompass a diverse set of locations and climatic zones in Nepal which are subject to the 
annual monsoons, and a range of flood, draught, landslide, GLOF, rainfall / temperature 
and ecological risks. Programme area ranges from plain Terai area to the mid-mountain 
and some parts of high-mountain. This is the case for the entire IFAD country portfolio by 
default, as it works in rural Nepal and 2/3 thirds of all districts in Nepal are rated as high 
or very high risk against one or more of these events (MOPE, Climate Change Vulnerability 
Mapping for Nepal 2010). However, such periodic events are an inherent part of the climate 
and  production  and  livelihood  systems  are  broadly  adapted  to  them.  Projected  climate 
change scenarios are not expected to change the level of risk to these events  to such a 
degree as to significantly affect the impacts or sustainability of the programme.  
185.  Consequently, while the answer must be ‘Yes’ to the climate risk checklist questions 
of  ‘Is  the  project  area  subject  to  extreme  climatic  events,  such  as  flooding,  drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves?’, this in itself is inherent to working in rural Nepal and is 
not  sufficient grounds on its own for categorising the programme as ‘high risk’. Indeed, 
all IFAD supported projects for over 20 years have worked in several of these 50 districts. 
It is notable that multiple recent and ongoing IFAD-supported projects across a majority 
of the proposed programme locations have enabled farmers to both mitigate these risks 
and  significantly  increase  production,  achieving  substantial  improvements  in  their 
agriculture-based  livelihood.  Specifically,  an  impact  study  of  recently  completed  IFAD 
funded  High Value Agriculture Project in Karnali  State (6) shows  substantial increase in 
agriculture production, and household income particularly in agriculture and livestock and 
no widespread losses from climate related events. Similar results have been seen in the 
recently completed KUBK project in State 5. The ongoing Adaptation for Smallholders in 
Hilly Areas (ASHA) project also covers seven districts of Karnali and State 5 and this project 
is also not experiencing significant loss due to climate change. Similarly, the RERP project 
covers 16 districts in State 1, 2 and 3 have reported improvements in farmer livelihoods 
and no widespread losses from climate related events. Some impacts have been recorded 
in specific Terai areas due to flood and drought, however these have not materially affected 
overall  programme  performance.  The  VITA  programme  will  be  sensitive  to  select  the 
location  and  supply  chain  commodities  in  these  areas.  For  example,  in  aquaculture  of 
having secure available stocks of fingerling for restocking after severe floods.  
186.  The  programme  will  pay  a  key  attention  to  mainstream  climate  consideration  into 
production and investment decisions in the supported value chains. The specific site and 
value chain selection will follow certain  criteria to avoid climate  risk areas and  hazards. 
Farmers will be capacitated to make climate informed investment decisions.  Programme 
will support financial institutions to strengthening their climate risk assessment tools as a 
part of their mainstream agriculture loan appraisal process. The traditional climate change 
adaptation  methods  and  knowledge  will  be  documented  and  disseminated  among  the 
smallholders. Crop and livestock insurance policy will be adopted for the risk mitigation. 
These will reduce the climate change impact and predicted impacts on crop and livestock 
production.  
6. Recommendations for programme design and implementation 
187.  Participatory  planning  and  implementation:  VITA,  by  name,  is  an  inclusive 
programme. To implement that on the ground, programme planning and execution process 
will be transparent and participatory. The multi-stakeholder platforms will be a central tool 
for  this.  Proportionate  participation  from  women,  Dalit,  indigenous  and  marginalized 
communities,  and  youth  should  be  ensured  and  their  concern  should  be  streamlined  in 
programme’s planning and implementation process. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
188.  Women:  The  programme  has  the  opportunity  to  ensure  women  participation  in 
income generating activities from the planning to decision making. Traditionally, women 
work to run their household daily without any meaningful economic return. The value chain 
selection  process  needs  to  consider  the  balanced  workload  between  male  and  female  – 
specifically  increasing  the  role  of  women  in  paid  economic  activities  and,  conversely, 
increasing participation of men in unpaid household works like involvement in  producing 
goods and providing services for own final use. An analysis of workload and working 
conditions  by  men  and  women  themselves  is  essential,  followed  by  interventions  to 
promote  more  equitable  rate  of  participation  of  women  in  production  and  marketing. 
Appropriate and reflective methodologies and tools needs to be  introduced, such as the 
Heifer  Corner  Stone  approach  and  the  GALS-lite  aspects  in  the  planned  business  skill 
training. The programme needs to  enhance the leadership capacity of women providing 
opportunities  to  participate  in  activities  that  generates  income  ultimately  leads  them 
towards the decision making level. Economic relationship between household members is 
crucial  to  bring  changes  in  decision  making  roles  and  overall  power  relations.  However, 
women may need to invest relatively more productive time to generate profit participating 
in  the  programme.  This  increases  the  workload  but  still  plays  a  vital  role  to  maximize 
productivity of women and ultimate returns in other dimension of life.  
189.  Programme should encourage women to raise the ownership of assets and role and 
voices  in  making  decisions  both  at  household  and  community  level.  It  gives  them 
confidence to participate in household as well as cluster and bigger level decision making 
process.  Time-efficient  techniques  and  technologies  should  be  introduced  to  reduce 
women workload and raise the efficiency and maximise profit from involvement in supply 
chains.  These  all  will  contribute  to  build  the  agency  of  women,  enhance  their  economic 
earning, labour productivity and leadership.  
190.  To contribute to a deeper transformation of women’s roles in the rural economy, the 
programme should also actively encourage the development of women’s producer groups 
where there is sufficient interest from women in a cluster to do so. Such groups would not 
be to the exclusion of men, but women would by a large majority of members, lead the 
group, hold the main decision making roles and consequently represent their own interests 
in the multi-stakeholder platforms, cluster and supply chain development processes. With 
a critical mass of such groups active in a road corridor, this would be expected to seed a 
deeper  transformation  in  women’s  empowerment  in  the  supply  chains  and  the  local 
economy. 
191.  The selected supply chains will be specifically targeted towards women, youth, poor 
and marginalized communities, and indigenous communities. ADBL and other key financial 
institutions will make the provisions to ease the access to credit for women, youths and 
poor to promote production and profit – including through the greater use of the interest 
subsidies and collateral free lending policies promoted by NRB. A special attention should 
be  given to enhance financial inclusion, business skills, appropriate methodology and tools 
for visioning and planning for better future, promote balanced workload between male and 
female, awareness on climatic risk, awareness on nutrition, capacity building, skill based 
training  and  awareness  programs.  The  time  and  venue  for  all  such  training  should  be 
aligned with these groups availability to participate.  
192.  Youth: The programme will work to retain the youth force attracting them in supply 
chain  process  and  also  develop  special  programs  from  the  oversees  migrant  returnee 
youth, those returning from cities and those affected by COVID-19. Their engagement is 
an important component of the programme to achieve desired outcome. Programme can 
reduce seasonal out migration by generating local level employment. The youth of Nepal 
are not attracted to traditional farming but have shown ample interest on market based 
commercial  farming,  livestock  and/or  fisheries.  The  programme  will  provide  skill 
development trainings based on local requirements, including as service providers. There 
are  potentials  to  develop  entrepreneurship  capacity  among  youths  that  increase 
networking  and  leadership  capacity.  Currently,  youth  population  is  relatively  low  in 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
villages;  If  they  find  better  opportunities  in  the  villages,  in  terms  of  both  income  and 
status, they will have opportunities to earn money in their hometown and also can continue 
their  education.  Overall,  the  youth  engagement  in  the  programme  leads  towards 
sustainable development of the villages.  
193.  Indigenous  Peoples50  have  advanced  knowledge  of  traditional  agricultural 
practices and are sources of traditional knowledge. Through their engagement in producer 
groups,  the  programme  will  seek  to  build  on  their  knowledge  blending  with  modern 
agriculture technology and practices to best fit in the programme activities will significantly 
enhance the outcome. Their voice will be heard and participation in the programme will be 
ensured providing opportunities in decision making level.  
194.  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)-lite:  This  is  a  community-lead 
empowerment methodology that uses principles of driving through visioning and planning 
of  household  for  economic  wellbeing,  promoting  women  and  youth’s  participation  in 
decision making gender justice, improve food and nutrition security of vulnerable people 
in  a  self-reflective  manner.  Once  GALS  is  practiced  at  household  level  and  catalyse 
changes,  this  methodology  further  can  be  used  in  other  analysis  of  the  supply  chains, 
market, climate change and financial services. It provides the practical solutions for poor 
women and men to drive their own development, identifying and dismantling obstacles in 
their environment, negotiating with service providers and private actors. It has proven to 
be  effective  for  changing  gender  inequalities  that  have  existed  for  generations, 
strengthening  negotiation  power  of  marginalized  stakeholders  and  promoting 
collaboration, equity and respect between value chain actors. The programme will adopt 
GALS-lite as an intervention specially focused to the most vulnerable youth women and a 
‘lite’ version, including key methodology and tools, will be expanded to all the beneficiaries 
through an enhanced business skill training. 
195.  Nutrition:  The  project  will  encourage  interventions  that  promote  nutritionally 
diverse and rich foods for an example meat, fish, dairy, vegetables, fruits, potato, honey 
and  more.  The  new  crop  varieties  with  high  nutritional  value  and  benefits  will  be  given 
higher  priority.  Project  will  promote  and  support  the  development  of  post-harvest 
management, storage and processing technologies at the community and household level. 
VITA will also focus on selection of gender responsive and nutrition sensitive value chains, 
pro-poor  investment  in  sustainable  agriculture,  maternal  education  and  awareness  of 
optimal  nutrition  practices  and  convergence  with  ongoing  nutritional  programmes  of 
Government of Nepal. 
 Sustainable  farming:  The  programme  will  focus  on  sustainable  farming;  balancing 
economic  profit,  environmental  stewardship  and  social  responsibility.  Along  with  the 
increasing  farm  production,  programme  give  due  attention  to  enhancing  soil  quality, 
reduce  the  use  of  non-renewable  and  unsustainable  inputs  especially  harmful  for  the 
environment,  sustainable  use  of  water  resources  through  adopting  different  water 
collection practices, rain water harvesting, water lifting, solar lifting, zero energy lifting, 
and  use  of  indigenous  knowledge  and  practices  to  tackle  with  agriculture  and  natural 
resource problems. Such practice are also sound business practices for farmers to achieve 
sustained success with farming as a business, enhancing their key productive resources 
rather than mining them unsustainably. 
196.  Human  resource  -    a  climate  resilient  supply  chain  expert:  Analysing  the 
institutional  and  human  resource  capacity  of  the  key  implementation  organization,  it  is 
recommended to recruit a full time climate resilient supply chain expert at the centre level 
and  provision  of  periodic  capacity  building  events  on  climate  change,  issues  and  risks; 
climate  resilient  agriculture/livestock  and  infrastructures;  green  financing;  IPM,  risk 
transfer solutions for an example insurance; climate resilient tools and techniques; climate 
50 According to the 2011 census, the indigenous nationalities of Nepal comprises 36% of the total population of 
26.5 million. These constitutes 125 castes and ethnic groups and three religious groups.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
resilient  land  use  planning,  environmental  and  social  screening  of  activities,  basics  of 
biodiversity conservation etc.  
197.  Risk transfer solution (Crop and Livestock Insurance): The insurance board of 
Nepal  has  also issued  crop  and  livestock  insurance  policies  which  are  subsidized  by  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  with  75%  of  the  premium.  The  interest  of  farmers  on  insurance  is 
increasing, in 2018-19; 1,750 crop and less than 100,000 livestock policies were sold  – 
plus 71% compared to last year. The programme should widely promote livestock and crop 
insurance as to mitigate risks and increase the investment of smallholders.  
198.  Carrying  Capacity  Assessment  screening:  The  programme  should  make  it 
mandatory  to  conduct  a  Carrying  Capacity  Assessment  for  the  proposed  commodity  in 
each  cluster  before  programme  intervention.  This  will  be  conducted  for  the  planned 
commodities in at ward or municipality level with the close coordination and collaboration 
with ward and municipality authorities. This will make the programme aware on the local 
situation and guide to take initiatives to prohibit further environmental deterioration.  
199.  Site and commodities selection criteria: The programme will develop a checklist 
of  ‘minimum  screening  criteria’  to  select  specific  site  and  commodities  for  particular 
locations to reduce the impact from climate hazards and avoid biodiversity sensitive areas. 
Location at high risk of landslide, flood, droughts and long history of pest should be avoided 
for the programme intervention.  
200.  Land access: VITA will support a portfolio of crops and livestock that are suitable to 
different  scales  of  production,  including  several  that  can  be  based  on  very  small  land 
holdings  yet  generate  decent  incomes  e.g.  fish  farming  in  surface  tanks/leased  ponds, 
stall-based goat fattening, poly-tunnel vegetable production 
201.  Women’s land rights: Via the peer-based training and mentoring  (Business Skills 
training, the HEIFER corner stone approach) VITA will include modules and information to 
educate people on women’s legal land rights as well as coordinating with local authorities 
to support women group members in procuring citizenship certificates, which are critical 
in exercising these legal rights. VITA will focus on perceptions and practices around the 
recognition  and  promotion  of  women’s  tenurial  rights  and  the  benefits  to  the  whole 
community with enhanced access and usage of land for women for productive activities 
and improved nutritional outcomes.  
202.  Youth access to land for production: An early priority in Year 1  will be to pilot 
and establish role model approaches with some of the stronger existing groups to engage 
the group and community leaders on identifying practical models through which they can 
provide better access for their youth to productive resources. This is expected to include 
locally  facilitated  lease  of  land/ponds  (given  there  are  high  levels  of  abandonment  of 
productive land across the country). Accompanying this would be locally operated credit 
guarantees – provided either by the municipality or the producer groups of the parents. 
ADBL  already  accepts  institutional  guarantees,  so  extension  of  this  provision  to  enable 
such  schemes  to  operate  is  considered  by  ADBL  to  be  straightforward.  The  specifics  of 
both these mechanisms will need to be developed in close consultation by with the pilot 
communities themselves – and the mechanisms may differ between communities, given 
different  social  norms  and  practices.  Once  there  are  the  first  batch  of  successful  pilots, 
these models will then be more widely promoted via other groups to adopt and test for 
themselves. 
203.  Bringing land back into cultivation: The programme will support investment in 
small scale irrigation and associated water user groups, including infield ponds, to make 
more land more productive and likely to be used, especially in hilly areas that have the 
highest levels of uncultivated land. 
7. Further studies needed 
204.  No further study is be required.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
8. Monitoring and evaluation  
205.  The  programme’s  M&E  should  well  capture  gender,  socio-ethnicity  and  household 
poverty  disaggregated  data.  All  the  programme  reports  should  reflect  issues  of  gender, 
youth, Dalit, marginalized and disadvantage communities, and indigenous communities.  
206.  ADBL will lead in the monitoring and evaluation process of the programme together 
with implementing partners and stakeholders.  The programme will adopt a strong focus 
on  beneficiary-led  collection  and  monitoring  of  programme  performance  –  including  via 
the farm diaries and the peer-based Business Skill Facilitators. In addition, monitoring and 
coordination committees comprises of programme team, representatives from state and 
municipal  government  authorities,  other  financial  organizations  should  be  formed  at 
central and States level. These committees will regularly monitor and share the report to 
programme office. 
207.  A list of M&E indicators is included in the ESMP matrix and are incorporated in the 
‘extended’ programme logframe.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 1: List of all provisional districts as physiographic zones 
State 
Terai and Siwalik  Mid and High Mountain  
High Himal 
Physiographic region 
Two 
Saptari, Siraha, 
Dhanusha, Mahottari, 
Sarlahi,Rautahat, 
Bara,Parsa 
Three 
(Bagmati) 
Chitwan,  
Makawanpur, 
Sindhuli 
Five 
One 
Parasi, Banke, 
Bardiya, 
Arghakhanchi,  Dang, 
Kapilvastu, Parasi, 
Palpa, Pyuthan, 
Rupandehi 
Sunsari 
Morang  
Udayapur 
Six  
(Karnali) 
Salyan, Surkhet 
Chitwan, Makawanpur, 
Sindhuli, Dhading, 
Dolakha, Kathmandu, 
Bhaktapur, 
Lalitpur,Kavepalanchok, 
Nuwakot, Ramechhap, 
Rasuwa,  Sindhupalchok 
Parasi, Banke, Bardiya, 
Arghakhanchi, 
Dang,Kapilvastu, Palpa, 
Pyuthan, Rolpa, 
Rupandehi, Eastern 
Rukum, Gulmi 
Udayapur 
Okhaldhunga 
Khotang 
Bhojpur 
Dhankuta 
Terhathum 
Salyan, Surkhet, Dailekh,  
Jajarkot,  Western 
Rukum,Jumla, Kalikot, 
Mugu,  Dolpa, Humla 
Dhading, 
Dolakha, 
Nuwakot, 
Ramechhap, 
Rasuwa, 
Sindhupalchowk 
Eastern Rukum 
Jajarkot, 
Western Rukum, 
Jumla, Mugu, 
Dolpa, Humla 
Source: Department of Forest Research and Survey, 2014.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 2: Consultation 
SN  Name  
Organization  
Position/Expertise  
A 
ADBL programme design team 
1  Anil Kumar Upadhyay 
2  Shankar Sapkota 
3  Krishna Niraula 
4  Neeku Acharya 
5  BabuKaji Thapa 
6  Ghuran Thakur 
7  Beena Sharma 
8  Bashu Adhikari 
9  Shyam Khadka 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
ADBL 
CEO 
Sr. Agri Economist 
Chartered Accountant  
Section chief  
Division Chief  
Agri. Finance Expert 
Director, PMO 
Division head 
Development division 
B 
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development   
1  Dr Yubak Dwaj GC 
MoALD 
Secretary 
2  Joint secretary 
C 
D 
E 
Representatives of National Cooperative Federation of Nepal  
Representatives of National Insurance Board, Nepal  
Thematic Experts 
1  Sanjeev Shrestha 
2  Tribhuvan Paudel 
3  Madan Pariyar, PhD 
4  Gyandendra Karki 
5  Keshav Raj Gautam, PhD 
IFAD 
IFAD 
IDE 
NAP 
MoFE, Climate 
Change Division 
6  Engila Mishra 
7  Srikanta Adhikari 
8  Draupati Subedi 
9  Basanta Acharya  
10  Bharat Gotame 
11  Nabaraj Dahal 
ASHA 
ASHA 
ASHA 
ASHA 
WWF 
Value chain Consultant 
GESI expert consultant  
Program Development  
Project Manager  
Under Secretary 
CC specialist  
Ag Specialist  
GESI specialist  
MEAL specialist 
Program Manager  
Practical Solution  
Program Manager  
12  Ambika Pd. Khatiwada 
NTCN 
Program Officer 
13  Shankar Neupane 
KUBK/ASHA 
Agriculture Specialist  
14  Prakash  Chandra Tara 
15  Dr Chet Raj Upreti 
NAARC, Former FAO 
Livestock Specialist  
Livestock and Climate Change 
Adaptation Expert  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
SN  Name  
Organization  
Position/Expertise  
F  Producers  
1  Mahesh Baral  
2  Kedar Wagle 
3  Bhupendra Khadka 
4  Bishnu Bhattarai  
5  Narayan Paudel 
6  Devraj Bhandari 
7  Mahendra Khadka 
8  Sharada Oli 
9  Sher Bahadur Oli 
10  Chetman Bhandari 
11  Sashiram Budhathoki 
12  Ram Chandra Khadka  
Farmer  
Farmer 
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer 
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer  
Farmer  
Potato, Maize  
Paddy  
Fish  
Banana 
Honey 
Milk (Cow) 
Vegetable  
Goat  
Goat  
Honey 
Poultry  
Citrus: Lemon 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 3: Gender role  
Many roles in production are shared, or dominated by women – especially in migrant 
households where the husband is working away. The following may therefore be 
considered traditional roles, where both woman and man are working together on the 
farm. 
Commodity  
Crop:  
Rice, Maize  
Livestock: 
Goat meat, 
Poultry  
Fishery  
Women's Role  
Plantation, weeding, cleaning, 
watering, harvesting 
Connection with local resource 
person 
Access up to the local market  
Processing work 
Men's role  
Ploughing, Partially engage in plantation, 
weeding, cleaning, and irrigation 
Purchase: Seed, fertilizers  
Contact with technician 
Link with market  
Processing work  
Dominate on decision making process  
Fodder collection  
Goat shed cleaning  
Poultry form cleaning  
Sell to the local buyer  
Assist to run the local meat shop 
Connection with local resource 
person  
Partially engage in fodder collection, Goat 
shed and poultry form cleaning  
Purchase of related materials  
Contact with technicians  
Link with market  
Support on processing work 
Dominate on decision making process 
Fish feeding  
Pond cleaning  
Sell to local buyers  
Assist to run local meat shop 
Connection to local resource person  
Support on fish feeding and pond cleaning  
Lead on purchse of related materials  
Contact with technicians  
Link with market  
Support on processing work 
Dominate on decision making process 
Horticulture  
Coffee 
Essential Oils 
Planting, weeding, manuring, 
harvesting, carrying up to the 
market                         Plant 
protection 
Plantation, weeding, cleaning, 
watering, harvesting 
Connection with local resource 
person 
Access up to the local market  
semi Processing work 
plantation, weeding, processing, 
irrigation 
Support partially on planting, weeding, 
manuring, harvesting Setting to market, 
Dominate on decision making process  
Support partially on planting, weeding, 
manuring, harvesting Setting to market, 
Dominate on decision making process  
Ploughing, support in plantation, weeding, 
harvesting, marketing; dominate in decision 
making 
*This will be further updated after the field visit during design mission.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 4 
Average precipitation and mean temperature of Nepal for different seasons during the reference period (1981-
2010) (MOFE, 2018) 
Seasons 
Winter 
Pre-monsoon 
Monsoon 
Post-monsoon 
Annual 
Average Precipitation 
Mm 
84 
232 
1418 
96 
1830 
% 
5 
13 
77 
5 
100 
Mean Temperature 
4.6 
12.5 
17.7 
11.4 
12.1 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 5 
A. Environment, Social and Climate Risk Screening  
Guiding questions for environment, social and climate risk screening  
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or C) and one of three 
climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Where IFAD is jointly financing a project with other 
agencies, IFAD will cooperate with the partner agency and agree on a common approach for the assessment 
and the categorization of the project. 
Determination of the category and classification will also depend on the national requirements and the 
existing national capacity to promote and implement environmental and social mitigation measures. The 
determination is informed by existing assessments of national frameworks and capacities. 
A positive response to any question between 1 and 22 (see questions below) will categorize the project as A. 
Similarly, a positive response to question 23 to 38 will categorize the project as B. In case all answers are 
negative, the project will be categorized as C. 
This list of questions can be used at different stages of the project design and should be used in conjunction 
with the respective guidance statements. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks will: 
1. 
initially be filled in during concept development to help guide in the identification of opportunities 
and possible risks and activities that will need to be considered in the project design; 
2.  be attached to the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) review note; 
and 
3.  be reviewed during project design phases and updated as required. 
Project title: 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
IFAD project no.: 
Version of checklist:  
Country: 
Nepal 
Date of this version: 
01/04/2020 
Checklist prepared by (name, 
title and institution) 
Nirajan Khadka, IFAD Consultant 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied adverse 
environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
No 
statement 1) 
Programme will not conduct any 
activities to develop wetlands  
2.  Would the project cause significant adverse impacts 
to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services 
(e.g. conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural 
forest, loss of habitat, erosion/other form of land 
degradation, fragmentation and hydrological 
changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 and 5) 
No 
Programme will not cause any 
impact to habitat or ecosystem   
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
3.  Does the proposed project target area include 
No 
ecologically sensitive areas,51 areas of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation, and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
4.  Is the project location subjected to major 
destruction as a result of geophysical hazards 
(tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
No 
5.  Would the project lead to unsustainable natural 
No 
resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying 
capacity. For example, is the development 
happening in areas where little up-to-date 
information exists on sustainable yield/carrying 
capacity? (Guidance statements 4, 5 and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-scale52 
No 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where their 
development involves significant alteration of 
ecologically sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant use of 
No 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns? (Guidance statement 14) 
Proposed 28 VITA working 
districts include seven national 
parks, one conservation area and 
their buffer zones. Programme 
will develop site selection 
criteria which will exclude the 
ecologically sensitive areas. 
Programme will ensure Free, 
Prior and Informed Consent 
(FPIC).  
The specific site selection 
criteria will ensure exclusion of 
areas at high risk of landslide.  
Programme activities will ensure 
the sustainability use and 
management of natural 
resources. A analysis will be 
carried out to assess the carrying 
capacity of potential cluster 
areas and other environmental 
aspects before and during the 
activities implementation.  
Programme will only work on 
small scale pond based fisheries 
which will not have any affect on 
alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas.  
Programme will encourage 
integrated pest management 
approach through adopting use 
of farmyard manure, natural and 
mineral fertilizers. The use of 
agrochemicals will be controlled 
and regular soil testing services 
promoted to reduce overuse. 
Evidence from recent similar 
interventions by IFAD supported 
projects in Nepal, including 
HVAP and KUBK, have seen 
production growth without 
increases in agro-chemical use to 
levels that are life-threatening or 
creating long term-health 
concerns. Indeed, in the RERP 
project and others, there is a 
strong interest from many 
farmers group to reduce 
chemical usage, both to respond 
51 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; 
areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change 
and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas that include physical 
cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
52 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and 
fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 
hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as 
an aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based (groundwater 
and/or surface water) development where there is 
reason to believe that significant depletion and/or 
reduced flow has occurred from the effects of 
climate change or from overutilization? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
No 
9. 
Does the project pose a risk of introducing 
potentially invasive species or genetically 
modified organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity? (Guidance statement 
1) 
No 
10.  Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
No 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
Infrastructure development 
11.  Does the project include the construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s) and/or 
reservoir(s) meeting at least one of the following 
criteria?  
-  more than 15 metres high wall;  
-  more than 500 metres long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation 
schemes rehabilitation and/or development 
(more than 100 hectares per scheme)?53 
(Guidance statement 7) 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
No 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that entail a total 
area being cleared above 10 km long, or any 
farmer with more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (Guidance statement 10). Will 
the works entail temporary and/or permanent 
resident workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or correction of 
No 
natural waterbodies  
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance statement 7) 
to market demand but also to 
secure the long-term health of 
their communities.   
Less than 5% of the programme 
outreach is expected in crops, 
specifially maize/rice farming 
systems in the Terai, that are 
reliant on water sources where 
there is the potential for 
significant changes to availability 
as a result of climate change. For 
these crops the programme will 
work within irrigated areas only 
to reduce the vulnerability to 
climate change or from 
overutilization on this small part 
of the project.  
Programme will introduce 
advanced but only certified 
seeds and breeds.  The project 
does not expect to promote 
GMOs in either crops or 
livestock. 
Programme will only support 
construction or rehabilitation 
small community-led irrigation 
scheme, typically of less than 5 
ha. command area or equivalent.  
All works will be below the given 
threshhold dimensions.  
Programme will only support 
small community-led irrigation 
schemes covering less than 100 
hectares.  
Programme will only support 
upgrading of existing farm roads 
less than 10 km long ensuring 
none of the farmer losing more 
than 10% of his/her farmland.  
53 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the 
country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size of irrigation 
development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no 
standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Programme activities will not 
displace any single person nor 
impact more than 10% of an 
individual livelihood asset.  
Programme will not work on any 
such activities related to physical 
cultural resources 
Programme will benefit the local 
communities and adopts a 
proven inclusive targeting 
approach.  
15.  Does the project involve significant 
No 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface 
water, leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental flow plus downstream user 
requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic 
No 
displacement54 or physical resettlement of more 
than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion and/or loss 
No 
of physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
18.  Would the project generate significant social 
No 
adverse risk/impacts to local communities 
(including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, 
indigenous people, persons vulnerable to GBV and 
sexual exploitation and abuse and people with 
disabilities) or other project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19.  Does the project include the manufacture and 
No 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials 
which may affect the environment? (Guidance 
statement 2) 
20.  Does the project include the construction of a large 
No 
or medium-scale industrial plant? 
21.  Does the project include the development of large-
No 
scale production forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22.  Does the project support any of the above 
No 
(Question 1 to Question 21) through the provision 
of a line of credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which can be 
readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural 
No 
intensification and/or expansion of cropping area 
in non-sensitive areas that may have adverse 
impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Programme will work on the 
agriculture intensification and 
expansion of cropping area but 
only in currently farmed  or 
previously farmed but currently 
idle farm lands; these are not 
expected to create  adverse 
impacts on habitats, ecosystems 
and livelihood. In fact, quite the 
opposite. By increasing the 
livelihoods, labour productivity 
and use of farm land it is 
expected to reduce pressure on 
the surrounding natural habits 
54 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods 
(guidance statement 13). 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include rangeland and 
Yes 
livestock development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
No 
information on stocks, fishing effort and 
sustainable yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, 
habitat damage and knowledge of fishing zones 
and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
26.  Would the project activities include aquaculture 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or 
intensively practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and clearing of 
coastal vegetation, change in hydrology or 
introduction of exotic species? (Guidance 
statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include natural resource-
based value chain development? (Guidance 
statements 1, 6 and 12) 
No 
Yes 
28.  Do the project activities include watershed 
No 
management or rehabilitation? 
29.  Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
No 
conservation measures? (Guidance statements 1 
and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium dam subprojects 
(capacity < 3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 7 
and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and 
microenterprise development subprojects? 
(Guidance statements 12 and 13) 
Yes 
Yes 
32.  Does the project include the development of agro-
Yes 
processing facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
as households become less 
reliant on them for their 
livelihoods through the growth 
of sustainable alternative 
livelihoods. 
Livestock supply chains are 
provisioned in Programme and 
adequate amount of fodder and 
forage species will be planted in 
private lands. Programme 
activities will not include the 
rangeland. Indeed, it will actively 
seek to reduce open grazing in 
forests and hillsides. The 
programme will complete Carry 
Capacity Assessments including 
of Total Nutrient Demand and 
supply balance at 
ward/municipality level for all 
potential livestock clusters prior 
to programme engagement in 
the cluster. 
Project plans to work only on 
pond-based aquaculture supply 
chains. This will be done in a 
sustainable manner without the 
risk of overfishing and habitat 
damage.  
The Programme will enhance 
smallholders to market driven 
production replacing the 
subsistence and/or traditional 
farming. This demands use of 
natural resources. 
Project will work on small-scale 
irrigation schemes.  
Smallholder and/or a group of 
smallholders-led 
microenterprises will be 
developed and/or supported  
Project will technically support 
farmers and micro-
entrepreneurs on agro-
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
33.  Would the construction or operation of the project 
Yes 
cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
(Guidance statement 10) 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities have minor 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
(Guidance statement 9) 
35.  Would the project result in physical resettlement 
of 20 people or less, or impacting less than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term 
public health and safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
37.  Would the project require a migrant workforce or 
seasonal workers (for construction, planting 
and/or harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the above 
(Question 23 to Question 37) through the 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
processing facilities, however 
this will not include support to 
private infrastructure 
development.   
The value chain development 
and market linkages may result 
in some increased road traffic for 
the transportation of increased 
amounts of produce. 
Project activities will not be 
related to the physical cultural 
resources.  
Seasonal workers are required 
for a minority of the supported 
supply chains with clear season 
production, such as rice, fruit 
trees. However, a majority of the 
crops and livestock will focus on 
year- round production thus 
reducing the reliance on migrant 
workforces, e.g. in vegetables, 
goats, dairy, aquaculture.  
The proposed key implementer 
itself a financial organization. 
Furthermore, project will have 
class A and class D grade Banks 
on providing loans for the 
production, processing and 
marketing. 
Guidance for categorization 
“Yes” response to 
any questions 
between 1 and 22 
Environmental 
and social 
category is A 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (full 
or specific) is required depending on availability of 
information. 
Also, some specific questions would require the below 
specific actions: 
 
Yes to question 16 – A Resettlement Action Plan is 
required depending on availability of information. 
Yes to question 17 – A Physical Cultural Resources 
Management Plan is required that includes 
provisions for managing chance finds at 
implementation. 
Yes to question 18 – Free, prior and informed 
consent should be obtained/Free, Prior and 
 
 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Informed Consent Implementation Plan is required 
depending on whether the affected communities 
are identifiable. In instances where indigenous 
peoples are affected an Indigenous Peoples Plan is 
required. A Social Impact Assessment is required. 
Yes to question 8 and/or question 15 – A water 
resources management plan for the project is 
required. 
Yes to question 7, question 9 and/or question 19 – 
A pest management plan is required. 
 
 
Environmental 
and social 
category is B 
An environmental and social analysis to develop an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
is required. 
“No” response to 
all questions 
between 1 and 22 
and “Yes” response 
to any questions 
between 23 and 38 
“No” response to 
all questions 
between 1 and 38 
Environmental 
and social 
category is C 
No further analysis is required. 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
1. Is the project area subject to extreme 
climatic events, such as flooding, 
drought, tropical storms or heat 
waves? 
√ 
2. Do climate scenarios for the project 
area foresee changes in 
temperature, rainfall or extreme 
weather that will adversely affect 
the project impact, sustainability or 
cost over its lifetime? 
√ 
The general programme areas encompass a diverse set 
of locations and climatic zones in Nepal which are 
subject to the annual monsoons, and a range of flood, 
draught, landslide, GLOF, rainfall /temperature, 
ecological risks. Programme area ranges from plain 
Terai area to the mid-mountain and some parts of high-
mountain. This is the case for the entire IFAD country 
portfolio by default, as it works in rural Nepal and 2/3 
of all districts in Nepal are rated as high or very high 
risk against one or more of these events. However, such  
periodic events are an inherent part of the climate and 
production and livelihood systems are broadly adapted 
to them. Projected climate change scenarios are not 
expected to increase the risk from these events 
sufficiently to have a significant effect on overall 
programme impacts and sustainability.  Site selection 
screening for the programme will include assessment 
of such risks to minimize exposure to very high-risk 
areas. 
With the preliminary broad analysis of potential 
physiographical zones and districts, the prediction is 
made for the increase in temperature, precipitation and 
extreme events like increase of dry days and night. 
These are expected to have very modest impacts on 
supply chains and the programme will consider the 
climate impact from the very beginning of the 
subprojects. Areas with the history of severe climate 
hazard or prediction of extreme changes will not be 
selected, based on the “minimum screening criteria” for 
clusters included in the Programme Implementation 
Manual. In the areas where the programme is expected 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Yes 
No 
3. Would the project make investments 
in low-lying coastal areas/zones 
exposed to tropical storms? 
4. Would the project make investments 
in glacial areas and mountains 
zones? 
5. Would the project promote 
agricultural activity in marginal 
and/or highly degraded areas that 
have increased sensitivity to 
climatic events (such as on hillsides, 
deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
6. Is the project located in areas where 
rural development projects have 
experienced significant weather-
related losses and damages in the 
past? 
7. Would the project develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with a track 
record of extreme weather events? 
8. Is the project target group entirely 
dependent on natural resources 
(such as seasonal crops, rainfed 
agricultural plots, migratory fish 
stocks) that have been affected by 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
to work, the expected impacts of climate changes will 
be localized and there are suitable adaptive measures 
available to farmers that the programme will support 
them to implement e.g. use of water efficient 
technologies like drip irrigation for vegetable and fruit 
production, use of poly-tunnel to protect crops from 
storm damage which are already being effectively used 
in various locations in the programme areas. Climate 
change impacts are on production level, hence the 
farmers will be capacitated to make such climate 
informed investment decisions. Financial institutions’ 
tools for Climate risk assessment as a part of 
agriculture loan appraisal will be further strengthened. 
Therefore, climate scenarios for the programme area 
are not expected to materially adversely affect the 
programme impact, sustainability or cost over its 
lifetime. 
Project will not work in glacial or high himal zones. 
The supply chain activities are expected to expand in 
abandoned lands, however the programme will adopt 
the site selection criteria that excludes areas sensitive 
to climatic events. 
The programme will primarily work in terai and mid-
hill districts of provinces two, three, five, one and 
Karnali Province. An impact study of recently 
completed IFAD funded High Value Agriculture Project 
in Karnali province shows substantial increase in 
agriculture production, and household income 
particularly in agriculture and livestock and no 
widespread losses. Similar results have been seen in the 
IFAD-supported KUBK project in State 5. A currently 
running Adaptation for Smallholders in Hilly Areas 
(ASHA) also covers seven districts of Karnali and State 
5, this project is also not experiencing significant loss 
due to climate change. Similarly, the RERP project 
covers 16 districts in States 1, 2 and 3 have reported 
widespread losses. Some impacts have been recorded 
in Terai area due to flood and drought, programme will 
be sensitive to select the area and supply chain 
commodities in these areas. For example, in 
aquaculture of having secure available stocks of 
fingerling for restocking after severe floods and/or 
where floods a typically shallow and low cost 
adaptations to pond design can be implemented to 
reduce risk of loss of fish stock. 
The programme targets smallholder for whom 
agriculture is the primary or a major livelihood. As 
outlined above, Nepali farmers have been affected by 
climate change over the last decade. There are reports 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
in the last decade by climate trends 
or specific climatic events? 
Yes 
No 
√ 
9. Would climate variability likely affect 
agricultural productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access 
to markets and/or the associated 
incidence of pests and diseases for 
the project target groups? 
10.  Would weather-related risks or 
climatic extremes likely adversely 
impact upon key stages of 
identified value chains in the 
project (from production to 
markets)? 
11.  Is the project investing in climate-
sensitive livelihoods that are 
diversified? 
12.  Is the project investing in 
infrastructure that is exposed to 
infrequent extreme weather 
events? 
13.  Is the project investing in 
institutional development and 
capacity-building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer 
groups, cooperatives) in 
climatically heterogeneous areas? 
14.  Does the project have the potential 
to become more resilient through 
the adoption of green technologies 
at a reasonable cost? 
15.  Does the project intervention have 
opportunities to strengthen 
indigenous climate risk 
management capabilities? 
16.  Does the project have 
opportunities to integrate climate 
resilience aspects through policy 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
that some smallholders have experienced loss of crops 
due to drought, excessive rainfall, floods and landslides. 
However, against this background a series of recent and 
ongoing IFAD projects have enabled farmers not only to 
adapt to this but also significantly improve their farm-
based livelihoods using the types of interventions and 
approaches proposed under the current programme. 
This is not to disregard the impact of climate change 
but demonstrate a credible pathway to sustainably 
improved agricultural livelihoods in the programme 
areas.  
The production will be mainly affected by climate 
variability, particularly affecting production that is 
purely rainfed. The programme will support adoption 
of water efficient technologies as well as investment in 
in-field catchment ponds and small-scale irrigation and 
multi-use water systems to reduce such vulnerability.  
Weather related risks are inherent to agriculture in 
Nepal. They inevitably have some impacts on the 
supply chains. Yet the local supply chains are well 
adapted to the current levels of risks and the future 
climate scenarios are not projected to increase these 
risks sufficiently to have major impacts on the 
proposed supply chains within the 25 year time 
horizon for programme impacts.  
The agriculture and horticulture supply chains are 
climate-sensitive. However, efforts will be made 
towards the climate resilient practices.  
The capacity of smallholders, farmers, agri-
entrepreneurs, processors, financiers stakeholders will 
be enhanced in different supply chain related themes, 
including environment and climate change, through 
different means.  
The green technologies will be adopted in a maximum 
possible extent via promotion through local technical 
service markets. This will include use of renewable 
energy technologies from production to marketing; 
rainwater harvesting, drip irrigation, use of IPM and 
predators, consolidated agriculture, low-tillage practice 
to reduce soil erosion, crop diversification and use of 
improvised seeds, organic fertilizer, mulching and 
micro-irrigation.  
Farmer capacity building via enhanced business skills 
training will include the better use of climate 
information in farm production and investment 
decision. Furthermore, the carrying capacity 
assessments will provide a strong evidence base at the 
ward/municipality level for local communities to make 
informed decisions on individual on collective climate 
risk management options, including building on 
indigenous capabilities.  
There are ample opportunities to assist on policy 
dialogue through different platforms to improve 
agriculture sector strategies and policies – at municipal, 
state and federal level. Robust M&E data and analysis 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
dialogue to improve agricultural 
sector strategies and policies? 
17.  Does the project have potential to 
integrate climate resilience 
measures without extensive 
additional costs (e.g. improved 
building codes, capacity-building, 
or including climate risk issues in 
policy processes)? 
18.  Based on the information 
available would the project 
benefit from a more 
thorough accounting of GHG  
emission ? 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
will be central to such evidence-based policy 
engagement. 
√ 
The climate resilient measures will be considered from 
the planning and designing phase of programme 
interventions. Priority will be given for the local and 
indigenous knowledge and practices. 
Programme will not substantially generate GHGs, 
however accounting emission will be helpful for the 
stakeholders to aware on project’s impact on CC 
√ 
Guidance for classification  
“Yes” response to any of 
the questions 1 to 7 
The climate risk classification 
is high 
A detailed analysis is required 
“Yes” response to any of 
the questions 8 to 17 
The climate risk classification 
is moderate 
A basic analysis is required 
“Yes” response to question 18  GHG assessment  
For example, EX-ACT tool 
“No” response to almost 
all questions 
The climate risk classification 
is low 
No further analysis is required, 
but voluntary measures can be 
incorporated 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 6: ESMP matrix  
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
1) Environmental 
Potential threat to forest and biodiversity resources including: 
Encroachment or 
expansion of 
agriculture in forest 
area 
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Potato 
Value chain activities will 
be confined only in 
agriculture lands. To 
address the shortage of 
agricultural land, project 
will encourage leasing of 
fallow/private cultivable 
lands.  
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
I) Meeting 
with farmers 
to identify and 
explore 
use  of 
abandoned 
land; 
Explore with 
municipalities, 
forest user 
groups, and 
forest officials 
on 
encroachment 
management  
O
F
D
/
G
U
F
/
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
p
i
c
i
n
u
M
,
U
M
P
% reduction of 
fallow land  in 
municipalities 
(ha) 
d
n
a
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
Mainstream activity 
in Comp 1. No 
incremental cost 
(A) Secondary 
sources: 
Registries from 
municipalities, 
local Forestry 
Groups and/or 
provincial 
Forestry 
Departments ; 
(B) Primary 
source: VC 
Cluster surveys. 
.
l
a
u
n
n
a
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Excessive harvesting of 
forest products and 
open grazing   
Goats  
Project will encourage stall 
feeding and provision will 
made to plant enough 
number/area of forage and 
fodder species;  
Carrying capacity 
assessment for Goat value 
chain prior to cluster 
engagement 
II) Evidence 
based 
consultation 
with 
interested 
communities 
to establish 
credible and 
sustainable 
development  
plans for Goat 
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
Farmers Diaries, 
Farm Diaries, 
VC Cluster 
surveys, 
Baseline/mid 
term/final 
impact surveys,  
$50,000 for GIS-
based carrying 
capacity 
assessment for all 
targeted Goat/dairy 
municipalities 
Via Sector 
Development Fund 
(SDF)  
(a) % of 
farmers with 
herds in stall 
feeding system 
 (b) % of 
municipalities 
with acceptable 
"current herd vs 
maximum 
carrying 
capacity" ratios 
(d) % of 
farmers using 
feed from 
sustainably 
managed fodder 
and forage 
sources  
l
a
u
n
n
A
E
F
T
I
o
M
d
n
a
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
p
i
c
i
n
u
m
h
t
i
w
U
M
P
A
T
I
V
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Increased water 
pollution from 
agriculture runoff due 
to the use of fertilizers 
and pesticides 
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Potato, 
Cereal, Fish  
Improper solid waste 
management  
Livestock, 
Fish, 
Wholesale 
market  
(i) Mulching, right balance 
of organic and inorganic 
fertilizer; (ii) Training and 
advice on proper use of 
pesticide and fertilizers, 
regular soil testing; (iii) 
Improved fish pond 
management to keep water 
healthy: restricting use of 
antibiotics and medicines, 
proper aeration keeps the 
water healthy; (iv) 
Introducing waste water 
management system; (v) 
Enhanced testing and 
enforcement regime for 
pesticides especially at 
wholesale market and 
strategic location 
(i) Solid Waste 
management plan 
mandatory for project 
supported wholesale and 
satellite market; (ii) Work 
with market management 
board and local authorities 
; (iii) Recycling and reuse 
of waste generated during 
production to processing 
including use to make bio-
compost ; (iv) Capacitate 
smallholders and micro 
entrepreneurs on 
sustainable waste 
management by easy and 
i
m
u
d
e
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
Awareness, 
capacity 
building and 
easy access to 
new practices 
and 
technologies  
(a) % farmers 
using efficient 
water use 
technologies  
(b) Number of 
farmers trained 
in IPM 
(c) Include 
Water Quality 
parameters to 
be measured 
(d) Include soil 
quality 
parameters to 
be measured 
s
r
e
v
o
r
p
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
t
e
t
a
v
i
r
p
(a) 
Baseline/mid 
term/final 
impact surveys; 
Farmers' diaries 
(b) Project 
training records 
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
l
a
c
o
l
Awareness, 
capacity 
building and 
easy access to 
new practices 
and 
technologies  
,
R
E
F
I
E
H
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
/
e
c
n
v
o
r
P
i
)
a
(
Project 
"infrastructure" 
records; 
Training 
reports; Reports 
from field 
inspection visits 
by PIU staff 
(a) % of 
project-
supported 
markets with  a 
waste 
management 
plan and an 
a
efficient waste 
u
n
management 
n
A
system                                                            
(b) No of 
capacity 
building events 
organized for 
smallholders 
l
(i)-(iv) via Service 
Market 
Development e.g. 
training of service 
provider to 
promote practice. 
Minimal 
incremental costs. 
Covered under 
‘Service Market 
Development’ 
budget line (Comp 
1) 
(v) $30,000, 
financed between 
SDF and 
state/municipal 
government 
partners who have 
mandate for 
market 
management/food 
safety 
(i)-(ii) 
Mainstreamed 
within Comp 3.  
Est. $5,000 
additional capacity 
building on good 
practice waste mgt 
in markets 
(iiii)-(iv) via 
Service Market 
Development e.g. 
training of service 
provider to 
promote practice. 
Minimal 
incremental costs. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
effective technologies and 
better hygiene 
and micro 
entrepreneurs 
Land and soil 
degradation  
Crops 
Awareness  
i
m
u
d
e
M
(i) Tillage operation and 
grazing will be controlled in 
land with moderate to 
steep slopes (50-300). 
Conservation terraces will 
be promoted in such 
lands.; (ii) Cultivation will 
be discouraged in land with 
slope more than 30 degree 
(iii) Integrated Pest 
Management approach will 
be promoted to discourage 
use of chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides ; (iv) Crop 
varieties which demands 
excessive use of fertilizer 
and water will be 
discouraged; (v) Landslide 
prone areas will not be 
selected for any kind of 
value chain. If value chain 
activities are planned 
proximity to such areas, 
adequate land cover 
practices such as 
plantation will be 
encouraged.  
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
/
e
c
n
v
o
r
P
i
(a) % of 
farmers using 
sound IPM 
practices                                                                  
(b)% of 
municipalities 
with an increase 
in the land area 
managed 
through IPM 
(c) hectares of 
land under 
sustainable 
agricultural land 
management 
(A) Secondary 
sources: 
Registries from 
municipalities, 
local Forestry 
Groups and/or 
provincial 
Forestry 
Departments ; 
(B) Primary 
source: VC 
Cluster surveys 
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
i
l
Mainstreamed in 
Comp 1 via  
i) Business skills 
training  
ii) Service market 
development for 
delivery of 
appropriate 
technical advice to 
farmers. 
No incremental 
costs. 
e
s
a
B
)
b
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Threat (such as 
chances of particular 
pathogen or pest 
arriving, population 
declines of native 
species, altering key 
ecosystem process like 
hydrology, nitrogen 
fixation etc) from 
introduction of exotic 
varieties and breeds 
Social 
Potential increase on 
the workload on 
women (especially 
from road maintenance 
activities) 
Crops, 
Livestock 
Introduction of only 
certified/verified varieties 
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
Capacity 
building  
(i) Ensure women’s 
participation from the 
activities planning phase; 
(ii) Promote awareness of 
smallholders and 
entrepreneurs on work 
division ; (iii) Ensure that 
women are not over-
represented in the 
maintenance work for the 
newly rehabilitated roads; 
(iv) Ensure women’s 
participation in capacity 
building events ; (v) 
Develop and implement 
GESI guidelines 
U
M
P
t
i
n
U
t
c
e
j
o
r
P
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
D
/
e
c
n
v
o
r
P
i
Ex ante:  
Component 1 
activities to 
ensure that only 
certified/verified 
seeds suppliers 
are supported 
under the 
various Funds 
or capacity 
building 
activities. 
(a) % of women 
among 
meetings' 
participants (VC 
meetings, 
cluster 
meetings, 
municipalities 
meetings) and 
awareness 
raising events 
(b) % of 
women among 
project training, 
capacity 
building events 
and exchange 
visits 
(c) % of women 
beneficiaries 
with increased 
time spent for 
leisure 
n/a 
No incremental 
cost 
(a) Lists of 
participants in 
meetings or 
awareness 
raising events 
Mainstreamed in 
the following 
activities a) group 
mentoring/capacity 
development b) 
Business skill 
training covering 
such issues, c) the 
Heifer Corner 
Stone approach. 
(b) Training 
records 
No incremental 
costs 
a
/
n
l
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
)
c
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
:
)
b
(
d
n
a
)
a
(
(c) simplified 
PRO-WEAI 
survey as 
included in the 
COI survey. 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
All 
Within high risk 
communities negative 
social dynamics from 
greater social and 
economic 
empowerment of 
women  
All 
Investment failing: 
Depletion of HH assets 
and livelihoods' base to 
the point where they 
can no longer recover; 
Indebtedness by loan 
beneficiaries unable to 
repay their loans. 
i
h
g
H
o
t
i
m
u
d
e
M
i
m
u
d
e
M
(i) Implementation of the 
Heifer Corner Stone 
approach. 
 for highly vulnerable 
women; (ii)  Inclusion of a 
"light GALS" module in 
Business Skills curriculum. 
(i) Affordable investment 
pathways ; (ii) Pre-
screening suitability of 
selected commodities for 
poor and vulnerable 
households  
(iii) Critical risk insurance 
among new products and 
services developed by 
ADBL or partner FIs; (iv) 
Group or municipality or 
supply chain guarantee and 
collateral free loan; (v) 
Working with in groups to 
improve market linkages 
which reduces selling risk; 
(vi) Link with technical 
service providers; (vii) 
Business skill training; 
(viii) Encourage saving and 
wealth generation practice 
; (ix) Better use of 
remittances  
% of highly 
vulnerable 
women among 
the Heifer 
Corner Stone 
approach/ 
GALS-lite 
beneficiaries 
(a) % of 
farmers 
repaying their 
loans according 
to agreed 
schedule                
(b) No of 
beneficiary 
farmers 
compelled to 
sell their 
collateral 
because they 
are unable to 
repay their 
loans.                 
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
U
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
l
a
u
n
n
A
PPI survey; 
Qualitative 
survey on 
women 
empowerment 
Via 
GALS – budget = 
$550,000 
GALS-lite aspects 
of Business Skills 
training. 
No incremental 
costs 
 i-ii: Mainstreamed 
in design. No 
incremental cost. 
iii: NRB promoted 
insurance products 
– no incremental 
cost.  
New insurance 
products 
development: via 
concurrent GIZ 
project with ADBL.  
No incremental 
cost to VITA. 
iv: Mainstreamed 
under Comp 2.2 
and municipality 
engagement under 
Comp 1. 
v-ix: Mainstream 
Comp 1 activities. 
No incremental 
cost 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Limited or less than 
optimal investment on 
land owned by women  
All 
Limited participation of 
women due to limited 
access to titled land 
All 
Lack of nutrition 
improvement  
All 
Climate change  
Heifer's Corner Stones 
based approach, 
sensitization via events 
business and skill 
development training 
Sensitization, 
Capacity 
building, 
group works  
Knowledge share via group 
events and trainings like 
business and skill 
development training 
Group work 
Gender and nutrition 
sensitive value chains, 
awareness of optimal 
nutrition practices  
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
% of women 
sensitized or 
capacitated via 
trainings  
% of women 
beneficiary  
% of household 
and women 
reporting 
minimum 
dietary diversity 
(MDDW) 
R
E
F
I
E
H
R
E
F
I
E
H
R
E
F
I
E
H
U
M
P
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
U
M
P
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
U
M
P
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
l
a
u
n
n
A
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
d
n
a
e
n
i
l
i
d
M
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
e
n
i
l
d
n
E
d
n
a
APR 
No incremental 
cost 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; 
Farmers' diaries 
; and ADBL 
MIS. 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; 
Farmers' diaries 
; and ADBL 
MIS. 
No incremental 
cost 
No incremental 
cost 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Flood and landslide  
Vegetable, 
Milk, Fish, 
Cereals    
Awareness  
(i) Project will develop the 
value chain location/site 
selection criteria which will 
exclude activities in flood 
and landslide prone areas 
and encourage to use land 
where farmers are 
traditionally doing farming 
; (ii) Banks of fish ponds 
raised to prevent flood, 
farmers will be encouraged 
to use fish-net, store 
tanks; (iii) Provisions of 
crop, livestock and other 
value chain based 
enterprises insurance  ; 
(iv) Development of sound 
site selection criteria and 
regular field inspection 
visits by PIU Engineer.     
i
m
u
d
e
M
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
% of beneficiary 
households with 
a crop or 
livestock 
insurance   
Include 
indicators for 
mitigation 
measure (ii), 
(iii) and (iv) 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; 
Farmers' diaries 
; and ADBL 
MIS. 
i: mainstreamed in 
cluster screening 
process 
ii: Promoted 
through technical 
advice in Business 
Skills and local 
service provider 
development. 
Actual costs of 
work paid for by 
beneficiaries as 
part of farm 
upgrading 
investments 
iii: beneficiaries 
pay insurance 
premiums, some of 
which is subsidized 
by NRB. 
iv) for 
infrastructure, site 
verification is 
mainstream part of 
Comp 3 
monitoring. No 
incremental costs. 
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
U
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Drought, water 
shortage  
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Cereals 
Change in disease 
timing and outbreaks  
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Cereals 
Occurrence of wind 
storms 
Banana, 
Vegetable, 
Cereal 
Awareness  
Awareness  
(i) Improve management 
practices: Small irrigation, 
water efficient 
technologies, infield water 
harvesting, water 
catchment pond ; (ii) 
Selection of drought 
tolerant species will be 
encouraged; (iii) 
Mandatory provisions of 
crop, livestock and other 
value chain based 
enterprises insurance 
(i) Promotion of IPM; (ii) 
Capacity building and 
awareness events to 
maximize use of bio 
chemicals and fertilizers 
(iii) Promotion of crop, 
livestock and other value 
chain based enterprises 
insurance 
(i) Wind break plantation ; 
(ii) Improve solid mound to 
strengthen plan; (iii) 
Additional pole for Banana  
Capacity 
building  
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
w
o
L
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
i
e
c
n
v
o
r
P
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
% of household 
using improved 
water 
management 
practices  
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
a
(
(a) % of 
farmers using 
sound IPM 
practices    
(b) % of 
beneficiary 
households with 
a crop or 
livestock 
insurance   
Baseline/mid 
term/final 
impact surveys 
; Farmers' 
diaries. 
Baseline/mid 
term/final 
impact surveys 
; Farmers' 
diaries. 
promoted via 
Business Skill 
classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Service 
Market 
Development) 
Investment in 
associated 
equipment/ 
insurance is by 
beneficiaries via 
private investment. 
Promoted via 
Business Skill 
classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Service 
Market 
Development). 
Specific demo 
activities via SDF 
$30,000 
Promoted via 
Business Skill 
classes plus local 
service providers 
(through Service 
Market Dev.) 
Investment in 
equipment/ 
materials is by 
beneficiaries via 
private investment. 
;
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
-
d
m
i
l
a
u
n
n
A
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
d
n
a
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Environmental, 
social and climate 
Impacts  
Commodities 
as main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rating 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency  Source of data 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Heat stress 
Milk  
w
o
L
(i) Decrease of milk 
production in heat stress 
period is natural 
phenomenon. It has been 
reported that the 
production decrease by 30-
40% during heat stress 
time. Project will 
encourage increasing 
investment on processing 
(milk powder, UHT) that 
allows storage to milk 
supply from flush to lean 
season; (ii) Improve  
fodder and feeder 
production and feeding 
practices; (iii)  Good 
monitoring; (iv) Promotion 
of improved husbandry 
practices; (v) Promotion of 
effective animal health 
services and livestock 
insurance 
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
% of beneficiary 
farmers 
reporting an 
improved 
access to 
processing 
infrastructure or 
improved 
storage 
capacity 
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
Baseline/mid 
term/final 
impact surveys 
Promoted via 
Business Skill 
classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Service 
Market 
Development). 
No incremental 
cost to VITA 
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 7: Climate extreme indices  
Indices 
Very wet days (P95) 
Extreme wet days (P99) 
Number of rainy days 
Consecutive dry days 
Consecutive wet days 
Warm days 
Warm nights 
Cold days 
Cold nights 
Definition 
Annual total days when the precipitation is higher than 95 
percentile 
Annual total days when the precipitation is higher than 99 
percentile 
Annual total days when the precipitation is >1 mm 
Maximum length of consecutive days with daily 
precipitation <1mm 
Maximum length of consecutive days with daily 
precipitation >1mm 
Percentage of days when maximum temperature >90th 
percentile 
Percentage of days when minimum temperature >90th 
percentile 
Percentage of days when maximum temperature <10th 
percentile 
Percentage of days when minimum temperature <10th 
percentile 
Warm spell Duration 
Index 
Annual count of days with at least 6 consecutive days when 
maximum temperature > 90th percentile 
Cold spell duration Index 
Annual count of days with at least 6 consecutive days when 
minimum temperature < 10th percentile 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 8: Detailed Socio economic analysis by Caste/ethnicity, Age, Sex and Poverty Status 
Caste/Ethnicity 
S
N 
1  Madeshi   Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Male 
Less than 25 yrs                                                         
Very poor                                                                                                                  
ISSUES:                                                                         
- Not yet productively managing their potentiality,                                           
- Limited literacy, very few have got formal education up to 4-5 
- Limited literacy, very few have got formal education 
- No ownership of assets, even married,                                                                            
class only                                                                                        
up to 4-5 class only                                                                                         
- Limited access to consultation and decision at family,                                                
- No citizenship cares.                                                                                   
- No citizenship cares.                                                                                    
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,      
- Early marriage, very start earning as labor from 13-14 age, 
- Early marriage,  bearing child in early age, 
- Nutrition – poor nutrition among very poor but also for all 
sometime take burden of family feeding, including children and 
malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                  
segments for children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                
spouse, Majority do not take family responsibility,                                            
- Living in thatched huts, mostly in public lands,                                       
- Interested to earn money but lack skill and opportunities,                                               
- No mutual discussions and understanding about future life of 
- No mutual discussions and understanding about 
-  Limited access to groups and cooperatives,                                                               
self and children between husband and wife, prevail masculinity,                                                                                                 
future life of self and children between husband and 
-  Limited financial and business skills,   
-  Facing social and cultural  barrier and discrimination 
wife,                                                                                                  
- Limited trust from guardians,                                                       
(untouchability).                         
-  Facing social and cultural barrier/discrimination 
-  No credit services due to collateral issues,                                                                            
- Working as agriculture brick factory and construction labor within 
(untouchability).                         
- Lack visioning of future life and planning of actions,   
village and city areas and mostly go to India (Punjab) for labor.                                   
- Working as agriculture labor within village.                                   
 - Lack of basic facilities - electricity, drinking water, sanitation                                                                                                                                                                                                        
- No land ownership within family, living in thatched huts, mostly 
- No assets except temporary thatched house at public 
OPPORTUNITIES:  
in public land,                                                           
land  and household utensils.                                                                                                                     
Potential group of human resources to:  
 - No savings, lack of visioning to improve future life, expense own 
- No land ownership within family.                                                           
-Mobilize for increase income, improve their well-being,  
self rather for family, Borrow money from local money landers 
- No savings, lack of visioning to improve future life, 
-Engage in agricultural sector to run as business,                              
even to go India for agriculture labor,                           
Borrow money from local money landers                           
-Develop as lifetime entrepreneur,                                                        
 - Limited assess and interest on community initiatives, social 
- Limited access to community group and exposure to 
RESPONSES:                                                            
awareness, Sometimes mobilized by political parties as  their vote 
development.                                                                                          
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
bank, but not support further,                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Gender stereotypes restricts free mobility,                                                                                                 
like-minded to engage in agricultural sector (this may vary by 
- Work balance between women and man is imbalanced.             
- Women have heavy burden of household work and 
clusters and commodity)                                                                       
-  Mostly Musahar and Dom belong to this category.  (literacy rate 
earning looking after children,                                                                                                       
- Conduct financial & business skill training with GALS 'Lite' 
of Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 17.9%) 
- Work balance between women and man is 
- Identify most vulnerable and risk averse women and men 
imbalanced.             
and engage in household mentoring/GALS.    
- Restricted mobility outside village.  
- Facilitate to prepare business/production plan (can use 
-Mostly Musher and Dom belong to this category.  
symbols and diagrams) based on MSP results,                                                                    
(literacy rate of Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 
- Lending collateral free loan to individuals considering group 
17.9%) 
and municipality guarantee to fund on prepared investment 
plan (if collateral is an barrier to interested one), 
- Encourage and mobilize to meet the production target,  
- Introduce/demonstrate efficient production technology and 
production methods,  
- Explore renting land for e.g vegetable, fish & goat farming  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
S
N 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Poor       
- Very few are attended school, left school before 13 
years      
- Early marriage and bear children at  teen age,                                   
- Average children size 4 and above,                                               
- Work  as agricultural labor within village.                                              
 - Limited savings.                                                                                              
 - Living in marginal land,                                                                                              
- Works on rented land by in laws, producing 
vegetables and cereals,                                                                                                           
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
produce,                                                                                                             
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
father in laws                                                                                                        
- Limited assess to community group due to cultural 
barrier (untouchability and poor status).                                                      
- Gender stereotypes restricts free mobility,                                                          
- Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have 
some access to community groups due to their power 
relation and influence in the community.  
- Very few are attended school, left school between 13-15 yrs. up 
to class 4-6,         
- Early marriage, no proper plan, no discussion for future,                                                                               
- Work  as agricultural and construction labor within village and 
city areas, go to India and big cities.                                              
 - Send earning to father and mother in many cases, wife is not 
consulted and supported,                                                                                             
 - Living in marginal land,  often in public land,                                                                                            
- Work on rented land with parents, producing vegetables/ cereals 
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural  
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to father.                                                                                                           
- Limited assess to community initiatives & social awareness, 
mostly mobilized by political parties as their vote bank,  
- Faces discrimination like untouchability in society, even in public 
places,                                                      
- Masculinity restricts mutual cooperation to female members of 
the family,                                                          
- Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have some access to 
community groups due to their power relation and influence in the 
community.  
Near Poor                                                                                                        
- Limited education, left school at 5-6 class in most 
cases, very few have passed school level education,                                                                                    
- Early marriage & having children before 20 yrs.,                          
- Mostly living in extended families with father and 
mother in laws,                                                                                                              
- In most cases living in wood-mud bond and thatched 
roof huts and some have improved houses with 
remittances, -  Mostly work an their own land and also 
in rented land, some are engaged in goat, chicken and 
pig rearing, buffalo ( in some cases)                                                                                                
-  some have developed skills like sewing and tailoring 
but limited earnings,                                                                                                                
- very few have access to community groups and 
exposure of development, in most cases mother-in- 
law represents at groups /cooperatives / savings /credit                                                                                         
- Marred, living in nuclear families receives skill 
development trainings like sewing and tailoring from 
development agencies(GOs, NGOs) managing small 
- Limited education, left school at 6-8 class in most cases, very 
few have passed school and college level education,                                                                                                              
- Mostly living in extended families with father and mother in laws,                                                                                                              
- Working as labor in city areas and mostly go to Gulf countries, 
living in wood-mud bond and thatched roof huts and some have 
improved houses with remittances, - A few educated are involved 
in development and other works,- Remittances mostly send to 
parents, limited sharing with spouses,                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Lack awareness on social and management of family and future 
planning,                                                                                          
- Sometime work on rented lands with parents for agriculture and 
producing cereals and cash crops along with father in-laws.  
- No collateral to get loan due to lack of land ownership, mostly it 
belongs to father and lack trust on youth for investment,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
scale enterprisers with credits from cooperatives.                                                                                          
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing 
cereals and cash crops along with father in-laws. - No 
collateral to get loan due to lack of land ownership,  
Non Poor 
-Mostly marriage before age of 20 and live inside 
house due to belief that  high status daughter in laws 
do not go outside,                                                                                     
- very few are working outside (not manual) in case 
husband, father and mother in laws permitted,                                                   
-  Have got skill development trainings and few have 
running tailoring enterprises,                                                                                                                       
-limited access to credit facility due to collateral, 
Limited knowledge of commercial production. Limited 
financial and business skills.  
-Mostly are studying in colleges, engaged is jobs and help parents 
on business and earning,                                                                                      
- Go abroad, Korea Australia,                                                
- Not interested in agriculture.                                                                                                                     
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
Continued 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:    
- Majority of this group are working and feeding family,                                                     
- No ownership of land assets, citizenship issue for 
vulnerable ones,               
- Working as agriculture labor and raising goats, pigs, 
chickens for additional income,                                                            
 -Limited practice of consultation and shared decision making 
between husbands and other male members,                                               
- Lack of workload balance between women and men, 
women work much inside household, agriculture is feminized,                                                                                                                            
- Limited access to groups and cooperatives for the very poor 
and poor,  
- Nutrition- primarily no availability is an issue for very poor 
and and poor and utilization knowledge and practice for rest 
segments for children, pregnant and lactating women,                                                                
- Limited financial and business skills of all,                                                         
- No collateral assets for credits to all women,                                                                            
- Lack of visioning for future life and planning of resources,                                 
- No proper productive land and lack of appropriate linkages 
for production and marketing even producing on rented land. 
- Lack of basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, 
sanitation facilities,     
Very poor                                                                                                                 
- Very limited have citizenship cares, No attendance at 
school; no education,                                            
- Bearing child in early age and having 3-4 children of 
different ages, high dependency, Malnutrition in 
children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                                                        
- Mostly living in public (Party Jagga) and landlords 
lands, mostly with no land ownership within family.                                                          
- Limited mutual discussions and understanding about 
future life of self and children between wife and 
husband,                                                                                                                      
- Facing social and cultural barrier/discrimination 
(untouchability).                          
- Working as agriculture labor within village, Rearing 1-
2 goats, 1-2 pigs in small piece of land, No assets 
except household utensils.                                                                                                        
- Women headed households are more vulnerable,                                                         
- Limited access to/ interest in group/ cooperatives, 
Borrow money from local money landers even to send 
husbands to India for agriculture labor,                                       
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development.                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Work balance between women and man is 
imbalanced.             
- Very limited have citizenship cares, No education at all; very few 
are literate, 
- Work as agriculture within village and India and construction 
labor on city areas, 
- No proper management of earnings, mostly influence by alcohol                                       
- Mostly live in public (Party Jagga) and landlords lands, and 
majority with no land ownership within family.                                                          
- Limited mutual discussions and understanding about future life 
of self and children between wife and husband,  masculinity 
prevails                                                                                                                    
-  Facing social and cultural discrimination and barrier 
(untouchability).                          
 - Limited access to/ interest in group/ cooperatives, Borrow 
money from local money landers to India for agriculture labor,                                       
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development.                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
- Women seems more trustable rather men due to behavior of 
unplanned expenses, 
 Mostly Musahar and Dom belong to this category (literacy rate of 
Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 17.9%) 
…. 
…. 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                     
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
….. 
Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
This group is most potential for economic activities to:  
- Mobilize to increase income, their wellbeing and assets 
- Engage in agricultural for growth as business for profits, 
- Potential to engage them for lifetime entrepreneur in 
agriculture sector.  
- Capitalize available labor force for better labor productivity, 
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded to 
engage in agricultural sector, below 25 yrs. can also be 
included in same group in one location. Mobilize existing 
groups including left out households,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan based on MSP 
decisions 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
commodity after B2B linkages with traders 
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient varieties,                                                                         
- Conduct comprehensive package  financial and business 
skill development with 'GALS lite',                                                                     
- Identify most vulnerable and risk averse women and engage 
in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System(GALS).                                                                      - 
Lending collateral free loan to individuals considering group 
and municipality guarantee,      
- Explore opportunity for renting in land for vegetable, fish 
and goat farming for landless,  
- Facilitate women to get consent letter from family member 
who own land ownership,    
- Coordination with other CSOs working on Dalit Rights to 
address citizenship and land ownership issue,                                                                                                         
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Restricted mobility outside village.  
- Mostly Musahar and Dom belong to this category 
(literacy rate of Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 
17.9%) 
Poor                                                                                                                   
-Very few are from this segment have attended school,                    
-Very few are from this segment have attended school,                    
- Lack knowledge, understanding and managing earning and 
- Marriage at early age and bear children before teen 
planning for future life improvement,                                             - 
age, high dependency,  malnutrition in children, 
Work as in villages and go to India for agricultural labor, - Living in 
pregnant and lactating mother,                                                
marginal land often in public and landlords land,                                                                    
- Work as agricultural labor within village, Some rearing 
- Few works on rented land and/or share crop with family 
livestock like, goat (2-3), pig (1-2) Chickens, buffalo 
members and producing vegetables, sale at local hat bazaar, a 
kids on sharing basis,                                                                                          
few are rented in and managing fish ponds,                                                                                                                  
- Living in marginal land often in Public land,                                                                    
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
- Few works on rented land and/or share crop with 
husbands, producing vegetables and sale at local hat 
production.                                                                                                               
bazaar, a few are rented in and managing fish ponds,                                                                                                                  
- No productive land and ownership.                                                                                                           
- Limited assess to community initiatives due discriminations and  
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
cultural barriers (untouchability and poor status). - Potential group 
produce.                                                                                                               
to engage in organized production process,                                                            
- No productive land and no ownership of land (in most 
-Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have some access to 
cases, it belongs to father in law and in some case it 
community groups due to their power relation and influence in the 
belongs to husband).                                                                                                           
community.  
-  Limited assess to community group due to cultural 
barrier (untouchability and poor status).                                                             
-Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have some 
access to community groups due to their power 
relation and influence in the community.  
Near Poor 
-  very few are literate,                                                                                                            
- No education of this category of women,                                                                                                            
-  Living with family members with son and daughter in law.                                                                                                                    
-  Some are living with children and also with daughter-
-  Most are living in nuclear family with young children                                                                                                                                                                                                      
in -laws,                                                                                                                    
-  Work on agriculture,  some are engaged in goat, chicken pig 
- Most are living in nuclear family with young children                                                                                                                                                                                                      
and buffalo rearing,                                                                                                  
-  Work on agriculture,  Some are engaged in goat, 
 - Socially aware, economically active, however,  exposure to  
chicken and pig rearing, buffalo   (in some cases)                                                                                                 
development is limited                                                                                                  
 - Some have access to community groups and 
- Mostly males are not organized in groups, in some areas they 
exposure of development                                                                                                    
are organized in cooperatives and managing monthly savings and 
- In most of cases they are organized in their own 
credits,                                                                                          
community  groups and managing monthly savings 
- Very limited access to develop skills from development 
and credits, take leadership role in groups,                                                                                         
agencies,                                                                                                  
- Receives skill development trainings like sewing and 
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing cereals and 
tailoring from development agencies(GOs, NGOs) 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Male 
Female 
cash crops, 
managing small scale enterprisers with credits from 
- Majority are on employment in Gulf and those returnees wants 
groups and cooperatives but limited earnings,                                                                                                                
to be entrepreneur,   
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing 
- Limited financial knowledge and business skills, 
cereals and cash crops along with husbands,                                                      
- Potential to engage in agriculture production sector with market 
- some women of this category are first movers if got 
services and facility,                                                    
any opportunities,  
- Limited business and financial knowledge and skills 
Non Poor 
 (Very few Dalit's fall in this category)                                                                                                                 
- Mostly educated ones are working outside, some are 
studying in colleges even after marriage,  
- Some have got skill development trainings and few 
have running enterprises like retail shops, tailoring,                                                                               
- Supporting family business and enterprises,  some 
are running fish ponds,                                                                                                     
- Those who are living in villages are managing land 
for cereal crops,                                                                                                                   
- Very few women have land ownership of productive 
land                                                                                                                
-Limited access to credit facility due to collateral,                                 
- Limited knowledge of commercial production.  
- Limited financial and business skills.  
- Mostly educated one are working outside, some are studying in 
colleges even after marriage,  
- Some are running enterprises like retail shops, tailoring, goal 
shops,                                                                                
- Some are engaged in agriculture business, unning fish ponds 
and producing cereals and vegetables,                                                                                                    
- However agriculture limitedly managed as business,                                                                                                                                       
- Limited knowledge of commercial production.  
Dalits 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        - 
Majority of this group are working on as labor and earning for 
family, and rearing goats, pigs and chickens                                                     
- No ownership of land and asset,                                                                                              
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
households,                                              - Lack of workload 
balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
- Limited access to community groups, cooperatives and skill 
development opportunities except non poor,                                                               
- Limited financial and business skills to run household and 
business,                                                        - No collateral 
assets for credits,                                                                            
- Almost no hopes of future life and plans,  - Discrimination 
and often blamed for witchcraft (Boksi), - Facing problems on 
getting social security facility in lack of citizenship,- Lack of 
basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, sanitation 
Very poor                                                                             
- No citizenship cares in most cases,                                                         
- Deprived to get social security facility due to issue of 
citizenship,                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- In most cases separated from son and daughter in- 
laws,                                                                              - 
Majority are single due to death of husbands and are 
very marginalized,                                                                                                      
- Living in thatched huts, mostly in public (Party 
Jagga)lands, mostly with not land certificates, no basic 
services like electricity, drinking water and satiation 
facility,                                                                                                                                                                            
- Facing social and cultural  barrier and discrimination 
like untouchability, facing blame as witchcrafts (Boksi).                                                                        
- Working as agriculture labor within village as single 
source of income,                                                                                                                                                     
- Rearing 1-2 goats, 1-2 pigs in small piece of land,                                                                            
- Deprived to get social security facility due to issue of citizenship,                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- In most cases living separately,                                                                                                                                                                               
-  Living in thatched huts, mostly in public (Party Jagga) and 
landlords land,  no basic services like electricity, drinking water 
and satiation facility,                                                                                                                                                                            
-  Facing social and cultural  barrier and discrimination like 
untouchability,                                                                         - 
Working as agriculture labor within village and go to India for 
seasonal work, some are engaged in construction labor,- Most of 
this category expense earning unplanned manner                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
- No access to/ and interest to engage in group/ cooperatives,                                    
- Very limited hopes of future life,                                                          
- Mostly Musahar and Dom belong to this category ( literacy rate 
of Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 17.9%) 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
facilities,                 OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
- Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in group with other ages 
and mobilized for economic activities,                                                    
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits,                                                                                                                  
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation/strengthening existing groups of interested and 
like minded to engage in agricultural sector (with other age 
groups also included in same group in one location). - 
Mobilize for production and marketing of potential commodity 
after B2B linkages with traders through Multi Sector Platforms 
(MSP). - Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient 
varieties,                                                                        -  
Conduct comprehensive package  financial and business skill 
development classes,                                                                      
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in Household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                      -  
Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipality guarantee/collateral,                                               
- Facilitate for renting in land for vegetable, fish and goat 
farming                                   - Coordination with CSOs 
working on Dalits Rights for preparation of citizenship and 
land ownership certificate and address other social issues,  
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- No access to/ and interest to engage in group/ 
cooperatives,                                    - Very limited 
hopes of future life,                                                             
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development.                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Mostly Musahar and Dom belong to this category ( 
literacy rate of Musahars and Doms are 17.4 % and 
17.9%) 
Poor                                                                                                                     
- No citizenship certificates in most of cases, so limited access to 
- No citizenship certificates in some cases, so limited 
social security facility,                                           
access to social security facility,                                           
- More number of dependents,                                                                                                               
- Some women of this age group are single and facing 
- Work as agricultural labor within village, some are rearing 
discrimination,                                                                                                               
livestock like, and supporting women to raise goat (2-3), pig (1-2) 
- Work as agricultural labor within village, some are 
Chickens,  Rearing buffalo kids on sharing with owner,                                                                                          
rearing livestock like, goat (2-3), pig (1-2) Chickens,                                                                                                           
- Rearing buffalo kids on sharing with owner,                                                                                          
- Living in marginal land often in Public and landlords land, no 
land ownership certificate in some cases,    
- Living in marginal land often in Public land, no land 
- Few works on rented land and/or share crop, producing 
ownership certificate,    
vegetables and sale at local hat bazaar,                                                                                                              
- Few works on rented land or share crop with 
husband, produce vegetables & sell at local hat bazaar 
- Lack of lending to invest in rented land for agricultural production                                                                                                                
-  Limited awareness on social context, assess to community 
- Lack of lending to invest in rented land for agricultural                                                                                                               
group due to cultural barrier (untouchability and poor status), 
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
often face blame of witchcraft (Boksi)                                                             
husband if they have land.  
-Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have some access to 
-  Limited assess to community group due to cultural 
community groups due to their power relation and influence in the 
barrier (untouchability and poor status), often face 
community.  
blame of witchcraft (Boksi),                                                             
-Terai Dalits other than Musahars and Dom have some 
access to community groups due to their power 
relation and influence in the community.  
Near Poor                                                                                                           
- No education of this category of women,                                          
- Some women of this age group are not getting 
citizenship certificates and deprived from social 
security facility,                                                                                                         
-  Some are living with son daughter-in -laws, majority 
are living separately if they are in couple and single 
women are living separately,                                                                                                              
- Engaged in agriculture labor, some are engaged in 
goat, chicken and pig rearing,  
- Very limited access  to community groups and 
- Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- No education of this segment,                                          
- Some are living with son daughter-in -laws, majority are living 
separately if they are in couple,                                                        
- Engaged in agriculture labor  and construction labor, some are 
engaged in goat, chicken,  pig and buffalo rearing,  
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing cereals and 
cash crops along with husbands, 
- Very limited access to community groups and exposure of 
development, and social context, 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
- In very few cases they are organized in their own community  
groups and managing monthly savings and credits,                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Potential group to engage in commercial agriculture production.                                                     
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
exposure of development  
- in very few cases they are organized in their own 
community  groups and managing monthly savings 
and credits,                                                                                                                                                                                            
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing 
cereals and cash crops along with husbands,  
- Limited financial and business knowledge and skill,                                                      
Non Poor:                                                                                                                
(Very few Dalit's fall in this category)                                                                                                                 
-  Mostly looking after grand children in extended 
families,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
- Families' are mostly engaged in politics, business and 
enterprises in market areas,  
 - Those who are living in villages are managing land 
for cereal crops,                                                                                                                    
- No land ownership of productive land,  
- very few have piece land on their ownership in city 
areas,                                                                                                                  
- Limited access to credit facility due to collateral,                                 
- Limited knowledge of commercial production.                            
- Limited financial and business skills.  
Non Poor:                                                                                                                
- Mostly engaged in politics, business and enterprises in market 
areas,  
 - Living in villages are managing land for cereal crops, very few 
are engaged in fish farming also,                                                                                                                    
- Land is not major property of this group,  
- Mostly, this group is migrated to city and business area, 
- Limited knowledge of commercial production.                            
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
ISSUES: 
 - Not productively managed the potentiality, even some are 
educated. - Limited practice of consultation and joint decision 
making at family in very poor and poor hhs,                                               
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
is feminized,                                                               - 
Interested to earn money but lack appropriate skill and 
opportunities, inputs and technology,                                            
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives for very poor and 
poor, not active and functional even engaged groups.                                                             
-  Limited financial knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues specially for very poor women                                                                            
- Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning 
for resources and opportunities.                 
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
women due to availability and utilization knowledge and 
practice,   
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Limited education, early marriage, bearing child in 
early age, high dependency ratio, Malnutrition in 
children, pregnant and lactating mother, 
- Women headed households likely to be more 
vulnerable 
- very limited mutual discussions and understanding 
about future life of self and children between husband 
and wife and parents,                                                                                              
- Working as agriculture labor within village, husbands 
are migrated for agriculture labor to India,                                                                                               
-Borrow money from local money landers on high 
interest rate, and even to send husbands to India for 
agriculture labor,                                                                                                                      
- Living in bamboo fenced thatched huts mostly in 
marginal lands and which are not registered on their 
Name                                                                                
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                         
- Limited education, early marriage, high dependency ratio,                                                                         
-Very limited mutual discussions and understanding about future 
life of self and children between husband and wife and parents                                                                                                 
- Working as agriculture labor within village, construction labor,  
go India for agriculture labor,                                                                                                
-Borrow money from local money landers on high interest rate to 
go to India for agriculture labor,                                                                                                                      
- Living in bamboo fenced thatched huts mostly in marginal lands 
and which are registered on their parents name,                                                                              
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life, excessive 
expenses                                                                         - Limited 
assess to social context and exposure to development due to 
their poor economic status and self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
Male 
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                     
Potential to organize and mobilize for production and 
marketing providing them required business and financial 
skills knowledge, basic facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
youths (both women and men based on local situation) in one 
cluster from representing different segments, mobilization of 
existing groups with inclusion of left our segments from 
household, - Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed 
in Multi sector Platform (MSP),   - Mobilize for production and 
marketing of selected/potential VC commodities, - Introduce 
climate resilient technology and resilient varieties,                             
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
Household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).   
- Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                               
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral,    
 - Facilitate for renting in land for vegetable, fish and other 
potential commodity farming, who do not have productive 
land.                                                                      
- Very low level of school attendance, very often complete primary 
level,         
- Early marriage, no proper understanding between couple,                                                                           
 - Work  as agricultural labor within village and work as 
construction labor in city areas, rural constriction sites,   
- Sone are migrated to Middle East countries,   
- Borrow money from local money lenders on high interest rate,                                                                
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                            
- Living in marginal land, some are in nuclear some on extended 
family,                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Some work on rented land, lack of investment even if they are 
managing for agricultural production,                                                                                                               
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to father).                                                                                                           
- Access to community/social initiatives, but limitedly benefitted,                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
-Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and 
self-esteem,                                                                                                      
- Bear the household management responsibility.                                                                                                
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Poor 
- Very low level of school attendance, very often 
complete primary level,         
- Early marriage and bear children before at age before 
teen,                                                                           
 - Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works 
as labor in rural constriction sites,                                                                    
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Living in marginal land, majority are in nuclear family,                                                                                        
- Works on rented land with in laws, producing 
vegetables,                                                                                                        
- Lack money to invest in rented land even if they are 
managing for agricultural production,                                                                                                               
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
father in law and in some case it belongs to husband).                                                                                                           
- Have some access to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                                    
Near Poor                                                                                                         
- Majority have passed class 10 and a few of them 
have +2 level education,  but due to low quality 
education, limited opportunity, employment is less,                                                                                   
- Early marriage is still prevail in Terai and a few are 
marriage after 20 yrs.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Mostly living in extended families with with father and 
mother in laws                                                                               
- Majority of this category are engaged in community 
level development workers, work in cooperatives and 
other groups, even Borrow money  to go Gulf and 
other countries,                                     
- Have access to development opportunities and 
getting skills like sewing and tailoring are self 
employed,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Very few have access to community groups and 
exposure of development, in most cases mother in law 
represents groups and cooperatives and savings and 
- Majority have passed +2 level education, some are studying 
higher level education, but due to low quality education, all are not 
getting opportunity,                                     
- Early marriage is still prevail in Terai and this segment is also 
influenced,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Mostly living in extended families with father and mother                                                                              
- Educated ones are engaged in community level development 
workers, school teacher and other services,  
- Mostly to go Gulf and Malaysia for employment,                                      
- Access to opportunities and getting skills development trainings 
like mechanics, mobile repairing, driving, enterprise development 
etc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Very few are aware on social context, mobilized and influenced 
by political parties,   
- Earning mostly managed by parents but not thinking to mange 
wife productively,                                                                                          
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing cereals and 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
cash crops along with parents, 
- Potential to work on commercial farming.  
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
credit.                                                                                          
- Marred and living in nuclear families receives skill 
development trainings like sewing and tailoring from 
development agencies(GOs, NGOs) managing small 
scale enterprisers with credits from cooperatives, 
support from husband,                                                                                                              
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing 
cereals and cash crops along with father in-laws.  
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
-Mostly educated and some are getting college level education,                                                                                                                                                                       
-Mostly marriage before age of 20 and live inside 
- Working in development field, teaching and government services 
house, not going out,                                                                                                                              
also,  
-Few have got college level education,                                               
- Those who do not have better education are getting technical 
- Very few are working outside (not manual) in case 
trainings and engaged in driving, mechanical work, and other 
husband, father and mother in laws permitted,                                                    
enterprises     
- Have got skill development trainings and few have 
-Limited access to credit facility due to collateral, Limited 
running tailoring enterprises, groceries,                                                                                                                            
knowledge of commercial agricultural production and marketing, 
-Limited access to credit facility due to collateral, 
- Limited financial and business knowledge and skills.  
Limited knowledge of commercial agricultural 
- Seems interested to engage in earning money activities.  
production and marketing, 
- Limited financial and business skills.  
- Seems interested to engage in activities to earn 
money,   
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
26-40 yrs.                                                                                
ISSUES:                                                                        
- High dependency ratio with very poor and poor, - Not 
productively managed the potentiality, low labor 
productively/economic return specially of women, - 
Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
is feminized,  - Malnutrition among children, pregnant and 
lactating women, availability is and issue among very poor & 
poor and utilization knowledge and practice among near 
poor-Limited practice of consultation and joint decision 
making between husband and wife specially among very poor 
and poor hhs,                                                
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,                                                            
- Lack appropriate skill and opportunities, inputs and 
technology,                                            - Limited access to 
groups & cooperatives and exposure to development 
opportunities for very poor and poor,                                                              
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- High dependency ratio, 3-4 children, mostly illiterate, 
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                        
- Women (widow), disabled and elderly headed 
households likely to be more vulnerable,                                                                                                     
- Very limited understanding between husband and 
wife, Lack further plan for future, - Borrow money from 
local money landers on high interest rate for household 
financing, and even to send husbands to India for 
agriculture labor,                                                                                                    
- Work as agriculture labor within village, husbands are 
migrated for agriculture labor to India and some time 
works within villages,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and 
- Majority are illiterate, very few are attended school up to 4-5 
classes,    - Work as agriculture and construction labor, majority 
go for agriculture labor to India and some time works within 
villages,                                                                                              
-Very limited understanding between husband and wife, Lack 
further plan for future, - Borrow money from local money landers 
on high interest rate for household financing, and even go to India 
for agriculture labor,                                                                                                    
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
Male 
- Majority are illiterate, learned get signature from Non Formal 
education.  - Work  on own small piecess of land, agricultural 
labor within village, few works as labor in rural constriction sites, 
go to India and Kathmandu for any type of work,                                                                     
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                       
- Living in marginal land, unregistered are very few.                                             
- Works on rented and shared cropping land and producing 
vegetables and cereals,                                     
- Lack money to invest in rented land for high return.                                            
- No ownership of land (in some cases, it belongs to father)                             
- Joined on cooperatives formed on other groups initiations, but 
limitedly benefitted,   
Lack knowledge and access to financial and business knowledge 
and skills,                                                    
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues for specially for very poor women and 
youth                                                                                        - 
Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                     
Highly potential age group to organize and mobilize for 
production and marketing of agricultural commodity providing 
them required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                           
 - Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments 
and/or mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in Multi 
Sector Platform (MSP),    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties,                              
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
Household mentoring/GALS.   
- Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                   
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral specially for youth 
and women,     
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less and those who do not have 
productive land.                                                                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Poor                                                                                                                     
- Majority are illiterate, learned get signature from Non 
Formal education.        
- Early marriage and bear children before teen age,  
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                                 
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works 
as labor in rural constriction sites,                                                                    
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                     
- Living in marginal land, unregistered are very few.                                           
- Works on rented land with husbands, producing 
vegetables                      
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
production.               
 - No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
father in law and in some case it belongs to husband).                                                                                 
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                                      
Near Poor                                                                                                        
- Majority have passed school level education, Some have 
 - Majority have passed primary level education, a few 
passed +2 level and higher level education, 
not attended in school, few have passed +2 level 
- Majority educated ones are employed in villages as teacher, 
education and employed in village,                                                                                    
development worker, engaged in politics, and business, a few are 
- Majority of this group has married before age of 20, 
government employee mostly on technical sector,  
bearing 2-3 children, Malnutrition in children, pregnant 
and lactating mother,                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 - Mostly, medium level education are employed in Gulf countries 
and increasing household assets, 
-  Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended 
- A few returnees are initiating new enterprises in agriculture 
families with in laws                                                                               
sector like livestock, fish farming, vegetable farming, 
- Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
- Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are producing 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
cereals and vegetables in rented land and shared cropping,  
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
-  Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended families                        
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and 
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives, often in 
savings and credit facility,                                                                                            
leadership positions and benefiting savings and credit facility,  
- Receives skill development trainings like sewing and 
- Most potential one to engage in commercial agriculture in 
tailoring from development agencies(GOs, NGOs) 
agriculture,  
managing small scale enterprisers with credits from 
cooperatives, support from husband                                                                                                         
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- very few of this segment are living in rural areas, 
mostly are not permitted to work outside,  -Educated 
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas, who lives are 
engaged in business and commercial farming like fish, dairy, goat, 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
ones are working outside and engaged in enterprises 
in main junctions, and market centers, supporting 
family business,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, commercial 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,                                     
- Seems interested to engage in activities to earning 
money, collateral in case of land ownership certificate 
is an issue to get loan from Banks,  
Male 
cow, buffalo, -Educated ones are working outside and engaged in 
enterprises in main junctions and market centers,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Majority are engaged politics,                                 - Seems 
interested to engage in activities to earn earning money,- Many of 
this segment have access to banks and taking benefits,    
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
1  Madeshi  
 ….. 
continued 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes: 
Yadavs, 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
Very poor 
ISSUES:                                                                         
-  High dependency ratio mostly among illiterate,  
- High dependency ratio, mostly illiterate,                                                   
- Low level illiteracy, even deprived from getting social security 
- Women (widow) headed households looks like have not 
- Women  (widow) and elderly headed households 
facility, 
ownership of land,                                                                                              
- Elderly people seems vulnerable when family support 
likely to be more vulnerable,  
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
mechanism is lacking,   
- Citizenship certificate is an issue, deprived from 
households,                                               
- Mostly living separately in couple, single ones are living with son 
social security facility                                                                                                    
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
and daughter in laws,                                                                   
-Mostly separated from son and daughter in laws, 
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
- Borrow money from local money landers on high interest rate for 
- Borrow money from local money landers on high 
development opportunities for poor and near poor.                                                                
household financing,                                                                                                    
interest rate for household financing,                                                                                                    
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
- Work as agriculture labor within village,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Work as agriculture labor within village,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
to run household and business,                                                         
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                              
- Very limited awareness on development and social and 
- Very limited access to community groups and 
-  Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor and 
administrative context,                                                                                                                                                                                                
cooperatives,                                                                                                                                                                                                      
very poor,  
Poor:                                                                                                                      
- Discrimination and practice of untouchability often blaming 
 - Majority are illiterate,   
for witchcraft (Boksi) to poor elder and single women,  
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works 
- Facing problems on getting social security facility in lack of 
as labor in rural constriction sites,                                                                    
citizenship, 
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Lack of basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, 
- Living in marginal land, unregistered are very few.                                                                                          
sanitation facilities,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Works on rented land w/ husbands, producing 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    - 
vegetables (in few cases),                                                                                                       
Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other 
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
ages and mobilized for economic earning,                                                    
produce.                                                                                                               
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
- No productive land in their ownership,                                                                                                          
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits,  
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly 
- Show them hope and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
benefitted,                                                      
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening existing 
groups of interested and like minded including left out 
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
groups in one location).  
- Majority are illiterate, elderly are on vulnerable condition, 
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works as labor in 
rural constriction sites,                                                                    
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Living in limited marginal land, some are living in landlords land,                                                                                          
- Works on rented and shared cropped land, producing 
vegetables (in few cases),                                                                                                        
- Money to invest in rented land for agricultural production is 
limited.                                                                                                               
- No productive land in their ownership,                                                                                                          
- Assess to community group seems good, but limitedly 
benefitted,           
Near Poor                                                                                                         
- Majority are illiterate, leaving school without 
completing primary school level,                                                                            
- Living separately, single women are more vulnerable,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Majority are illiterate, leaving school without completing primary 
school level,   
- No sufficient land for agriculture production,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Sudi, Teli, 
Mandals, 
Mahato.....
etc. 
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed on MSP, 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
commodity after B2B linkages with traders,   
- Introduce climate resilient production technology and 
resilient crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                       
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipality guarantee/collateral specially for poor 
women,                                                
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
commodities (vegetable, fish and goat.....)  farming   
- Coordination with CSOs working on right issues for 
preparation of citizenship and land ownership certificate and 
address other social issues,                                   
Male 
-  work outside also in city areas, and other service sectors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are producing 
cereals and vegetables in rented land and shared cropping, 
raising livestock- goats, poultry, buffalo,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Access to community groups, cooperatives and savings and 
credit facility is good,                                                                                            
-  Potential for agriculture farming in small scale,                                                                                                        
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
-  Mostly living in nuclear family, few are in extended 
families with in laws,                                                                                        
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and 
savings and credit facility,                                                                                            
-   Potential for agriculture farming in small scale,                                                                                                        
Non Poor                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Mostly living managing houses not involved in 
agricultural activities,  
- Majority are living with extended families, very few 
are separated from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in politics, commercial 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
- Majority are renting out land and living in city areas,   
- Majority are living with extended families, very few are separated 
from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in politics, commercial farming of 
Fish, business and enterprises,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
Ethnic Minority groups 
Margin-
alized 
groups  
(Mostly 
Muslim 
and 
Tharus 
belong 
to this 
group) 
Less than 25 yrs 
.ISSUES- 
 Early marriage and bearing child on early age,  
- Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating women 
among poor and very poor category,  
- High number of dependent children primarily in Muslim 
communities,  
- Imbalance workload between men and women, 
 - Lack of visioning and planning of resources and 
opportunities for future,  
- Limited access to community groups and cooperatives 
especially for poor and very poor category, 
 -  Low self esteem, lack proper confidence to move ahead 
among poor women,  
- Lack of parents trust on youth and no collateral for credit, 
 -Limited access to community groups and cooperatives 
specially for very poor and poor category  
- Lack of financial knowledge and business skills to engage in 
agriculture sector, OPPORTUNITIES: Potential segment of 
people to: -Mobilize to increase income and improve their 
well being, -Engage in agricultural sector to run as business  
Very poor                                                               
- Not completing school level education properly,                                                                                                                                                                
-Early marriage,  bearing child in early age. 
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother, 
- Number of Children and dependents are high mostly 
Muslim community.                                                       - 
Very limited mutual discussions and understanding 
about future life of self and children between husband 
and wife,                                                                                                  
-  Low self esteem, lack proper confidence to move 
ahead,   
 - Working as agriculture labor within village.                                                                                                                                                       
- Lack of productive land and ownership of land,                                                          
- No savings, credit from local money landers, -Lack of 
visioning to improve future life,- Limited assess to 
community group and exposure to development.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Imbalance work load  between women and man.  
- Not completing school level education properly,                                                                                                                                                                
-Early marriage and Number of Children and dependents are high 
mostly Muslim community.                                                       - 
Very limited mutual discussions and understanding about future 
life of self and children between husband and wife,                                                                                                  
- Low self esteem, lack proper confidence to move ahead,   - 
Working as agriculture labor within village, construction worker, 
work in India and a few are employed in Gulf countries,                                                                                                                                                       
- Lack of productive land and ownership of land,                                                          
- No savings, taking credits from local money landers,  
- Lack of visioning to improve future life, 
- Limited assess to community group, cooperatives and exposure 
to development.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Imbalance work load  between women and man.  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Margin-
alized 
groups  
(Mostly 
Muslim 
and 
Tharus 
belong 
to this 
group) 
Male 
and demonstrate the sector is profitable,                            -
Develop as lifetime entrepreneur,                                                        
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and like 
minded to engage in production of selected VC commodities 
(this may very by clusters and commodity), - Mobilize existing 
potential groups including the left outs,                                                                        
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite',                                                                    
- Identify most vulnerable and risk averse women and men 
and engage in household mentoring/GALS.  - Facilitate to 
prepare business/production plan (illiterate can use symbols 
and diagrams) as agreed on MSP, - Mobilize for production 
and marketing of planned commodity after B2B linkages with 
traders,  - Introduce/demonstrate efficient climate resilient 
production technology and resilient crop verities and 
production methods,                                                                   
- Lending collateral free loan to individuals considering group 
and municipality guarantee to fund on prepared plan (if 
collateral is an barrier to interested one),- Encourage and 
mobilize to meet the production target, - 
Introduce/demonstrate efficient production technology 
resilient crop verities and production methods,/technology - 
Lending collateral free credit with guarantee mechanism with 
municipality and groups for youth and very poor.- Explore and 
facilitate for renting in land for production of selected/planned 
commodity  for landless,- Facilitate to manage collateral 
consent from guardians for youth and women. 
- Majority left school before completing school level education, 
very few are completed 10 and +2 level education,  
- Early marriage, high dependency ratio,                                                                           
- Work on construction and other sector in city areas, some are 
going to India and a few to Gulf countries,   
- A few work on own families small pieces, rented land and 
shared cropping land and producing vegetables and cereals,                                                                                                               
- Lack of money to invest in rented land to increase agricultural 
production and profit,                                                
 - Limited savings, limited practical ideas for earning and 
business,  
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to father)                                                                           
- Limited assess to community group due to social and economic 
status,  
- Potential group to engage in business and financial skills,                                                       
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Very few are attending school, left before completing 
school level education,  
- Early marriage and bear children before teen age, 
high dependency ratio,                                                                           
- Work  as agricultural labor within village and work on 
own families small piece of land,                                              
 - Limited savings, limited productive land,  
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
father in law and in some case it belongs to husband).                                                                          
- Works on rented land by husbands, producing 
vegetables  and cereals,                                                                                                               
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Limited assess to community group due to social and 
economic status,  
- Limited mobility outside villages,                                                      
Near Poor                                             
- Limited education, left school before completing 
primary level in most cases, very few have passed 
school level education,                                                                                    
- Early marriage and having children before 20 yrs., 
Muslims have high number of children,                         
- Mostly living in extended families with father and 
mother in laws,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- some are engaged in goat, chicken and (pig by non 
Muslims), buffalo rearing (in some cases)                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Tharus are more cohesive and organized in groups 
but Muslims are very rarely organized in groups and 
exposure of development, in most cases mother in law 
represents groups and cooperatives and savings and 
credit.                                                                                         
- Married and living in nuclear families receives skill 
development trainings like sewing and tailoring from 
development agencies (GOs, NGOs) managing small 
scale enterprisers with credits from cooperatives. in 
Muslims it is difficult to have access to group of below 
25 young women,                                                                                         
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing 
cereals and cash crops along with father in-laws.  
- Majority are literate, some complete class 10 and few to 10, + 
2and above,  
- Early marriage, Muslims have high number of children,                         
- Mostly living in extended families with parents,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Tharus are more cohesive and organized in groups but Muslims 
are very rarely organized in groups and exposure of development 
family members represent groups & cooperatives and manage 
savings credit.                                                                                         
- A few are getting vocational skill training from GoN and other 
development Agencies,   
-  Mostly working in city areas, few educated are working as 
development worker, private sector and go to Gulf countries,                                                       
- Managing rented lands for agriculture and producing cereals and 
cash crops along with father, 
- Potential group to mobilize in commercial agriculture with 
business and financial skills and knowledge, 
- Limited trust to the youths from parents, 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Non Poor                                                                                                                                                                                                   
-Mostly marriage before age of 20 and live inside 
house due to belief of high status daughter in laws,                                                                                         
- Very few are working outside, in case husband, father 
and mother in laws permitted,                                                    
-  Have got skill development trainings and few have 
running tailoring enterprises,                                                                                     
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, business and 
enterprises, land is managed for commercial crops,                                          
-limited access to credit facility due to collateral, 
Limited knowledge of commercial production. Limited 
financial and business skills.  
- Majority have passed school level, some +2 and a few on higher 
education, some wants abroad for higher education,  
-Mostly marriage between 20-25, a level of discussion for 
managing family size,                                                                                      
- Working outside in city areas, some are working in development 
sector, some are engaged in private sector,                                                                                                                          
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, business and enterprises, 
land is managed for commercial crops,                                          
- Limited trust from parents to initial 
Margin-
alized 
groups  
(Mostly 
Muslim 
and 
Tharus 
belong 
to this 
group) 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                 
ISSUES:  
- High dependency ratio with very poor and poor, women 
mostly are illiterate,  
- Women are over loaded with work however, not 
productively managed the potentiality, labor productivity 
specially of women is low, - Imbalanced workload between 
women and men, agriculture is feminized,  - Malnutrition 
among children, pregnant and lactating women, availability is 
an issue among very poor/poor and utilization knowledge and 
practice among near poor- Limited practice of consultation 
and joint decision making between husband and wife among 
very poor and poor hhs,                                               - Lack 
visioning and planning of resources for future,                                                            
- Lack appropriate skill and opportunities, inputs and 
technology,                                            - Limited access to 
groups & cooperatives and exposure to development 
opportunities for very poor/poor,                                                              
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues specially for very poor women                                                                                          
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
 Highly potential age group to organize and mobilize for 
production and marketing of agricultural commodity providing 
them required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- High dependency ratio, 3-4 children, mostly illiterate , 
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                        
- Women headed (widow) households likely to be more 
vulnerable more in Muslim communities,                                                                                                     
-Very limited understanding between husband and 
wife,  - Lack further plan for future, - Borrow money 
from local money landers on high interest rate for 
household financing, and even to send husbands to 
India and Gulf as labor,                                                                                                  
- Work as agriculture labor within village, husbands are 
migrated for agriculture labor to India and some time 
works within villages,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and 
self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Imbalanced  workload between women and man,  
Poor 
- Majority are illiterate, learned get signature from Non 
Formal education.        
- Early marriage and bear children before teenage,  
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother, 
- high dependency and number of children in Muslim 
Community,                                                                                
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works 
as labor in rural constriction sites, - Borrowed money 
-  some are illiterate, very few have passed                                                                            
-Very limited understanding between husband and wife,  - Lack 
further plan for future, High dependency ratio, 3-5 children,- 
Borrow money from local money landers on high interest rate for 
household financing, and even to go  India and Gulf for labor 
work,                                                                                                  
- Work as construction and other sector in city areas,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited knowledge on managing earnings due to lack of future 
visioning of life,                                                                        -
Assess to community group and exposure to development is 
moderate  low self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Imbalanced  workload between women and man,- Limited 
financial and business knowledge and skills,   
- Majority are literate, very few have passed school level, a few 
are + 2 passed and more than bachelor level,        
 - Early marriage and bear children before teenage,  high 
dependency and number of children in Muslim Community,                                                                                
- Work as agricultural labor within village, few works as labor in 
rural constriction sites and private sector in city areas, some go to 
India and Gulf countries for employment, - Borrowed money from 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                          
 - Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments, 
- Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments, - Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in 
Multi sector Platform (MSP),   - Mobilize for production and 
marketing of selected/potential VC commodities, - Introduce 
climate resilient technology and resilient crop varieties,  and 
efficient production technology,          - Conduct 
comprehensive package of financial knowledge and business 
skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS). - Facilitate guareians to provide consent for 
collateral to take loan for youths and women,                                                                    
- Explore and facilitate for collateral free credit to with 
guarantee from municipal and group specially for youth and 
women,    - Facilitate for renting in land for agriculture 
production to landless and others who do not have productive 
land.                                                                                                                     
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Male 
Female 
local money landers to go and send sons to Gulf on high interest 
from local money landers to send husbands and sons 
rate,                                                                    
to Gulf on high interest rate,                                                                   
- Limited earnings, saving are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Living in marginal land, No productive land,                                                                                        
- Living in marginal land, unregistered are very few.                                                                                          
- Works on rented land and share cropping lands and produce 
- Works on rented land with husbands, producing 
vegetables and cereals,                                                                                                                
vegetables                                                                                                                
- Lack money to invest in rented land to increase agricultural 
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
produce.                                                                                                               
- Access to community group and cooperatives, but benefitted 
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
limitedly,                                                   
father in law and in some cases it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                    
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
 - Majority have passed primary level education, mostly 
have not attended in school, few have passed +2 level 
education and employed in village,                                                                                    
- Majority of this group has married before age of 20, 
bearing 2-3 children,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
-  Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended 
families with in laws                                                                               
- Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and 
savings and credit facility, however this access to 
Muslims is limited,                                                                                             
- Receives skill development trainings like sewing and 
tailoring from development agencies(GOs, NGOs) 
managing small scale enterprisers with credits from 
cooperatives, support from husband,  
- Aware on savings, managing and increasing assets 
with limited earnings,                                                                                                            
Non Poor                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
- very few of this segment are living in rural areas, 
mostly are not permitted to work outside,  
- Receiving remittances from husbands and and sons.    
-Educated ones are working outside and engaged in 
enterprises in main junctions, and market centers, 
supporting family business,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, commercial 
- mostly are educated and those with little education are confident 
to run other enterprises, 
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas, mostly 
engaged in  business and service sector, and politics, 
- Landlords are engaged in fish farming and in many cases land is 
rented out,    
- Seems interested to engage in activities to earn money.  
 - Majority have passed school level education, some have 
passed +2 and above, a few have higher education,   
- Less educated are engaged and construction and other private 
sector, and educated ones are engaged development work, 
school teacher and other jobs in city areas,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
-  Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended families 
with in laws                                                                               
- Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are producing 
cereals and vegetables in rented land and shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Have good access to community groups, cooperatives and 
savings and credit facility this segment is leading these 
community groups,                                                                                              
- Aware on savings, managing and increasing assets with limited 
earnings,   
- Highly potential to engage in  commercial sector,                                                                                                       
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,                                      
- Seems interested to engage in earning money 
activities, and collateral in case of land ownership 
certificate is an issue to get loan from Banks,  
Male 
Margin-
alized 
groups  
(Mostly 
Muslim 
and 
Tharus 
belong 
to this 
group) 
- High dependency ratio, mostly illiterate,                                                                 
-Disable and elderly headed households seems more more 
vulnerable,  
- Living in small pieces of land with thatched huts, 
- Citizenship certificate is also an issue, deprived to get social 
security facility                                                                                                     
- Borrow money from local money landers on high interest rate for 
household financing, and even to send husbands to India for 
agriculture labor,                                                                                                    
- Work as agriculture labor within village,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Limited savings from small earning,                                                                        
- Very limited assess to community groups and productive lands,                                                                                                                                                                                                      
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                         
-  High dependency ratio mostly among illiterate,  
- Women (widow), elderly and disable headed households 
looks like more vulnerable,                                                                                              
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
households,                                               
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
development opportunities for poor and near poor.                                                                
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business 
skills,                                                         
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                               
-  Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor and 
very poor,  
- Discrimination often blaming for witchcraft (Boksi) to poor 
elder and single women,  
- Facing problems on getting social security facility in lack of 
citizenship by some women, 
- Lack of basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, 
sanitation facilities,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    - 
Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other 
ages and mobilized for economic earning,                                                    
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits,  
- Show them hope and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening existing 
groups of interested and like minded including left out 
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
groups in one location).  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed on MSP, 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
commodity after B2B linkages with traders,   
- Introduce climate resilient production technology and 
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- High dependency ratio, mostly illiterate,                                                                 
- Women headed (widow) households seems more 
vulnerable,  
- Living in small pieces of land with thatched huts, 
- Citizenship certificate is an issue, deprived from 
social security facility                                                                                                    
-Mostly separated from son and daughter in laws, 
- Borrow money from local money landers on high 
interest rate for household financing, and even to send 
husbands to India for agriculture labor,                                                                                                    
- Work as agriculture labor within village,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                        
- Very limited assess to community groups and 
productive lands,                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Poor:                                                                                                                      
 - Few are  literate, others just know to put signatures, 
aware on social contexts and other processes,- Single 
women (widow), disable and elderly headed hhs are 
vulnerable,- Limited earning, conscious on savings and 
increasing assets,- Work on  own small pieces of and 
along with shared cropping, raising,                                                                    
- Some families work on rented lands and managing 
livelihoods jointly with husbands and/or other family 
members,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
produce.                                                                                                               
- Limited ownership om productive land,                                                                                                          
- Have assess to community group, sometime in 
leadership positions also,  
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- Majority are literate, illiterate are also aware on social 
contexts,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
- Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in 
extended families with in- laws, - Managing 
- Some are literate, very few are have passed school level 
education,  aware on social contexts and other processes,- 
Disable and elderly headed hhs are vulnerable,- Limited earning, 
conscious on savings and increasing assets,- Work on  own small 
pieces of and along with shared cropping, raising livestock,                                                                   
- Some families work on rented lands and managing livelihoods 
jointly with other family members,   -  A few are working as 
agriculture labor and construction sector, and work on city areas,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Lack money/credit to invest in rented land to increase 
agricultural production,                                                                                                                
- Limited ownership om productive land,                                                                                                          
- Have good assess to community group, sometime in leadership 
positions,  
- Mostly literate, aware on social and political contexts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in extended families 
with in- laws, - In most cases returnee from Gulf, working in city 
areas and younger sons are out for earning,                                                                                      
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
resilient crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                       
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipality guarantee/collateral specially for poor 
women,                                                
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
commodities (vegetable, fish and goat.....)  farming   
- Coordination with CSOs working on right issues for 
preparation of citizenship and address other social issues,                                   
Male 
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are producing 
cereals and vegetables in rented land and shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Access to community groups, cooperatives and savings and 
credit facility is normal in many cases                                                                                            
-  Potential for agriculture farming in small scale, with credit and 
market linkages,   - Credit required for enterprise is lacking.                                                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
households solely, in most cases husbands and 
younger sons are out for earning,                                                                                      
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and 
savings and credit facility,                                                                                           
-   Potential for agriculture farming in small scale,                                                                                                        
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Mostly managing houses limitedly involved in 
agricultural activities,  
- Majority are living with extended families, very few 
are separated from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in politics, commercial 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
- Education to this segment is good, majority are literate, 
- Limited portion are involved in agricultural activities, primarily 
commercial fish farming, business and other enterprises,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Engaged in party politics,  
- Very few are living in rural areas. 
Influential 
groups: 
Brahmans 
- Jha, 
Thakur, 
Mishra, 
Kayasta, 
Karna, 
Rajputs 
etc.) 
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
ISSUES:                                                                        
- Not productively managed time of women who are not 
engaged in other additional income enterprises,   
- Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making at 
family in very poor and poor hhs,                                                
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
is feminized,  men are not mut interested in agriculture 
business,                                                             - Interested 
to earn money but lack appropriate skill and opportunities, 
inputs and technology,                                             
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives for very poor and 
poor, not active and functional even engaged in groups.                                                             
-  Limited financial knowledge and business skills,                                                         
- Borrow money from relatives and family network some time 
from money landers and no credit facility due to collateral 
issues specially for very poor women                                                                            
- Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning 
for resources and opportunities.                 
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
women due to availability and utilization knowledge and 
practice,   
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Very Few of influential groups are very poor in 
number, they even use family networks and relatives to 
get access and opportunities,  
 - Majority of this group have attends schools and due 
to cultural influence of family and caste social 
networks,                                                                             
- Women headed households, disables and elderly 
headed households are likely to be more vulnerable,                                                                 
- Very low level human capitals- like skills, and ideas 
for better life and management, limited mutual 
discussions and understanding about future life of self 
and children between husband and wife,                                                                                                  
- Working in small land pieces on agriculture,                                                                                                
-Borrow money from relatives and to send husbands 
Gulf and India for work and other household expenses.                                                                                                                                                                                             
  -Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and 
self-esteem,  but it is better in comparison to other 
groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Very few from influential groups are in this segment, they even 
use family networks and relatives to get access and opportunities,  
 - Majority of this group attends schools and due to cultural 
influence of family and caste social networks,                                                                                                                                           
- Very low level human capitals- like skills, and ideas for better life 
and management, limited mutual discussions and understanding 
about future life of self and children between husband and wife,                                                                                                  
- Migrated to Gulf and some time works within villages and India 
too,                                                                                               -
Borrow money from relatives and to go Gulf and India for work 
and other household expenses.                                                                                                                                                                                             
  -Limited interest in community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and self-esteem,  
but it is better in comparison to other groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:  
Potential group of human resources to: Organize and 
mobilize in commercial agriculture and improve their well 
being,  
Engage in agricultural sector to run as business, Develop as 
lifetime entrepreneur  providing them required business and 
financial skills, knowledge, technology and services,                                                                                                   
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
youths (both women and men based on local situation) in one 
cluster from representing different segments, mobilization of 
existing groups with inclusion of left out segments household,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in Multi 
sector Platform (MSP),    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient varieties,  
and production technology,                           
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).  
 - Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production, specially for youths                                                                    
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral for very poor and 
poor.     
- Facilitate for renting in land for vegetable, fish and other 
potential commodity farming, for poor and who do not have 
productive land.                                                                      
Male 
- Majority have attended school but not completed properly, very 
few have passed + 2 lever education, but due to quality of 
education very less opportunity available,         
- Now a days educated are getting marriage after 18 yrs., very 
few attend school after marriage,                                                                             
 -  Majority living with families, mostly reading in colleges and 
work in city areas,  
- A few are employed in Gulf countries and India too,                                                              
- Mostly income is controlled by parents, limited understanding 
with spouse.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Lack credits to invest in rented land even if they are managing 
for agricultural production,                                                                                                               
- No ownership of land, trust from parents for investment is 
limited,                                                                                   - Have 
better assess to community group, but youths are not much 
interested  to engage in groups,   
- Some Gulf returnees are exploring opportunities in agriculture so 
these are potential ones,                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Majority have attended school but not completed 
properly, very few have passed + 2 lever education, 
but quality of education is low,         
- Now a days educated are getting marriage after 18 
yrs., very few attend school after marriage,                                                                             
 -  Majority living with families and very few are 
separated and living in nuclear family, mostly work 
agriculture and cash/vegetable crop production,                                                                      
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly, 
very poor segments of other groups,                                                                                                                                                                          
-Rear goats, ducks, buffalos, and engaged in of-farm 
activities, tailoring, cosmetics, grocery,                                                                                                     
- Lack credits to invest in rented land even if they are 
managing for agricultural production,                                                                                                               
- No ownership of land (in most cases, it belongs to 
father in law).                                                                                                           
- Have better assess to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                                      
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- Mostly this category are educated,  but quality varies, 
some are still studying, after marriage also,                                                                               
- Early marriage is still prevail in Terai and a few are 
marriage after 20 yrs.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Mostly living in extended families with father and 
mother and with father and mother in laws,  - Families 
are engaged in politics, business, and farming as 
business,                                                                          
-  Majority of this category are engaged in community 
level development workers, school teachers, 
cooperatives staff, husbands are getting higher 
education and also searching opportunities for 
employment and engaged in student politics of 
different political Parties,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
-Marriage during studying at +2 and higher level, 
mostly around age of 20,  
- Marred before 20 are with just high school level 
education are confined within household works, due to 
cultural barrier that high status/ more conservative 
family do not prefer to go daughter in laws out,                                                                                                                           
- Most of this group are either studying or engaged in any type of 
jobs, school teacher, government and development sector 
services,  
 - Few are involved in family business and some are engaged in 
politics,                                                                                                                 
- Not seems much interested to engage in agriculture work. 
- Mostly this category are educated,  some are studying higher 
education,- Majority are engaged in development work, school 
teacher, government services and private sector, - Less educated 
are employed in Gulf countries, returnees seems interested in 
agriculture enterprises,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
- Mostly living in extended families with Parents,- Families are 
engaged in politics, business, and fish and agriculture farming,  - 
Credit required for enterprise is lacking,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Mostly are engaged in getting higher education, and 
engaged any type of work, 
- Not seems interested to engage in agriculture work. 
Male 
  Medeshi
… 
continued 
Influential 
groups: 
Brahmans 
- Jha, 
Thakur, 
Mishra, 
Kayasta, 
Karna, 
Rajputs 
etc.) 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        
- High dependency ratio with very poor and poor,  
- Not productively managed the potentiality, low labor 
productively/economic return specially of women,  
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
is feminized,   
- Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating women, 
availability is and issue among very poor & poor and 
utilization knowledge and practice among near poor 
-Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making 
between husband and wife specially among very poor and 
poor hhs,                                                
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,                                                             
- Lack appropriate skill and opportunities, inputs and 
technology,                                             
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives and exposure to 
development opportunities for very poor and poor,                                                              
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                         
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues for specially for very poor women and 
youth                                                                                         
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
 Highly potential age group to organize and mobilize for 
production and marketing  of agricultural commodity providing 
them required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments 
and/or mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Very low number of this segment, High dependency ratio, 3-4 
children,  
- Around half in number have attended school, but not got 
properly passed out.  
- Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                        
- Women headed (widow), elderly and disable headed 
households likely to be more vulnerable,                                                                                             
- Due to access and relatively good network of Borrow money 
from relatives and close networks,  as other send husband to 
work on Gulf.                                                                                  
- Work as agriculture and construction labor within village and 
some as got small entrepreneur.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Savings and thinking about future of children and life is better 
that other segments of people.  
- Due to being from influential group, even poor status, assess to 
community group and exposure to development is relatively 
better,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Workload is Imbalanced between women and man is common. 
Very poor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Very low number of this segment, High dependency 
ratio, 3-4 children,  
- Around half in number have attended school, but not 
got properly passed out.  
- Women headed (widow), elderly and disable headed 
households likely to be more vulnerable,                                                                                             
- Due to access and relatively good network of Borrow 
money from relatives and close networks,  as other 
send husband to work on Gulf.                                                                                  
- Work as agriculture and construction labor within 
village and some as got small entrepreneur.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Savings and thinking about future of children and life 
is better that other segments of people.  
- Due to being from influential group, even poor status, 
assess to community group and exposure to 
development is relatively better                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Workload is Imbalanced between women and man is 
common. 
Poor:                                                                                                                       
-  Literacy is not problem and majority are literate, 
mostly attended basic school level education,                                                                  
- aware on savings, trying to save and increasing 
assets, earnings are poorly managed,                                                                                               
- Living in small pieces of land, but not marginalized,                                                                                           
- Works on rented land with husbands, rear livestock 
like goat, buffalo, cow, ducks and produce vegetables 
- Lack of money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
produce, profit is limited, 
- Limited ownership of productive land, women 
normally are not entitled to Land ownership,  
- This group has access to user groups, however often 
in leadership positions.                                                                                                                                                             
-  Majority are literate, mostly have + 2 and above level education,  
- Educated are employed in different sector,      
- Majority of this group work on rented land, rear livestock like 
goat, buffalo, fish and produce vegetables                                                              
- Aware on savings, trying to save and increasing assets, 
earnings are poorly managed,                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Lack of money/credit to invest in rented land for agricultural 
production,  
- Limited ownership of productive land,  
- This group has access to community groups and cooperatives 
and often lead the organizations,  
-  Business knowledge and financial access is limited,   
- Those living in rural areas are potential to engage in commercial 
agriculture,                                                                                                                                                              
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties, efficient production technology,                              
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/GALS.  
 -Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                    
- Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral specially for youth 
and women,     
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less poor and those who do not 
have productive land.                                                                                                                      
Male 
-Majority have got school level education, some have passed +2 
level and higher education,   
- Majority are employed in development sector, government jobs, 
school and college teacher,                                                                                                                                                                
- Majority are involved enterprise and business and those working 
on agriculture are producing in commercial level,  
- Majority works on own land and also added rented land for 
production and income.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Community groups and cooperatives are influenced and lead by 
this segments of people,  
- Business knowledge and financial access is limited,   
- Lack credit and investment to enhance and make more profit. 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
 - Majority have got school level education, some have  
passed +2 level education, a few are employed at mid 
level works,                                                                                     
- Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended 
families with in laws                                                                               
- Majority are involved enterprise and business and 
those working on agriculture are producing in 
commercial level, Majority works on own land and also 
added rented land to produce more.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Community groups and cooperatives are influenced 
and lead bit this segments of people,  
- This group has access and influence on development 
and getting benefits from skill development work, and 
running some kind of enterprisers with credits from 
cooperatives, support from husband,                                                                                                             
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas, 
mostly are not permitted to work outside,  -Educated 
ones are working outside and engaged in enterprises 
in main junctions, and market centers, supporting 
family business,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, commercial 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,                                     
- This group is not interested to work on agriculture 
sector,  
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas, -Educated 
ones are working in city areas, in government, development and  
private sector jobs, engaged in enterprises in main market 
centers,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Families' are mostly engaged politics, commercial farming of 
Fish, business and enterprises,                                     - This 
group is not interested to work on agriculture sector,  
Influential 
groups: 
Brahmans 
- Jha, 
Thakur, 
Mishra, 
Kayasta, 
Karna, 
Rajputs 
etc.) 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
ISSUES:                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
- Women headed (widow), disables, elderly headed 
households,                                               
households are  vulnerable conditions,  
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
- UP to 60 yrs. are economic active and earning, 
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
engaged mostly in agriculture sector rearing goats, 
development opportunities for poor,                                                                 
cow, chicken ducks, 
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
- Over sixty are connected to social security facility                                                                                                    
to run household and business,                                                         
- Grown up children mostly are separated and elderly 
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                             
people are living separately,  
- Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor,  
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for 
- Socially aware, engaged in some enterprises also have not 
household financing,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
been productive enough even near poor too.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Perspective on savings quite better in this segment,                                                             
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    - 
- Assess to community groups is not issue but 
Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other 
ownership and access to productive lands is limited.                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Very few are literate,   
- Women headed (widow), disables, elderly headed households 
are  vulnerable conditions,  
- UP to 60 yrs. are economic active and earning, engaged mostly 
in agriculture and raising livestock, 
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for household 
financing,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Perspective on savings quite better in this segment,    
- Some are Gulf returnees and interested to engage in agriculture 
sector, 
- Lack credit to invest in commercial sector,                                                          
- Assess to community groups and cooperatives is not problem, 
but are not properly benefitted,                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
S
N 
Male 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
- Even not properly educated and illiterate, aware on social 
context and process,  
- less educated are engaged in agriculture and raising livestock,  
- Work on small piecess of land and earn for livelihoods,                                                                     
- Limited savings from earnings and managing assets,                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Works on own, rented lands and share cropping and producing 
vegetables and managing livestock,  
- Limited productive land on their ownership,     
- some returnees from Gulf are interested to engage in 
commercial farming,                                                                                                     
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural production,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Poor                                                                                                        
ages and mobilized for economic earning,                                                    
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
- Even not properly educated and illiterate, aware on 
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits,  
social context and process,    
- Show them hope and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
- Work on small piecess of land and earn for 
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
livelihoods,                                                                     
Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening existing 
- Limited savings from earnings and managing assets,                                                                                                                                                                                    
groups of interested and like minded including left out 
- Works on own, rented lands and share cropping with 
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
husbands, producing vegetables and managing 
groups in one location).  
livestock,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed on MSP, 
- Managing households when husbands are out for 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
earning,                                                                                                   
commodity after B2B linkages with traders,   
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
- Introduce climate resilient production technology and 
produce.                                                                                                               
resilient crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Limited productive land in their ownership,                                                                                                          
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
- Have some assess to community group, often on 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                       
leadership positions,                                                     
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
- Majority are not school attended however aware on 
System (GALS).                                                                       
social context,                                                                           
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
- Mostly living with families and very few are living 
group and municipality guarantee/collateral specially for poor 
separately, single women, disables and elderly headed 
women,                                                
hhs seems more vulnerable,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
-  Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in 
commodities (vegetable, fish and goat.....)  farming   
extended families with in- laws,  
- Coordination with CSOs working on right issues for 
-Younger sons are out for earning, either Gulf or any 
preparation of citizenship and land ownership certificate and 
outside country,                                                                                        
address other social issues,                                   
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Community groups and cooperatives are dominated 
from this segments of People, managing savings and 
credit facility,   
- Majority literate and some have passed school level education,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Elder ones are living in villages,  
- Gulf returnees, those working in city areas are interested to 
engage in agriculture enterprise sector,                                                                                        
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are producing 
cereals and vegetables. 
- some are producing on own land and on additional rented land, 
raising livestock- goats, buffalo, cow,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Community groups and cooperatives are dominated from this 
segments of People, managing savings and credit facility,   
 - Good social network however, lack investment and proper 
business Ideas,                                                                                           
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Mostly managing houses limitedly involved in 
agricultural activities,  
- Majority are living with extended families, very few 
are separated from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in politics, commercial 
- Very limited number of this segment are living in rural areas,  
- Mobilizing working class for agriculture production,  
- Mostly rented out the land and some parts are give for shared 
crops,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
- Families are mostly engaged in politics, commercial farming of 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
farming of Fish, business and enterprises,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
Male 
Fish, business and enterprises,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
2  Hill 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
ISSUES:                                                                        
- No ownership of productive land, men are engaged Gulf 
employment and transportation sector in city areas,- Very 
minimum mutual discussions and understanding about future 
life of self and children between husband and wife among   
very poor and poor hhs,                                               
 - Imbalanced workload between women and men,  
- Women mostly are engaged in agricultural and construction 
wage labor  
- Not productively managed the potentiality of women even 
some are educated ones, 
- Interested to earn money but lack appropriate productive 
asset, skill and opportunities, inputs and technology,                                            
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives for very poor and 
poor, not active even engaged groups.                                                             
-  Limited financial knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money mostly from relatives and no credit facility 
due to collateral issues specially for very youths both women 
and men,                                                                           - 
Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning for 
resources and opportunities.                 
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
women due to availability  for very poor and poor and 
utilization knowledge and practice for others,  - Limited 
capacity/knowledge of saving and managing resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
Potential to organize and mobilize for production and 
marketing providing them required business and financial 
skills knowledge, basic facilities, service and technology and 
facilitating to manage productive land,                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
youths both women and men based on cluster with 
representation different segments,  
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
Very poor:                                                                                                                    
- Majority attend schools however, it varies based on 
- Every one are attend schools however, it varies based on 
community awareness, majority leave during class 3-5, 
community awareness, majority leave before class 8-10,  - Living 
very few goes up to class 6-7. - Living in marginal 
in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership of productive 
lands, thatched huts, no ownership of productive lands,                                                                                  
lands,                                                                                  - Early 
- Early marriage,  bearing child in early age, 
marriage, engage in earning before 15 age as agriculture labor, 
malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother 
majority leave home and go to city areas and involved in transport 
is prevalent among this group,                                                   
sector, brick factory and construction sector,                                             
- Very minimum mutual discussions and understanding 
- Very minimum mutual discussions and understanding about 
about future life of self and children between husband 
future life of self and children between husband and wife,                                                                                                  
and wife,                                                                                                  
-  Faces problem of social and cultural barrier and discrimination 
-  Faces problem of social and cultural  barrier, 
even untouchability is prohibited by law,                                                                                                                                                                                       
discrimination even untouchability is prohibited by law,                        
- Producing cereal crops and vegetables wherever market 
- Working as agriculture labor within village, work as 
available on rented land in some cases producing on share 
construction labor  at private and public sectors,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
cropping basis, rearing goats, pigs and chickens, - Limited saving, 
- Producing cereal crops and vegetables wherever 
lack knowledge of visioning to improve future life, - Borrow money 
market available on rented land. In some cases 
from family networks and relatives and mostly to go sending 
producing on share cropping basis, rearing goats, pigs 
husbands to Gulf for employment,                           - A few of this 
and chickens, - Limited saving, lack knowledge of 
group has assess to community group, but benefitted less, 
visioning to improve future life, - Borrow money from 
mobility is good.                                                                                         
family networks and relatives and mostly sending 
- Even in joint families, they have good communication with 
husbands to Gulf for employment,                           - A 
spouse and participation in decision making,                                                                                                                                                                                                
few has assess to community group, but benefitted 
- Work balance between women and man is imbalanced.            
less, mobility is good.                                                                                         
(Majority of Sarki, Pariyar, Gandarba and a few Bishwokarma falls 
- Even in joint families, they have good communication 
in this group) 
with spouse but not proper participation on decision 
making,                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Work balance between women and man is 
imbalanced.            (Majority of Sarki, Pariyar, 
Gandarba and a few Bishwokarma falls in this group) 
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Majority of this group are attended school up to 6-7 
classes, 1/3 are passed class 10 and a few of them are 
studying at +2 levels also where schools are near to 
the community, quality of education is an issue.          
- Majority of this group are attended school up to 8-9 classes, 1/3 
are passed class 10 and a few of them are studying at +2 levels 
also where schools are near to the community, quality of 
education is an issue.          
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
- Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments from poor and very poor household,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as decided in MSP,   
 - Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities, - Introduce climate resilient technology and 
resilient varieties and efficient production technology,                           
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
Household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).   
- Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                   
- Facilitate for collateral free credit with guarantee 
mechanisms from municipality and groups,      
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity commercially for those who do not have 
productive land.                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Early marriage is still happening and bear children 
before teen age also                                   
- No more children these days mostly 2-3,                                             
- Work as agricultural labor within village along with 
share cropping and producing cereals and vegetables 
where market and irrigation facilities are available, 
rearing chickens, goats, pigs for supplementary 
income,                                              
 - Aware on savings, but not managing earnings 
meaningfully,                                                                                               
- Living within own community sometime on more 
marginal lands,                                                                                          
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, no idea of making profitable,                                                                                                             
- Mostly ownership of land belongs to father in law and 
in some case it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
- Assess to community group in hill communities is not 
a big problem these days, however, social 
discrimination and practice of untouchability  still 
prevails in different forms.                                                     
  - Within Dalit's of hill, Sarki, Darji and Gaine are 
relatively weaker in comparison to Bishwokarma.                                                      
Male 
- Early marriage, however no more children these days mostly 2-
3,                                             
- Work as agricultural labor within village along with share 
cropping and producing cereals and vegetables where market 
and irrigation facilities are available, rearing chickens, goats, pigs 
for supplementary income,  
- Majority are migrated to India and Gulf countries, a few are 
ingrted to city areas and working in different sector mostly in 
construction and transportation sector, engaged in police and 
army and very few educated one are working as teacher and 
development sector,                                              
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                              
- Living within own community, some are living in marginal lands 
separately,                                                                                        
- Both money and business idea to invest for more production and 
making profitable on rented land is limited,                                                                                                              
- Mostly ownership of land belongs to father, even small piecess 
of land.                                                                  - Assess to 
community group in hill communities is not a big problem these 
days, however, social discrimination and practice of untouchability 
still prevails in different forms.  
- This is one potential group to engage in commercial agriculture 
sector,                                                     
  - Within Dalit's of hill, Sarki, Darji and Gaine are relatively 
weaker in comparison to Bishwokarma.                                                      
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
- Education level is better, almost all attends and 
complete basic school level, more than half pass 10 
class and some of them pass +2 level, quality of 
education is question.  
- Some are getting community level mobilizer and 
school teacher job, some                                                                                     
- Marriage at the age of 18-20 yrs., conscious and 
having 2-3 children,                           
- Mostly living in nuclear families, very few are with 
extended families,                                                                                                               
- No Productive land ownership, engage in small scale 
enterprises in absence of husbands, who are mostly in 
Gulf, Very few are working with parent in laws rented 
land and producing cereals and vegetables along with 
- Education level is better, almost all attends and complete basic 
school level, more than half pass 10 class and some of them pass 
+2 level, quality of education is question.  
- Mostly migrated to Gulf, some are employed in army and polices 
sector, a few are involved construction and transportation sector,                                                                  
- No ownership over productive land, 
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                   
- Getting access to develop skills like electrician, carpenter, 
driving, mechanical and utilized for earning                                                                                                                  
- Better access to community groups and exposure of 
development,                                                                                                                                                                           
- No collateral to get loan due to lack of land ownership,  
- Assess to community group in hills is not a big problem these 
days, however, social discrimination and practice of untouchability 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
still prevails in different forms have negative implications,  
- Potential group to engage in commercial agriculture enterprises, 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
goat, chicken and pigs,                                                                                                
- Getting access to develop skills like sewing and 
tailoring, however earnings is limited,                                                                                                                 
- Better access to community groups and exposure of 
development,                                                                                                                                                                           
- No collateral to get loan due to lack of land 
ownership,  
Non Poor 
 (Very few Dalits fall on this category)                                                                                                            
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and 
some are on higher education, - Mostly marriage at 
after +2 level education, conscious on small family 
size,                                                                                      
- Mostly are working outside and a few are engaged in 
family business, - Due to better access getting better 
opportunity on skill development trainings, a few are 
engaged in tailoring enterprises,                                                                                                                      
- This group is very less interested in agriculture 
sector.   
(Very few Dalits fall on this category)                                                                                                            
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and some are on 
higher education, - Mostly marriage at after +2 level education, 
conscious on small family size,- This group is much benefitted 
with the provision of inclusive policies,                                                                                      
- Mostly are working in development, government and other public 
and private sector jobs, a few are engaged in family business, - 
Due to better access getting better opportunity on skill 
development trainings, a few are engaged in tailoring enterprises,                                                                                                                      
- This group is very less interested in agriculture sector.   
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        
- Not productively managed the potentiality, low labor 
productively/economic return specially of women,  
- Imbalanced workload between women and men,  
Women of very poor are engaged agriculture and 
construction wage labor, poor and near poor engaged in 
agriculture with ranging land,    
- Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating women, 
availability is and issue among very poor & poor and 
utilization knowledge and practice among near poor 
-Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making 
between husband and wife specially among very poor and 
poor hhs,                                                
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,                                                             
- Lack appropriate skill and opportunities, inputs and 
technology,                                             
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives and exposure to 
development opportunities for very poor and poor, other have 
access but not  benefitted adequately,   
- Social discrimination and cultural barrier are prevailed, even 
Very poor                                                                                                                  
- Very few are attended school; are just literate,  
- Mostly living in a community, in some cases are in 
very marginal land,                                             
- Got marriage on teenage, bearing child in early age, 
having 2-3 children,  
- Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating 
mother is prevalent in this group,                                                                                                                                                             
- Mutual discussions between wife and husband and 
understanding about future life of self is limited,                                                                                                                    
-  Social discrimination and cultural barrier are 
prevailed, even untouchability is illegal,                           
- Working as agriculture labor within village, Rearing 
goats, pigs in small piece of land, working on share 
cropping,                                                                                                       
-  Women, disable and elderly headed households are 
more vulnerable,  Cultural barrier and social 
discrimination are prevailed, limiting benefits, even 
untouchability is illegal,                                                          
- There is access but interest to engage in  group/ 
- Very few are attended school; majority are just literate,  
- Mostly living in a community, in some cases are in very marginal 
land,                                             
- Got marriage on teenage, mutual discussions between wife and 
husband and children for understanding about future life of self is 
limited,                                                                                                                                             
- Mostly migrated to city areas and engaged unskilled labor 
sector, some are engaged in Nepal army and police force, some 
are working as agriculture labor within village,                                                                                                                                                      
- There is access but interest to engage in group/cooperatives is 
limited, very less benefitted,  
- Social discrimination and cultural barrier are prevailed and 
minimized confidence, even untouchability is illegal,  
- Borrow money from family networks & relatives for household 
matters,  
- Limited business ideas and earning opportunities in villages,                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
- Imbalanced workload between women and man prevails,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Male 
untouchability is illegal,                                                             
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                         
- Borrow money mostly from relatives and family networks, no 
credit facility due to collateral issues for specially for very 
poor women and youth 
- Received remittances are not productively managed.                                                                                          
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    Highly 
potential age group to organize and mobilize for production 
and marketing  of agricultural commodity providing them 
required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons  based on cluster situation, representing 
different segments,  
Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties and efficient production technology,                               
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/GALS.  
 - Facilitate guareians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production specially for youth,                                                                    
- Facilitate for collateral free credit to youths and women 
considering mechanisms of guarantee from groups and 
municipalities,  
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less and those who do not have 
productive land.                                                                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
cooperatives is limited,  
- Borrow money from family networks & relatives, 
Husbands to send Gulf                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Imbalanced workload between women and man 
prevails,  
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Very few are educated, however aware on social 
context,                      
- Having children 3-4 on average, a few children, 
pregnant and lactating mother are affected by 
malnutrition,                                                 
- Rearing goats, pigs, chickens and buffalo also,                                                                                            
- Majority living within own community, a few are in 
isolated marginal lands,                                                               
-  Majority are working as agriculture labor, a few works 
on rented land and/or share crop with husbands, 
produce vegetables and sale,                                                                                                   
- Lack awareness and credit to invest in rented land for 
agricultural produce in commercial level,                                                                                                               
- Now ownership over productive land,                                                                                                            
- Assess to community group is not problem, however 
interest and getting benefit is limited,  
- Faces social and cultural discrimination even 
untouchability is illegal,  
- Potential to enhance capacity increase access and 
mobilize to increase production.  
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- very few are educated, however, aware on social 
context,  - a few from this segment are elected in local 
election at least one in each ware of Municipality,                                                                                                          
- Mostly husbands and sons are employed in Gulf, 
employed in Nepal Army and Police forces in some 
context employed in India too as jobs and managing 
households,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
-  Work on agriculture in rented land and/or share 
cropping basis, Some are engaged in goat, chicken 
and pig rearing, buffalo too in some cases,                                                                                                 
- High access to community groups and exposure of 
development, ofter leading the groups, In most of 
cases they are organized in their own community  
- Very few are educated, however aware on social context,                      
- Having children 3-4 on average,                                                 
- A few work as agricultural labor within village, rearing goats, 
pigs, chickens and buffalo, work on rented and shared cropped 
mostly cereal crops,                                                                                          
- Majority are living within own community, a few are in isolated 
marginal lands,                                                               
- Majority works on city areas as construction worker, work in 
transportation sector, army, police and Gulf countries,                                                                                                 
- Lack awareness and credit to invest in rented land for profitable 
agricultural production in commercial level,                                                                                                               
- Now ownership over productive land,                                                                                                            
- Assess to community group is not problem, however interest 
and getting benefit is limited,  
- Faces social and cultural discrimination, which is limiting their 
potentials even untouchability is illegal,  
- Potential to enhance capacity increase access and mobilize to 
increase production.  
- Very few are educated, however, aware on social context,  - 
Mostly employed in Gulf, employed in Nepal Army and Police 
forces in some context employed in India and city areas too,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
-  Work on agriculture in rented land and/or share cropping basis, 
Some are engaged in goat, chicken and pig rearing, buffalo too in 
some cases,                                                                                                 
- High access to community groups and exposure of 
development, often leading the groups, In most of cases they are 
organized in their own community  groups and managing monthly 
savings and credits,              
- This category are first movers, if got any opportunities and are 
potential ones to engage in commercial agriculture farming, 
primarily the returnees,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
groups and managing monthly savings and credits,             
- Receives skill development trainings like sewing and 
tailoring from development agencies(GOs, NGOs) 
managing small scale enterprisers with credits from 
groups and cooperatives but limited earnings,                                                                                                                                                                     
- Some women of this category are first movers if got 
any opportunities and are potential ones to engage in 
commercial agriculture farming,  
Non Poor: 
Very few Dalit's fall under this category)                                                                                                              
 (Very few Dalit's fall under this category)                                                                                                              
- Educated ones are working outside, other are 
- Educated ones are working outside, mainly on government jobs, 
engaged in family business and politics, 
development sector, business and politics, civil society sector as 
social activist,   
- Some have got skill development trainings and few 
- Social discrimination are opposed by this group in the society,  
have running enterprises like retail shops, tailoring, 
- Very few are living in rural areas, and engaged in agriculture 
beautyparlor,                                                                                                                                                                              
sector,                                                                                                                                                                           
 - Very few women have land ownership of productive 
- Seems less interested to engage in agriculture business,  
land                                                                                                                
- seems less interested to engage in agriculture 
business,  
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        -  
- Women (widow), elderly and disable headed households 
looks more vulnerable,                                                                                               
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
households,                                               
- Lack of workload balance between women and men, 
women seems overloaded with unproductive work                                                                                                       
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
development opportunities for poor and near poor.                                                                
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
to run household and business,                                                         
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                              
-  Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor and 
very poor,  
- Discrimination and practice of untouchability often blaming 
for witchcraft (Boksi) to poor elder and single women,  
- Facing problems on getting social security facility in lack of 
citizenship by very poor women, 
- Lack of basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, 
sanitation facilities,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Very poor 
- No Literacy, this group is socially vulnerable,                                                   
-  Even deprived to get social security facility due to 
lack of citizenship, in few cases,                                                                                                                                                                                                  
-  Majority are single due to death of husbands and are 
very marginalized,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
-  Facing social and cultural  barrier like untouchability, 
facing blame as witchcrafts (Boksi), even it is illegal,                                                                        
- Working as agriculture labor within village as single 
source of income,                                                                                                                                                     
- Rearing 1-2 goats, 1-2 pigs in small piece of land for 
additional income,                                                                           
- No access to/ and interest to engage in group/ 
cooperatives,                                    - Very limited 
hopes of future life,                                                              
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development.                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Poor:                                                                                                                                                      
- Some women of this age group are single and facing 
discrimination like witchcraft (Boksi)  
- Very few are literate,                                                  
 -  Even deprived to get social security facility due to lack of 
citizenship, in few cases,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
-  Facing social and cultural barrier like untouchability, that has 
discouraged to move ahead,                                        
- Working as agriculture labor within village as single source of 
income,                                                                                                                                                     
- Rearing 1-2 goats, 1-2 pigs in small piece of land for additional 
income,                                                                           
- No access to/and interest to engage in group/ cooperatives,                                    
- Very limited hopes of future life,                                                              
- Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development.                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Work as agricultural labor within village, some as unskilled labor, 
very few are working as skilled meson and carpenter, rearing 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
S
N 
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Dalits 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Male 
Female 
livestock like, goat (2-3), pig (1-2) Chickens in family                                                                                                           
- Single and elderly headed households are more 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    - 
- Rearing buffalo kids on sharing basis in some cases,                                                                                         
vulnerable,                                                                                                                 
Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other 
- Few works on rented land and/or share crop and producing 
- Work as agricultural labor within village, some are 
ages and mobilized for economic earning,                                                    
cereal and vegetables                                                                                                             
rearing livestock like, goat (2-3), pig (1-2) Chickens,                                                                                                           
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize with  other age groups to 
- Lack of credit to invest in rented land for agricultural production 
- Rearing buffalo kids on sharing basis in some cases,                                                                                         
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits,  
profitable,                                                                                                                
-Show them hope and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
- Few works on rented land and/or share crop by 
husbands, producing vegetables and sale at local hat 
- No ownership of productive land,  
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
bazaar,                                                                                                             
- Potential ones to work on commercial farming mostly returnees 
Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening existing 
of Gulf countries, 
- Lack of credit to invest in rented land for agricultural 
groups of interested and like minded including left out 
- Problem of discrimination and cultural barrier like untouchability 
produce.                                                                                                               
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
even it is illegal,  
- No ownership of land, in most cases, it belongs to 
groups in one location/cluster).  
husband if they have land.  
 - Single and elderly headed households are more vulnerable,   
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed on MSP, 
- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
Near Poor:                                                                                                                                                     
commodity after B2B linkages with traders,   
- Majority separated from, some are living with son 
- Introduce climate resilient production technology and 
daughter-in -laws, - Single and elderly headed 
resilient crop verities, efficient production technology,                                                                      
households are more vulnerable,                                                                                                           
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
- Engaged in agriculture labor, some are engaged in 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                       
goat, chicken and pig rearing, - No ownership to 
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
productive land, engaged in rented in and/or share 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
cropping,- Access  to community groups is not bad but 
System (GALS).                                                                       
interest and exposure to development is limited,-In 
- Facilitate for collateral free credit to poor and very poor with 
some communities they are organized in their own 
guarantee mechanism with municipality and groups for poor 
community  groups and managing monthly savings 
women,                                                
and credits,  - No access to credits and other facilities 
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
for production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
commodities (vegetable, fish and goat.....)  farming   
- Coordination with CSOs working on right issues for 
preparation of citizenship and land ownership certificate and 
address other social issues,                                   
- Mostly illiterate, very few are literate,  
- Majority separated from, some are living with son daughter-in -
laws, 
- Single and elderly headed households are more vulnerable,                                                                                                           
- Engaged in agriculture labor, some are engaged as mason and 
carpenter,  some are raising goat, chicken, pigs and buffalo,  
- No ownership to productive land, engaged in rented in and/or 
share cropping, 
- Access  to community groups is not bad but interest and 
exposure to development is limited 
,-In some communities they are organized in their own community  
groups and managing monthly savings and credits,  - No access 
to credits and other facilities for production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Non Poor: 
 (Very few Dalit's fall under this category)                                                                                                              
- Mainly women of this group are engaged in family 
business and politics, 
- Some have got skill development trainings and few 
have running enterprises like retail shops, tailoring, 
beauty parlor,                                                                                                                                                                              
 - Very few women have land ownership of productive 
land                                                                                                                
- Seems less interested to engage in agriculture 
business,  
 (Very few Dalit's fall under this category)                                                                                                              
- Mainly group are engaged in family business and politics and 
service sector, 
- Very few are engaged agriculture sector,                                                                                                                                                                             
-Very few have ownership of productive land in rural areas,                                                                                                               
- Seems less interested to engage in agriculture business,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Male 
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes 
:Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
- Majority attended school but left school before class 10, very few 
have completed +2 level, mainly people with low level human 
capital,                                                                                                                           
- Mutual understanding about future life of self and children 
between spouse looks not happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership of 
productive lands,                                                                                                                        
- Majority are migrated to city areas and working on construction, 
transportation sector, hotel and other service sector, go to India 
and very few are employed in Gulf,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Aware on savings due to their social category and family 
networks but proper management is a problem,                         
- Normally this group boys are not interested to join in community 
groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.             
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
Very poor                                                                                                           
ISSUES:                                                                        
- Not productively managed time of women who are not 
- Majority of caste groups women are attended school 
engaged in other additional income enterprises,   
but left school before class 8-9, very few have 
- Rapid migration of youths to city and market centers, 
completed +2 level,       
economically active are migrated to Gulf countries, 
- Majority get early marriage,  bearing child in early 
- Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making at 
age, malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating 
family in very poor and poor hhs,                                                
mother is prevalent among this group,                                                    
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
- Mutual understanding about future life of self and 
is feminized, men are not much interested as agriculture 
children between husband and wife looks not 
business,                                                             - Interested 
happening,   
to be entrepreneur, earn money but lack appropriate skill and 
- Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership 
opportunities, inputs and technology and market,                                            
of productive lands,                                                                                                                        
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives for very poor and 
- Working as agriculture labor within village, work as 
poor,                                                             -  Limited financial 
construction labor  at private and public sectors,                                                                                                                                                                                                      
knowledge and business skills even more people are 
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
educated,                                                        
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
- Borrow money from relatives and family network some time 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis with 
from money landers and no credit facility due to collateral 
parent in laws,   
issues specially for very poor women, 
- Rearing small animals -goats, chickens and buffalo 
- Remittances earned is not effectively mobilized in business 
- Aware on savings due to their social category and 
and less private investment in rural areas and contributing in 
family networks but proper management  seems 
rural economy.                                                                              
problem,                         
- Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning 
 - Normally this age group are not interested to join in 
for resources and opportunities.                 
community groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.             
women due to availability and utilization knowledge and 
Poor:                                                                                                                       
practice on very poor.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Majority of this group attends school, drop out starts 
OPPORTUNITIES:  
form 6 -10, 1/3 pass class 10 and a few of them are 
Potential human resources to organize and mobilize in 
studying at +2 levels where school facility is good, 
commercial agriculture and improve their well being, engage 
quality of education is an issue.  
in agricultural sector to run as business, develop as lifetime 
- Few of educated ones are working as school teacher 
entrepreneur  providing them required business and financial 
in both private and public sector, community level 
skills, knowledge, technology and financial services,                                                                                                   
development worker,          
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Early marriage is still happening due to love marriage 
- Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
and bearing children after 20,  not more than 2-3 
youths (both women and men based on local situation) in one 
children these days,                                              
- Majority of this group attends school drop out starts form class 8 
to 10, 1/2 pass class 10 and studying at +2 levels where school 
facility is good, A few are studying bachelor and above education,   
- Few of them are working in city areas in public and private 
sector, majority are going to Gulf countries,    
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
lacking business idea,                                                                                                              
- Mostly ownership of land belongs to father in law and in some 
case it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
cluster from representing different segments,  
-Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments/households,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities and manage B2B linkages, 
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient varieties  
and production technology,                           
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).  
 - Facilitate guareians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production, specially for youths                                                                    
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral for very poor and 
poor.     
- Facilitate for renting in land for vegetable, fish and other 
potential commodity farming, for poor and who do not have 
productive land.                                                                      
Hill 
continue
d…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes : 
Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
Male 
 - Community group in hill are dominated by this group, so no 
problem of access,   
-This age group is totally detached from traditional type of 
agricultural work,   
- Wants to be an entrepreneur, but no proper supporting 
mechanisms to these fulfill their aspirations,   
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Majority of this group work on their own land along 
with share cropping and rented land and producing 
cereals and vegetables where market and irrigation 
facilities are available,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for 
supplementary income,                                              
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings 
meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, lacking business idea,                                                                                                              
- Mostly ownership of land belongs to father in law,                                                      
- Community group in hill are dominated by this group, 
so no problem of access,   
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
- Education level is better, almost all attends and 
complete basic school level, more than half pass 10 
class and some of them pass +2 level, quality of 
education is question. A few are getting higher 
education,- Majority of this group are engaged in 
community level mobilizer and school teacher, 
management of cooperatives,                                                                                                         
- Majority are living in extended families and rest on 
Nuclear families,                                                                                                              
- No much Productive land ownership, engage in small 
scale enterprises in absence of husbands, who are 
mostly in Gulf, Very few are working with parent in laws 
rented land and producing cereals and vegetables 
along with goat, chicken and pigs,                                                                                                
- Getting access to develop skills like sewing/tailoring, 
vegetable farming,  however earnings is limited,                                                                                                                
- Better access and leading community 
groups/cooperatives and exposure of development is 
better,                                                                                                                                                                         
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an 
issue because they do not have ownership of land, and 
father in-laws do  not trust them,   
Non Poor:                                                                                                            
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and 
some are on higher education, socially dominant 
group, 
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and some are on 
higher education, socially dominant group, 
- Mostly engaged in getting higher education in country and 
- Education level is better, almost all attends and complete basic 
school level, more than 60% pass class 10 and +2 level, quality of 
education is question. Off them a few are getting higher 
education,- Majority of this group are engaged government 
services, school teacher, private and development sector, a few 
are migrated to Gulf and abroad for higher study,                                                                                                         
- No much productive land ownership with family,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Better access and leading community groups/cooperatives and 
exposure of development is better, however this group is not 
much interested in agriculture, - A few of this group wants to be 
entrepreneur but the support mechanism is not fully functional,                                                                                                                                                                        
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an issue 
because they do not have ownership of land, and father in-laws 
do  not trust them,   
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Mostly marriage at after +2 level education, 
conscious on small family size,                                                                                       
- Mostly are working outside and a few are engaged in 
family business,  
- Due to better access getting better opportunity on 
skill development trainings, a few are running 
enterprises,                                                                                                                       
- This group is very less interested in agriculture 
sector.   
Male 
abroad,                                                                                       
- Those who have completed education are engaged government 
and private services, a few are engaged in family business,  
 - This group is very less interested in agriculture sector but can 
be potential one for enterprise level,   
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes : 
Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
ISSUES:                                                                        
- High dependency ratio among very poor and poor,  
- Almost all of this group are attended schools and 
- Limitedly managed the potentiality, low labor 
drop out during class 6 - 10, small portion get pass 
productively/economic return specially of women,  
class 10 and a few of them are studying at +2 levels 
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
where school facility is good, quality of education is an 
is feminized,   
issue.                                                                            
- Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating women, 
- Living with 2-3 children in nuclear family, Majority get 
availability is and issue among very poor & poor and 
early marriage,  bearing child in early age, malnutrition 
utilization knowledge and practice among near poor 
in children, pregnant and lactating mother is prevalent 
-Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making 
among this group,                                                    
between husband and wife specially among very poor and 
- Mutual understanding about future life of self and 
poor hhs,                                                
children between husband and wife looks not 
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,  
happening,   
- Many productive lands in hills are leaving barren,                                                             
- Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership 
- Lack appropriate skills, opportunities, inputs and 
of productive lands,  
technology,                                             
- Borrow money from family networks and relatives and 
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives and exposure to 
mostly sending husbands to Gulf for employment,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
development opportunities for very poor and poor,                                                              
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                         
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
- Borrow money from relatives and family networks no credit 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis, some 
facility due to collateral issues  specially for very poor women 
time other labor work 
and youth                                                                                         
- Rearing small animals -goats, cow, buffalo 
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
- Aware on savings due to their social category and 
resources productively                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
family networks but proper management  seems 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    Highly 
problem,             
potential age group to organize and mobilize for production 
 - Assess to community group is not problem but 
and marketing  of agricultural commodity providing them 
benefitted less, mobility is good.  Workload between 
required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
women and man is imbalanced.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Almost all of this group are attended schools and dropped out 
during class 6 - 10, small portion get pass class 10 and a few of 
them have got higher education,                                                                             
- Mutual understanding about future life of self and children 
between husband and wife looks not happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership of 
productive lands,  
- Borrow money from family networks and relatives and mostly to 
go Gulf and India for employment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills areas and this 
group of people are producing cereal crops & vegetables on 
share cropping basis, some time engaged in short term migration 
to city areas,  
- Rearing small animals -goats, cow buffalo,  
- Aware on savings due to their social category and family 
networks but proper management seems problem,  
- Credit facility and knowledge and idea about business is lacking,             
- Assess to community group is not problem but benefitted less, 
mobility is good.   
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.   
- Wanted to involve in a more earning in a sustainable manner,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments 
and/or mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties, efficient production technology,                              
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/GALS.  
 -Facilitate guareians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                    
- Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral specially for youth 
and women,     
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less poor and those who do not 
have productive land.                                                                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Male 
Female 
- Almost all of this group attends school drop out starts from class 
- Almost all of this group attends school drop out starts 
10, majority 1/3 pass class 10 and a few of them had studied +2 
from class 10, majority 1/3 pass class 10 and a few of 
levels, some are getting higher education,  - Majority of their 
them are studying at +2 levels where school facility is 
group living in rural areas are work on their own land along with 
good and even some are getting higher education,  - 
share cropping and rented land and producing cereals and 
Few of them are engaged as community level works 
vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are available, - 
like social mobilizers, - Having not more than 2-3 
Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for supplementary income,                                             
children                                              - Majority of this 
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
group work on their own land along with share 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
cropping and rented land and producing cereals and 
lacking business idea,                                                                                                             
vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are 
.- Majority are engaged in school teacher, local level political 
available, - Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for 
career,                                                                                                           
supplementary income,                                              - 
- Better access to community groups and cooperatives in hills 
Aware on savings, but not managing earnings 
meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
often lead by this group,  - Borrow money from relatives and 
family network mainly for management of household and go/send 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
son to Gulf and other countries for employment,                                                                                            
limited, lacking business idea,                                                                                                             
- Mostly ownership of land belongs to father in law and 
in some case it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
- Community group in hill are represented by this 
group, often in leadership positions, - Borrow money 
from relatives and family network mainly to send 
husbands Gulf and other countries for employment,                                                                                            
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
- Education level is better, almost all attends and 
complete basic school level, 1/3 have passed 10 class 
and some of them pass +2 level, A few are getting 
higher education, 
- Majority of this group are engaged in community level 
mobilizer and school teacher, management of 
cooperatives,                                                                                                          
- Majority living in extended families and rest on 
Nuclear families,                                                                                                               
- No much Productive land ownership, engage in small 
scale enterprises in absence of husbands, who are 
mostly in Gulf, Very few are working with parent in laws 
rented land and producing cereals and vegetables 
along with goat, chicken and buffalo                                                                                               
- Getting access to develop skills like sewing/tailoring, 
vegetable farming, beauty parlor and hospitality 
business however earnings is limited,                                                                                                                 
- Education level is better, almost all attends and complete basic 
school level, 1/3 have passed +12 and a few are getting higher 
education, 
- Majority are engaged in government and private sector jobs and 
service sector business                                                                                                          
 - No sufficient productive land ownership, engage in small scale 
enterprises a few are producing cereals and vegetables along 
with goat, chicken buffalo most often in rented lands for more 
income, 
- Those who are not engaged in supplementary work except 
regular agriculture are migrated to Gulf and city areas,  
- Increasing asset but no investment in rural areas, limited credit 
facility in rural areas to invest in agriculture,                                                                                                                                                                                                            
- Better access and leading CBOs, forest groups and community 
groups/cooperatives and exposure of development is good,                                                                                                                                                                          
Hill 
continue
d…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes : 
Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Better access and leading CBOs, forest groups and 
community groups/cooperatives and exposure of 
development is better,                                                                                                                                                                         
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an 
issue because they do not have ownership of land, and 
father in-laws do  not trust them,   
Non Poor:                                                                                                            
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and 
some are on higher education, socially dominant 
group, 
- Mostly marriage at after +2 level education, 
conscious on small family size with 1-2 children,                                                                                    
- Mostly are working outside and a few are engaged in 
family business,  
- Due to better access getting better opportunity on 
skill development trainings, a few are running 
enterprises,                                                                                                                       
-Very few of this group seems interested in agriculture 
sector, but are potential for commercial farming with 
improved technology.    
- Better education, majority are getting +2 level and some are on 
higher education, socially dominant group, 
- Majority of this group are not living in rural areas, migrated to 
city and town areas and engaged government, private and 
development sector jobs,  
- Remaining are engaged in service sector business,                                                                                                                                                                                                        
-Very few of this group seems interested in agriculture sector, but 
are potential for commercial farming with improved technology.    
Hill 
continue
d…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes : 
Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
- Mostly Illiterate, very few living village are literate - Women, 
households,                                              - Lack of workload 
disables and elderly headed households likely to be more 
balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
vulnerable,    -  Mostly separated from son and daughter in laws, 
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
some are single, disable and elderly headed Hhs, very few are in 
development opportunities for poor,                                                                 
extended family,                                                                                                                      
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
- Mutual understanding about future life looks not happening,  - 
to run household and business,                                                        
Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, no ownership of 
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                          
productive land,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor, - 
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills areas and this 
Socially aware, engaged in some enterprises also have not 
group of people are producing cereal crops & vegetables on 
been productive enough even near poor too.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
share cropping basis,- Rearing small animals -goats, cows, 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    Potential 
buffalo, - Assess to finance and business ideas are lacking,  - 
(40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other ages and 
Aware on savings due to their social category and family networks 
mobilized for earning from commercial agriculture                                                   
but earning is at that level,             - Assess to community group is 
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
not problem but benefitted less, mobility is good. - Workload 
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits, - 
between women and man is imbalanced.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Show them hopes of future and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
- Mostly Illiterate,  very few living village are literate, - 
Women, disables and elderly headed households likely 
to be more vulnerable,    -  Mostly separated from son 
and daughter in laws, some are single, disable and 
elderly headed Hhs, very few are in extended family,                                                                                                                      
- Mutual understanding about future life looks not 
happening,  - Living in marginal lands, thatched huts, 
no ownership of productive land,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis, some 
time other labor work,- Rearing small animals -goats, 
cows, buffalo, - Aware on savings due to their social 
category and family networks but earning is at that 
level,             - Assess to community group is not 
problem but benefitted less, mobility is good. Workload 
between women and man is imbalanced.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Poor:                                                                                                                       
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening existing 
groups of interested and like minded including left out 
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
groups in one location). - Facilitate to prepare production plan 
as agreed on MSP,- Mobilize for production and marketing of 
potential commodity after B2B linkages with traders,  - 
Introduce climate resilient production technology and resilient 
crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                      
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                      -  
Facilitate for collateral free loan specially for poor women with 
mechanism of group and municipality guarantee,                                                
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
commodities farming                                  
Hill 
continued
…. 
Caste 
groups 
Other 
castes : 
Khas 
Aryas- 
Brahmin
, 
Chhetry, 
Thakuri, 
Dasnami 
Male 
- Very few are literate, but aware about social context,                                            
- Majority of this group work on their own small land pieces along 
with share cropping and rented land and producing cereals and 
vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are available,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for additional income,                                               
 - Aware on savings, but income is not at that level, 
-  Personal asset are increased but investment in agriculture is 
limited,                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
lacking business idea and financial access,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
 - Access to community group is good, benefitted fairly, few of this 
group are in leadership positions,  
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for household  
- Potential group to mobilize for commercialization of agriculture,                                           
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
-- Very few are literate, mostly engaged in                                            
- Majority of this group work on their own land along 
with share cropping and rented land and producing 
cereals and vegetables where market and irrigation 
facilities are available,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for additional 
income,                                               
 - Aware on savings, but income is not at that level,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, lacking business idea,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 - Access to community group is good, benefitted fairly, 
very few of this group are in leadership positions,  
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for 
household and  mainly to send husbands Gulf and 
other countries for employment,   
- Potential group to mobilize for commercialization of 
agriculture,                                           
Near Poor 
-- Majority are not school attended however aware on 
social context,                                                                           
- Mostly living with families and very few are living 
separately, single women, disables and elderly headed 
hhs seems more vulnerable,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
-  Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in 
extended families with in- laws,  
-Younger sons are out for earning, either Gulf or any 
outside country,                                                                                        
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Community groups and cooperatives are dominated 
from this segments of People, managing savings and 
credit facility,                                                                                            
- Much interested to involve in agriculture, first movers, 
potential ones for commercial farming.  
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Mostly managing houses limitedly involved in 
agricultural activities,  
- Majority are living with extended families, very few 
are separated from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in business, service and 
- Majority are literate very few are educated, mostly aware on 
social context, 
- majority are engaged in teacher, local level politics, and other 
service sector business,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
-Younger sons are out for earning, either Gulf or any outside 
country,                                                                                        
- Very few of this group are involved in agriculture farms, some 
are producing cereals and vegetables in rented land,    
- Those engaged in agriculture are are also not investing, event 
public sector investment is increased,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Community groups and cooperatives and dominated from this 
segments of People, managing savings and credit facility,                                                                                            
- Much interested to involve in agriculture, first movers, potential 
ones for commercial farming.  
- Appropriate production facility and support system attract this 
group for commercial agriculture.  
- This group is not involved in agricultural activities,  
- Majority are engaged in government jobs, business, service and 
enterprise sector, mostly in city area and market sector,  
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas are interested 
in agriculture sector,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
enterprise sector, ,   
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
Male 
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Marginal-
ized 
groups: 
chepangs, 
Kumals, 
Danawars, 
Majhi, 
Bote, 
Darai, a 
few 
Tamang 
and  
Magar,…..
.  
- School attended but drop out from class 6, no complete more 
than +2 class,- Very few are engaged in higher education, - 
Majority are migrated to city areas, and engaged in construction, 
transpiration, hotels and other sector, - Very few are migrated to 
Gulf and few are going to India, - Lack further plan for future,  - 
Due to very unproductive land areas and less opportunities in 
agriculture in hills, very few are engaged in agriculture- Borrow 
money from local money landers and family networks,                                                                 
-Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                         
-Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
ISSUES:                                                                       - 
Chepangs are most vulnerable community in hills, they do not 
have productive land asset, some section of magars and 
Tamangs who lives mostly in hill areas do not have 
productive land, - Bote, Majhi, Darai and Danuwars basically 
live in hill valleys are primarily engaged in agriculture are very 
less productively managed their time.  
- Mostly these groups have fragmented land, agriculture is 
mostly managed by women only.    
 - Not productively managed the potentiality, even educated 
ones,  
- Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making at 
family in very poor and poor hhs,                                               
- Workload between women and men seems imbalanced.                                                                
- Interested to earn money but lack appropriate skill and 
opportunities, inputs and technology,                                            
- Limited financial knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues specially for very poor women                                                                            
- Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning 
for resources and opportunities.                 
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
women due to availability and utilization knowledge and 
practice,   
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
 Potential to organize and mobilize for production and 
marketing providing them required business and financial 
skills knowledge, basic facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                           - 
Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- School attended but drop out from class 6, not more 
than 8 class,- Early marriage, bearing child in early 
age, high dependency ratio, -  Malnutrition in children, 
pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                                                                                        
-Very limited mutual discussions and understanding 
about future life of self and children between husband 
and wife,                                                                                                  
- No productive land, working as agriculture labor 
within village, husbands are migrated to Gulf and or 
city area for labor work,                                                                                               
-Borrow money from local money landers and family 
networks,                                                                 -
Limited savings due to lack of future visioning of life,                                                                         
-Limited assess to community group and exposure to 
development due to their poor economic status and 
self-esteem,                                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Imbalanced workload between women and man,  
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Very low level of school attendance, very often 
complete basic level,         
- Early marriage and bear children before at age before 
teen,                                                                           
 - No ownership of productive land, work  as 
agricultural labor within village, few works as labor in 
rural constriction sites, few are migrated to market 
centers, few are working on rented lend and /share 
cropping,                                                                   
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Lack money to invest in rented land even if they are 
managing for agricultural production,                                                                                                               
- No ownership of land normally it belongs to father in 
law and in some case it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
- Majority attend schools but start drop outs before completing 
basic level, a few are entered in +2 level and higher education,  
- Majority are migrated to city areas, involved in construction, 
transportation, hotels and other private sector,  
- Few are migrated to Gulf and some event to India,  
- Lack further plan for future,  
- No ownership of productive land,                                                                    
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
- No ownership of land normally it belongs to parents                                                                                                            
- This group is not engaged in any group activities,                                                    
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
youths (both women and men based on local situation) in one 
cluster from representing different segments,  
-Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left our 
segments from household,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in Multi 
sector Platform (MSP),    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient varieties 
with efficient production technology,                           - 
Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge and 
business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
Household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).   
- Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                   
-  Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral,    
 - Facilitate for renting in productive land for commercial 
production of selected commodities for landless and who do 
not have productive land.                                                                      
Male 
- Majority have reach at class 10, very few got +2 level education, 
and  higher level education,  
- Very few are engaged in service sector jobs,  
- Mostly migrated to city areas and engaged in private sector jobs, 
majority are migrated to Gulf,  
- Lack further plan for future,  
-  Lack of proper support mechanism to involve in commercial 
agriculture sector 
- Earnings are managed by family, mostly parents, 
- Supporting mechanisms including financial access, business 
idea and market facilities, this group is not much interested 
- Investment for any enterprise is lacking,  
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Interested women have assess to community group, 
but limitedly benefitted,                                                   
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- Majority have reach at class 10, very few got +2 level 
education, other are also got school level education, 
employment opportunities are less, 
- Very few are engaged on community level jobs, work 
in cooperatives and other groups,                                                                     
- Early marriage is due to mutual understanding 
between boys and girls prevails in these communities, 
some marriage after 20 yrs.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Mostly living in nuclear families, and a few are 
extended families,                                                                                                        
-  Have access to development opportunities and 
getting skills like sewing and tailoring, beauty parlor 
and a few are self employed,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Have better access to community groups and 
exposure of development,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Managing own lands along with rented lands for 
agriculture and producing cereals and cash crops 
along with parent in-laws. Raise goat, chicken, pigs 
and buffalo, 
- Collateral is an issue for this segment due to 
ownership on land,  
- Potential ones for commercialization of agriculture,  
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
-Majority have passed class 10 and half of them have 
got +2 level and a few are higher education,                                                                                                                                                                         
- A few are working outside at and few are working as 
teacher and community level development workers,                                                  
- Have got skill development trainings and few have 
running tailoring enterprises,  
 -Limited access to credit facility due to collateral, 
Limited knowledge of commercial agricultural 
production and marketing, 
- Limited financial and business skills.  
- Potential group to engage in commercial farming.  
-Majority have passed class 10 and half of them have got +2 level 
and higher education,                                                                                                                                                                         
- Mostly engaged in higher level education are also involved in 
some development sector jobs, some are engaged in private 
sector jobs and family business                                            
- Mostly not interested in agriculture sector due to is low return.  
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Marginal-
ized 
groups: 
chepangs, 
Kumals, 
Danawars, 
Majhi, 
Bote, 
Darai, a 
few 
Tamang 
and  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Magar,…..
.  
Marginal-
ized 
groups: 
chepangs, 
Kumals, 
Danawars, 
Majhi, 
Bote, 
Darai, a 
few 
Tamang 
and  
Magar,…..
.  
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
- High dependency ratio with very poor and poor, 
 - Not productively managed the potentiality, low labor 
productively/economic return specially of women and gulf 
returnees,  
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, 
 - Mostly working on rented and shared crop land,  
 - Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating 
women, availability is an issue among very poor & poor and 
utilization knowledge and practice among near poor-Limited 
practice of consultation and joint decision making between 
husband and wife specially among very poor and poor hhs,                                               
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,                                                            
- Lack appropriate skill and opportunities, inputs and 
technology for commercial production,                                             
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                        
- Borrow money from money lenders and no credit facility due 
to collateral issues for specially for very poor women and 
youth                                                                                       
  - Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                     
Highly potential age group to organize and mobilize for 
production and marketing  of agricultural commodity providing 
them required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments 
and/or mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in Multi 
Sector Platform (MSP),    
-  Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties and production technology,                            - 
Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge and 
business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Male 
Female 
- Majority are illiterate, very few have completed school level 
- High dependency ratio, 3-4 children, mostly illiterate, 
education,                                                                      
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother 
- Majority are migrated to city areas, India and a few are migrated 
prevails,                                                                        - 
to Gulf for employment,  
Women (widow) and elderly headed households likely 
- Some are engaged as agriculture labor and work on 
to be more vulnerable,                                                                                                     
constructions sector in city areas,                                                                                                       
-Very limited understanding between husband and 
-Very limited understanding between husband and wife, Lack 
wife, Lack further plan for future,  
further plan for future, - Borrow money from close relatives and 
- Borrow money from close relatives and family 
family network to go India and Gulf,                                                                                                    
network for household financing, and even to send 
- No productive land, work on rented and /or share cropping 
husband to GULF,                                                                                                    
basis,- Returnees from foreign employment wants to be engaged 
- No productive land, work on rented and /or share 
in agriculture sector as enterprise,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
cropping basis,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited savings, not much conscious about savings,                                                                       
- Limited savings, not much conscious about savings,                                                                       
- Limited assess to community group, interest, exposure to 
- Limited assess to community group, interest, 
development/business due to their poor economic status and self-
exposure to development/business due to their poor 
economic status and self-esteem is limited,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
esteem is limited,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Imbalanced  workload between women and man, 
- Imbalanced  workload between women and man, 
 -  No collateral for credits and lending, 
 - No collateral for credits and lending, 
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Majority are literate, a few have got school level education and 
- Majority are illiterate, learned get signature from Non 
very few on +2 and above,   
Formal education.        
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works as labor in 
- Bear children before teen age, 3-4 children,  
rural constriction sites,   
Malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating mother,                                                                                  
- Majority are migrated to city areas and involved in construction, 
- Work  as agricultural labor within village, few works 
transportation, and hotel areas in cities and a few are migrate to 
as labor in rural constriction sites,  
Gulf, very few are engaged in agriculture sector along with goats, 
- Raising goats, buffalo, chickens                                                                  
pigs, buffalo, chickens                                                                  
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Limited ownership over productive land,                                                                                          
- Limited ownership over productive land, work on rented land and 
- Works on rented land with husbands, producing 
producing vegetables,  
vegetables                                                                                                                
- Proper planning for future and management of available 
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
opportunities is lacking                                                                                                                      
produce.                                                                                                               
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural production 
- No ownership of land in most cases, it belongs to 
and business ideas                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
husband.                                                                                                           
- Have assess to community group, and cooperatives but limitedly 
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                                      
benefitted,                                                      
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
 - Majority are just literate, few have passed +2 level 
education and employed as teacher and involved in 
community level work,                                                                                    
 - Majority are literate, few have passed +2 level education and 
some very few of them have got higher education,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
- Majority are migrated to city areas and Gulf countries for 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/GALS.   
- Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                   
-  Facilitate for collateral free with guarantee mechanism with 
group and municipalities,  specially for youth and women,    - 
Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less and those who do not have 
productive land.                                                                                                                      
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Marginal-
ized 
groups: 
chepangs, 
Kumals, 
Danawars, 
Majhi, 
Bote, 
Darai, a 
few 
Tamang 
and  
Magar,…  
Male 
employment, a few educated are involved teaching, business in 
roadside small markets, very few male are engaged in agriculture 
and are producing cereals and vegetables in own including rented 
land and shared cropping, raising goats, pigs, buffalos,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Have better access to community groups, cooperatives and 
savings and credit facility,                                                                                            
- Lack business and financial management skills to make 
investment and profit, 
- Proper planning for future and management of available 
opportunities is lacking                                                                                                     
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Majority of this group has married before age of 20, 
bearing 2-3 children,                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
-  Mostly are live in nuclear family, few are in extended 
families with in laws                                                                               
- Majority are involved in agriculture, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping, raising goats, pigs, buffalos,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Have better access to community groups, 
cooperatives and savings and credit facility,                                                                                            
- Receives skill development trainings like sewing and 
tailoring from development agencies(GOs, NGOs) 
managing small scale enterprisers with credits from 
cooperatives, support from husband,  
- Lack business and financial management skills,   
- Credit facility is not easy due to collateral issue,                                                                                                          
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Majority are literate and some have passed +2 level 
education,  
- Educated ones are working as school teacher, 
community level development worker, work outside in 
cities,   
-Engaged agriculture in villages, enterprises in main 
road junctions and market centers, supporting family 
business,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Families are mostly engaged jobs, business, 
business,  enterprises and Politics,                                      
- Seems interested to engage in earning money 
activities, and  
- Collateral is an issue to get loan from Banks,  
- Potential group for commercial farming,  
- Majority are literate and some have passed +2 level education,  
- Educated ones are working as school teacher, community level 
development worker, work outside in cities, engaged in private 
and government sector 
-Very few are engaged in agriculture who are living in rural areas, 
with enterprises in main road junction and market centers, a few 
are engaged in local politics,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
- Seems interested to engage in earning money activities, 
- Collateral is an issue to get loan from Banks,  
- Potential group for commercial farming,  
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
Very poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
ISSUES:                                                                         
-  High dependency ratio mostly among illiterate,  
- High dependency ratio, mostly illiterate,                                                                      
- Women (widow), elderly and disable headed households 
- Women (widow), elderly and disables headed 
looks more vulnerable,                                                                                              
households are likely to be more vulnerable, -Mostly 
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
living marginal and unproductive land,-Separated from 
households between male and female,                                               
son and daughter in laws,- Borrow money from local 
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
money landers, relatives and family networks, interest 
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
rate is high,- Earning is limited and managed poorly,                                                                                                    
development opportunities for poor and near poor.                                                                
- Work as agriculture labor within village and 
- High dependency ratio, mostly illiterate, - Work as agriculture 
labor within village and construction labor in public and public 
sector,                                                                       -Mostly living 
marginal and unproductive land,-Separated from son and 
daughter in laws,- Borrow money from local money landers, 
relatives and family networks, interest rate is high,- Earning is 
limited and managed poorly,                                                                                                    
- Limited savings, no proper management due to lack visioning of 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
life, limited assess to community groups, - Proper planning for 
future and management of available opportunities is lacking                                                                                                                                                                                                     
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
to run household and business,                                                        
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,                                                                             
-  Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor and 
very poor,  
- Facing problems on getting social security facility in lack of 
citizenship  in few cases, 
- Lack of basic facilities like electricity, drinking water, 
sanitation facilities,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    
 - Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with 
other ages and mobilized for commercial production,                                                   
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
engage in agricultural sector growth, personal business and 
profits, - Show them hopes and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
RESPONSES:                                                           
 - Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening 
existing groups of interested and like minded including left out 
potential households in cluster,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed on MSP 
,- Mobilize for production and marketing of potential 
commodity after B2B linkages with traders,   
- Introduce climate resilient production technology and 
resilient crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                      
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                      -  
Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipality guarantee/collateral specially for poor 
women,                                                
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
commodities (vegetable, fish and goat.....)  farming 
  - Coordination with CSOs working on right issues for 
preparation of citizenship and other social issues,                                   
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
construction labor in public and public sector,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited savings, no proper management due to lack 
of future visioning and planning of life,                                                                        
- Very limited assess to community groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Poor:                                                                                                                      
 - Majority are illiterate,  high dependency ratio,  
-Women (widow), disable and elderly headed 
households  
- Work as agricultural labor within village, few works as 
labor in rural constriction sites,  raising goats, 
chickens, pigs, buffalo                                                                  
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Living in marginal unproductive land, no land 
ownership,                                                
- Works on rented land w/husbands, producing 
vegetables,                                                                                                                                                
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural 
production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly 
benefitted,                                                      
Near Poor:                                                                                                              
- Majority are illiterate, however socially aware on the context,                                                             
- Majority are illiterate, however socially aware on the 
- Majority are out of rural areas, involved in service sector 
context,                                                             
- Living separately, single women are more vulnerable,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
business and jobs,                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Some living in villages are involved in agriculture and producing 
-  Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in 
cereals and vegetables in rented land and shared cropping, 
extended families,       
educated one are engaged in school teacher and local level 
- Majority are involved in agriculture, some are 
politics,  
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
- Very limited investment in agriculture due to its low return and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
profitability with traditional technology,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and 
- Have access to community groups, cooperatives and savings 
savings and credit facility, often leading the groups,                                                                                         
and credit facility, often leading the groups,   
-   Potential for commercial agriculture,                                                                                                        
- Proper planning for future and management of available 
opportunities is lacking,                                                                                        
- Potential group for commercial agriculture with production 
technology and financial access,                                                                                                        
- Majority are illiterate,  high dependency ratio,  
- Majority are migrated to city areas and involved construction, 
transportation, hotels and other service sector, very few are in 
rural areas and involved in  agricultural  partially as labor within 
village, and also product cereals and vegetable on rented/ shared 
cropped land raising goats, chickens, pigs, buffalo                                                                
- Limited savings, earnings are not managed properly,                                                                                              
- Very few marginal and unproductive land on ownership                                           
- Lack money to invest in rented land for agricultural production 
for making profit,                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- Have some assess to community group, but limitedly benefitted,   
- Lack business and financial management ideas with visioning 
and planning for future life.                                                     
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Marginal
-ized 
groups: 
chepang
s, 
Kumals, 
Danawar
s, Majhi, 
Bote, 
Darai, a 
few 
Tamang 
and  
Magar,…  
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Mostly living in better of places, managing houses 
and agricultural production, 
- Majority are living, in nuclear family, very few are 
- Mostly literate, aware on social context and ving in better of 
places, 
 - Mostly migrated to city areas and engaged in service, 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
separated from son are daughter,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged, enterprises, business, 
commercial farming and politics,    
- Potential group for commercial agriculture,  
Male 
enterprises, business,   
- Very few are living in rural areas and doing agriculture mobilizing 
labors and rented out/shared out to the working class,  
- Not invested for further development of land to get more return. 
- Potential group for commercial agriculture, if production 
technology, financing is available, 
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
Less than 25 yrs.                                                                
ISSUES:                                                                        
- Not productively managed time of women who are not 
engaged in other additional income enterprises,   
- Rapid migration of youths to city and market centers, 
economically active are migrated to Gulf countries, 
- Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making at 
family in very poor and poor hhs,                                                
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
is feminized, men are not much interested as agriculture 
business,                                                             - Interested 
to be entrepreneur, earn money but lack appropriate skill and 
opportunities, inputs and technology and market,                                            
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives for very poor and 
poor,                                                             -  Limited financial 
knowledge and business skills even more people are 
educated,                                                        
- Remittances earned is not effectively mobilized in business 
and less private investment in rural areas and contributing in 
rural economy.                                                                              
- Limited knowledge on visioning of future life and planning 
for resources and opportunities.                 
- Nutrition problem among children, pregnant and lactating 
women due to availability and utilization knowledge and 
practice on very poor.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
OPPORTUNITIES:  
Potential human resources to organize and mobilize in 
commercial agriculture and improve their well being, engage 
in agricultural sector to run as business, develop as lifetime 
entrepreneur  providing them required business and financial 
skills, knowledge, technology and financial services,                                                                                                   
RESPONSES:                                                            
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
- Majority have attended school but  left school before 
class 7-8, very few have completed +2 level where 
good school facility and support system is effective,                                                                             
- Majority get early marriage,  bearing child in early 
age, malnutrition in children, pregnant and lactating 
mother is prevalent among this group,                                                    
- Mutual understanding about future life and planning 
between husband and wife looks not happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, no ownership of productive 
lands,                                                                                                                        
- Working in agriculture often as labor within village, 
work as construction labor at local market centers and 
district headquarters,                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis, rearing 
small animals -goats, chickens,  
- Aware on savings due to their social category and 
family networks but proper management  seems 
problem,                         
 - Normally this age group are not interested to join in 
community groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.             
Poor 
-- Majority of this group attends school, drop out starts 
form 6 class up to 10, 1/3 pass class 10 and a few of 
them studying +2 levels where school facility is good, 
quality of education is an issue in most rural areas,     - 
Early marriage is still happening due to love marriage 
and bear children is after 20,  2-3 children,                                             
- Majority are attended school but  left school before class 7-8, 
very few have completed +2 level,                                                                             
- Majority are migrated to city areas around 15-18 yrs. age, after 
drop out school and involved in transportation, construction and 
hotel sector,  
- Very few are working as agriculture labor within village,  
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills areas and this 
group of people are producing cereal crops & vegetables on 
share cropping basis, rearing small animals -goats, pigs and 
chickens, 
- Get married when they start earning, normally in early age,                                                 
- Mutual understanding, visioning and planning for future life 
between husband and wife looks not happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, no ownership of productive lands,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 - Aware on savings due to their social category and family 
networks but proper management of income is lacking,                         
 - Normally this age group are not interested to join in community 
groups,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.             
- Majority attends school, drop out starts form 6 to 10 class, 1/3 
passed class10 and a few of them studying +2 levels where 
school facility is good,      - Early marriage is still happening due to 
love marriage, because males migrate to city areas  and start 
earning from around 16 over,- Majority migrates to city areas 
engage in construction, transportation and hotel sectors and a few 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
- Formation of inclusive groups of interested and like minded 
youths (both women and men based on local situation) in one 
cluster from representing different segments,  
-Mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments/households,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities and manage B2B linkages, 
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient varieties  
and production technology,                           
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS).  
 - Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production, specially for youths                                                                    
-  Facilitate for collateral free credit with guarantee 
mechanisms considering group and municipal guarantee for 
repayment for very poor and poor.     
- Facilitate for renting in land for vegetable, fish and other 
potential commodity farming, for poor and who do not have 
productive land.                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
- Majority of this group work on their own land along 
with share cropping and rented land and producing 
cereals, vegetables are produced where market and 
irrigation facilities are available, - Rearing goats, 
poultry, pigs, buffalo for supplementary income,                                             
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings 
meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, lacking business and financial management 
idea,                                                                                                             
- Normally ownership of land belongs to father in law 
and in some case it belongs to husband.                                                                                                           
- Access to community group is not problem for this 
group, however interest depends and less benefitted.                                                                                             
Male 
go to Gulf countries for employment,                                              - 
Very few of this group work on their own land along with share 
cropping and rented land and producing cereals, vegetables are 
produced where market and irrigation facilities are available, - 
Rearing goats, poultry, pigs, buffalo for supplementary income,                                              
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
lacking business and financial management idea,                                                                                                             
- Normally ownership of land belongs to father in some cases it 
belongs to grand father,                                                                                                            
- Access to community group is not problem for this group, 
however interest is not to have community groups, - visioning and 
planning for future and make understanding between husband 
and wife is lacking, - Those how want to engage in agriculture do 
not have access to credit for investment,                                                                                             
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
- Almost all attends and complete basic school level, more than 
- Almost all attends and complete basic school level, 
half pass 10 class and some of them pass +2 level, A few are 
more than half pass 10 class and some of them pass 
getting higher education, 
+2 level, quality of education is question. A few are 
- Majority are migrated to city areas, involved in service sector 
getting higher education, 
jobs, a few got involved in government jobs, some go to Gulf 
- Some of this group are engaged in community level 
countries,                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
development worker and some time school teacher, 
-Very few are are partially involved in agriculture although they 
cooperatives job,                                                                                                          
have limited ownership of productive land, adding rented land 
- Majority living in extended families and rest on 
producing cereals with parents and spouse,                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Nuclear families,                                                                                                               
- Better access and participate and lead community 
- Limited ownership of productive land producing 
groups/cooperatives and exposure of development is better, 
cereals and vegetables along with goat, chicken and 
however very limitedly involved in this sector,                                                                                                                                                                         
pigs,                                                                                                
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an issue 
- Getting access to develop skills like sewing/tailoring, 
because they do not have ownership of land,  
vegetable farming,  however earnings is limited,                                                                                                                 
- Better access and participate and lead community 
groups/cooperatives and exposure of development is 
better,                                                                                                                                                                         
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an 
issue because they do not have ownership of land, and 
father in-laws do  not trust them,   
Non Poor:                                                                                                            
- Majority are getting +2 level and some are on higher 
education, better social influence on community,  
 - Mostly marriage at after +2 level education, 
- Almost all are getting +2 level and majority are getting higher 
education in city areas and abroad, better social influence on 
community,  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
conscious on small family size,                                                                                       
- Mostly are working outside and a few are engaged in 
family business,  
- Due to better access getting better opportunity on 
skill development trainings, a few are running 
enterprises,                                                                                                                       
- This group is very less interested in agriculture 
sector.   
Male 
- A few have started to work on development sector, government 
jobs, work in Banks and financial institutions, and involved in 
tourism and hotel sector business with family members,  
- Non of this segment are engaged in agriculture sector,                                                                                                                                                                                                         
- This group is very less interested in agriculture sector.   
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
26-40 yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                        
- Mostly, all segments are migrated to city areas and market 
centers,  
- Gulf returnees are not properly engaged in agriculture 
production, 
- Limited investment in rural areas from remittance and  other 
income, 
- High dependency ratio among very poor and poor,  
- Limitedly managed the potentiality, low labor 
productively/economic return specially of women,  
- Imbalanced workload between women and men, agriculture 
mostly managed by women   
- Malnutrition among children, pregnant and lactating women, 
availability is and issue among very poor & poor and 
utilization knowledge and practice among near poor 
-Limited practice of consultation and joint decision making 
between husband and wife specially among very poor and 
poor hhs,                                                
-Lack visioning and planning of resources for future,  
- Many productive lands in hills are leaving barren is an 
opportunity for poor and very poor,                                                           
- Lack appropriate skills, opportunities, inputs and 
technology,                                             
- Limited access to groups & cooperatives and exposure to 
development opportunities for very poor and poor,                                                              
- Limited financial access, knowledge and business skills,                                                         
- Borrow money from relatives and family networks no credit 
facility due to collateral issues  specially for very poor women 
and youth                                                                                         
- Limited capacity/knowledge of saving and managing 
resources productively                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Majority who did not attend school have learned writing own 
name learning in non-formal education, some have got 6 -7 class 
avery few are get pass class 10,  
- Majority are migrated to city area and involved in construction, 
transpiration and tourism sector, mostly unskilled,  
- Some are migrated to India and Gulf countries for employment,                                                                                                                                 
- Living in marginal lands, no ownership of productive lands,  
- Borrow money from family networks and relatives and money 
landers to go Gulf,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Majority agricultural land owners are absent in hills areas and 
this group of people are producing cereal crops & vegetables on 
renting land,  
- Rearing animals -goats, pigs and chickens, buffalo 
- A few are working as agricultural labor,  
- Aware on savings due to their social category and family 
networks but proper management seems problem,             
 - Assess to community group is not problem but benefitted less,  
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.  
- Mutual understanding between husband and wife and visioning 
and planning for future life is not happening,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
- Majority are illiterate, some are attended schools but 
drop out during class 6 -7, very few are get pass class 
10,                                                                              
- Living in nuclear family, Majority get early marriage,  
bearing child in early age, malnutrition in children, 
pregnant and lactating mother is prevalent,                                                    
- Mutual understanding between husband and wife 
about future life of self and children looks not 
happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, no ownership of productive 
lands,  
- Borrow money from family networks and relatives and 
mostly sending husbands to Gulf for employment,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
- Majority agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis, some 
time other labor work 
- Rearing small animals -goats, pigs and chickens, 
- A few are working as agricultural labor,  
- Aware on savings due to their social category and 
family networks but proper management seems 
problem,             
 - Assess to community group is not problem but 
benefitted less, mobility is good.   
- Workload between women and man is imbalanced.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Poor:                                                                                                                      
- Majority of this group are literate, school drop out 
starts from 8-10,very a few of them are studied +2 
levels  where school facility is good, - Having not more 
than 2-3 children                                              - Majority 
Poor:                                                                                                                      
- Majority of this group are literate, school drop out starts from 8-
10,very a few of them are studied +2 levels where school facility is 
good, - Majority are migrated to city areas and involved in more 
unskilled sector, a few are working on skilled sector in 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                    Highly 
potential age group to organize and mobilize for production 
and marketing  of agricultural commodity providing them 
required business knowledge and financial skills, basic 
facilities, service and technology.                                                     
RESPONSES:                                                            
- Formation of inclusive producer groups of interested and 
like minded persons (both women and men based on local 
situation) in one cluster from representing different segments 
and/or mobilization of existing groups with inclusion of left out 
segments,  
- Facilitate to prepare production plan as agreed in MSP,    
- Mobilize for production and marketing of selected/potential 
VC commodities,  
- Introduce climate resilient technology and resilient crop 
varieties, efficient production technology,                              
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development with GALS 'Lite',                                                                       
- Identify most vulnerable young women and engage in 
household mentoring/GALS.  
 -Facilitate guardians to provide consent for collateral to take 
loan to increase production,                                                                    
- Facilitate for collateral free loan to individuals considering 
group and municipal guarantee/collateral specially for youth 
and women,     
- Facilitate for renting in land for production of selected 
commodity specially for land less poor and those who do not 
have productive land.                                                                                                                      
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
of this group work on their own land along with share 
cropping and rented land and producing cereals and 
vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are 
available, Very limited supporting hands, - Rearing 
goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for supplementary income,                                             
- Aware on savings, but not managing earnings 
meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, lacking business and financial management 
idea,                                                                                                             
- Mostly ownership of land belongs husbands and in 
some case it belongs to father in-laws.                                                                                                           
- Good access to community group in hills, often in 
leadership positions, - Borrow money from relatives 
and family network mainly to send husbands Gulf and 
other countries for employment,- Imbalanced workload 
between husband and wife,                                                                                            
Near Poor:                                                                                                             
- Education level is better, majority attends and 
complete basic school level, 1/3 have passed 10 class 
and some of them pass +2 level, A few are getting 
higher education, 
- Majority of this group are engaged in community level 
worker and school teacher, management of 
cooperatives,                                                                                                          
- Majority living in extended families and rest on 
nuclear families,                                                                                                               
- No much Productive land on their ownership, engage 
in small scale enterprises in absence of husbands, 
who are mostly in Gulf,  
- Few are working rented land and producing cereals 
and veg  along with goat, chicken and pigs, buffalo                                                                                               
- Getting access to develop skills like sewing/tailoring, 
vegetable farming,  however earnings is limited,                                                                                                                 
- Better access and leading CBOs, forest groups and 
community groups/cooperatives and exposure of 
development is better,                                                                                                                                                                         
- In case of getting credit from Banks, collateral is an 
issue because they do not have ownership of land, and 
father in-laws do  not trust them,   
Male 
Construction, tourism, transportation,                                          - 
A few along with returned from city areas are working on their 
own land along with share cropping and rented land and 
producing cereals and vegetables where market and irrigation 
facilities are available, - Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo for 
supplementary income,                         - Aware on savings, but 
not managing earnings meaningfully,                                                                                                                                                                                
- Availability of money/access to finance, to invest in production 
on rented land and own land is limited, lacking business and 
financial management idea, No proper skill for planning for future,                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
- Good access to community group and cooperatives in hills, often 
in leadership positions, - Borrow money from relatives and family 
network mainly to out for employment,- Imbalanced workload 
between husband and wife,                                                                                            
- Education level is better, majority attends and complete basic 
school level, 1/2 have passed 10 class and some of them pass +2 
level, A few are with higher education, 
- Majority of this are out from village and engaged in services, and 
business,  
- Those who are in villages are engaged in school teaching, 
community level worker,  management of cooperatives, local 
politics and running small business in rural areas, and managing 
own land for agriculture, Marginal lands are fallow,                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
- No much Productive land on their ownership,                                                                                                              
- Better access and leading CBOs, forest groups and community 
groups/cooperatives and exposure of development is better,                                                                                                                                                                         
- Credits for business is limited, 
- Agriculture is not taken as profitable sector, except some plane 
areas for vegetables,  
- Better access to finance business ideas are lacking,  
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Non Poor:                                                                                                            
-Better education status, majority are getting +2 level 
and some are on higher education, socially aware, 
- Mostly marriage at after +2 level education, 
conscious on small family size with 1-2 children,                                                                                    
- Mostly are working outside some are engaged in 
teaching job, some working on community level works, 
a few are engaged in family business, and enterprises, 
- Due to better access as influential group, getting 
better opportunity on skill development trainings, a few 
are running enterprises,                                                                                                                       
- Very few are engaged in agriculture however, this is 
the potential group to work on commercialization of 
agriculture with improved technology.  
-Better education status, majority are getting +2 level and higher 
education,  
- Majority leave outside, in city areas for business and services, 
left land on rent and share cropping to poor ones, marginal lands 
are fellow,                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Very few are engaged in agriculture however, this is the 
potential group to work on commercialization of agriculture with 
improved technology.  
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
41 + yrs.:                                                                                   
ISSUES:                                                                                                                                                                      
- Limited practice of consultation for any decisions at 
households 
- Lack of workload balance between women and men,                                                                                                         
- Limited access to community groups cooperatives and skill 
development opportunities for poor,                                                                 
- Limited financial knowledge and access, and business skills 
to run household and business,                                                        
- No collateral assets for credits with very poor,  
- No investment in rural areas and agriculture from individuals 
 - Very low hopes of future life and plans among poor, - 
Socially aware, engaged in some enterprises also have not 
been productive enough even near poor too.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
OPPORTUNITIES:                                                     
Potential (40-55 yrs.) to include in producer group with other 
ages and mobilized for earning from commercial agriculture                                                   
- Potential to sensitize and mobilize other age groups to 
engage in agricultural sector growth as business and profits, - 
Show them hopes of future and mobilize with full potential,                                                                                                                 
RESPONSES 
 - Formation of inclusive producer groups/strengthening 
existing groups of interested and like minded including left out 
potential households in agricultural sector (with other age 
groups in one location). - Facilitate to prepare production plan 
as agreed on MSP,- Mobilize for production and marketing of 
Very poor:                                                                                                                     
- Mostly Illiterate,  very few are literate however,  a bit 
conscious about social context,  
- Women, disables and elderly headed households 
likely to be more vulnerable,  
-  Mostly separated from son and daughter in laws, 
some are single, very few are in extended family, 
Dependency ratio is high,                                                                                                                     
- Mutual understanding about future life looks not 
happening,   
- Living in marginal lands, no ownership of productive 
land, however livelihood is depended on agriculture 
and agriculture labor, rearing goats, pigs and chickens,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills 
areas and this group of people are producing cereal 
crops & vegetables on share cropping basis, - Aware 
on savings due to their social category and family 
networks but earning is at that level,              
- Assess to community group is not problem but 
benefitted less, mobility is good. Workload between 
women and man is imbalanced.  
- Lack of credit due to no collateral is an issue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Poor:                                                                                                                       
- Very few are literate, but know the social context,                                            
- Majority of this group work on their own land along 
- Majority are literate however, however conscious about social 
context,                                                                                                                        
- Mutual understanding about visioning and planning for future life 
looks not happening,  - Living in marginal lands, no ownership of 
productive land, however livelihood is depended on agriculture 
and agriculture labor, rearing goats, pigs and chickens, - A few 
are seasonally migrated to city areas for seasonal employment,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
- Mostly agricultural land owners are absent in hills areas and this 
group of people are producing cereal crops & vegetables on 
share cropping basis, by this group, - Aware on savings due to 
their social category and family networks but earning is at that 
level,             - Assess to community group is not problem but 
benefitted less, mobility is good. Workload between women and 
man is imbalanced. - Due to collateral this group is not getting 
credit appropriately,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Majority are literate, and a few are got school level education, 
aware social context,   
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
potential commodity after B2B linkages with traders,  - 
Introduce climate resilient production technology and resilient 
crop verities, production technology,                                                                      
- Conduct comprehensive package of financial knowledge 
and business skill development training with GALS 'Lite'                                                                      
- Identify most vulnerable and  risk averse women and 
engage in household mentoring/Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).                                                                      -  
Facilitate for collateral free loan specially for poor women with 
mechanisms of group and municipality guarantee,                                                
-  Renting in land for commercial production of  agriculture 
commodities farming                                  
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
with share cropping and rented land and producing 
cereals and vegetables where market and irrigation 
facilities are available,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo and a few are 
entrepreneur,                                                
 - Aware on savings, but income is not at that level,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is 
limited, lacking business idea,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 - Access to community group is good, benefitted fairly, 
very few of this group are in leadership positions,  
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for 
household and  mainly to send husbands Gulf and 
other countries for employment,   
- Potential group to mobilize for commercialization of 
agriculture,  are real worker,                                           
Male 
- Majority of economically active male (40-55 yrs.) are seasonally 
migrated to city areas and Gulf countries, and seasonally are 
living in rural areas,                                           
- Majority women of this group are working on agriculture with 
support from male members on seasonal basis on their own land 
along with share cropping and rented land and producing cereals 
and vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are available,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo and a few are running as 
commercial scale,                                                 
- Aware on savings, but income is not at that level,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
lacking business idea and skills for making agriculture profitable,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Access to community group and cooperatives is good, benefitted 
fairly, very few of this group are in leadership positions,  
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for household 
and  mainly to send husbands Gulf and other countries for 
employment,  - Potential group to mobilize for commercialization 
of agriculture,  are real worker,            
Hills 
Ethnic 
groups 
Influential 
groups 
(Newars, 
Gurungs, 
a few 
Tamangs 
Magars 
and 
Sherpas) 
Near Poor                                                                                                                   
- Majority are not school attended however aware on 
social context,                                                                           
- Mostly living with families and very few are living 
separately, single women, disables and elderly headed 
hhs seems more vulnerable,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
- Mostly are living in nuclear family, few are in 
extended families with in- laws,  
-Younger sons and some cases husband are out for 
earning, either Gulf or any outside country,                                                                                        
-Majority are involved in agriculture farms, some are 
producing cereals and vegetables in rented land and 
shared cropping,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
- Community groups and cooperatives and dominated 
from this segments of People, managing savings and 
credit facility,                                                                                            
- Much interested to involve in agriculture, first movers, 
potential ones for commercial farming.  
-                                                                                                     
- Majority have attended school level education, aware social 
context,   
- Majority of economically active male (40-55 yrs.) are migrated to 
city areas and Gulf countries,  a few are back seasonally to rural 
areas,                                           
- Majority women of this this group work their own land along with 
share cropping and rented land and producing cereals and 
vegetables where market and irrigation facilities are available a 
few of male counter part are supporting seasonally,  
- Rearing goats, poultry, cow, buffalo and a few are running as 
commercial scale,                                                 
- Aware on savings, but income is not at that level,                                                                                                                                                                                 
- Money to invest for more production on rented land is limited, 
lacking business idea and skills for making agriculture profitable,                                                                                                                                                                                                                
- Community group and cooperatives are better managed and 
lead by this group and  benefitted adequately,   
- Borrow money from relatives and family network for household 
and  mainly to send husbands Gulf and other countries for 
employment,   
- Potential group to mobilize for commercialization of agriculture,  
are real worker  
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Caste/Ethnicity 
Common issues for age group across all wealth levels 
S
N 
Male 
Additional challenges by gender and wealth 
Female 
Non Poor:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
- Mostly managing houses limitedly involved in 
agricultural activities,  
- Majority are living with extended families, very few 
are separated from family (son and daughter in laws),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
- Families are mostly engaged in business, service and 
enterprise sector,    
- Very few of this segment are living in rural areas. 
- Majority of this group are mostly not living in rural areas, almost 
all are migrated to city areas, and involved in business and 
service sectors, limitedly involved in agricultural activities,  
- Very few of this group are interested to engage in agriculture, 
however, this group could be one potential to run agriculture 
relates enterprises, 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
Annex 9 : Poverty by district 2011, from small areas analysis 
Source: World Bank. 2013. Nepal small area estimation of poverty 2011 (English). Nepal 
small area estimation of poverty 2011 ; volume 1. Washington DC : World Bank. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/959781468290482736/Nepal-small-area-
estimation-of-poverty-2011 
State  
SN  District 
Nepal  
VITA Areas – Full Package (All 3 Components) 
Saptari 
State 2 
1 
Siraha 
2 
3 
Dhanusha 
4  Mahottari 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Sarlahi 
Rautahat 
Bara 
Parsa 
State 5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Arghakhanchi 
Gulmi 
Palpa 
Nawalparasi 
(west) 
Rupendehi 
Kapilwastu 
Banke 
Bardia 
Dang 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Rukum (East) 
11  Rolpa 
12  Pyuthan 
State 3  
(VITA 
locations 
only) 
Average 
Chitwn 
1 
Sindhuli 
2 
Dolakha 
3 
Sindhupalchok 
4 
Kabhrepalchok 
5 
Nuwakot 
6 
7 
Dhading 
8  Makawanpur 
Average 
Poverty 
rate 
(%) 
 25.16 
39.49 
34.55 
23.14 
16.19 
17.66 
33.35 
29.92 
29.15 
27.93 
28.82 
25.58 
21.6 
17.03 
17.31 
35.48 
26.35 
28.66 
25.05 
26.26 
26 
32.19 
25.86 
8.89 
38.33 
25.42 
25.42 
13.87 
20.3 
18.75 
27.86 
22.36 
Poverty 
disparity 
Poverty 
intensity 
Poor 
Head 
count 
10.03 
8.01 
4.62 
3.48 
3.58 
8.28 
7.07 
7.07 
6.52 
6.85 
5.94 
5.19 
3.8 
4.05 
8.88 
6.63 
7.05 
5.9 
5.75 
5.62 
7.88 
6.13 
1.68 
9.87 
5.36 
5.36 
2.49 
4.18 
3.78 
7.29 
5.00 
3.58 
2.66 
1.38 
1.14 
1.1 
2.94 
2.47 
2.47 
2.22 
2.39 
2.03 
1.84 
1.27 
1.41 
3.19 
2.4 
2.53 
2.03 
1.8 
1.8 
2.78 
2.12 
0.49 
3.57 
1.67 
1.67 
0.69 
1.29 
1.15 
2.72 
1.66 
251579 
219339 
174071 
100544 
135268 
227000 
203484 
172599 
1483884 
56739 
71369 
55910 
54397 
151171 
201772 
127690 
121178 
137255 
27215 
57504 
72791 
1134991 
504994 
112302 
48064 
72613 
52018 
55895 
62621 
115473 
1023980 
VITA areas – “Finance only” with partner programmes 
State 1 
Taplegunj  
26.95 
5.53 
1 
1.68 
34066 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
State  
SN  District 
Panchthatr 
Ilam 
Jhapa 
2 
3 
4 
5  Morang 
Sunsari 
6 
Dhankuta 
7 
Tehrathum 
8 
Sankhuwasabha 
9 
10  Bhojpur 
11  Solukhumbu 
12  Okhaldhung 
13  Khotang 
14  Udayapur 
Average 
Rukum (West) 
Salyan 
Surkhet 
Dailekh 
Jajarkot 
Dolpa 
Jumla 
Kalikot 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9  Mugu 
10  Humla 
Average 
State 6 
Non-VITA areas 
 State 3 
Kathmandu 
9 
10  Lalitpur 
11  Bhaktapru 
12  Rasuwa 
13  Ramechap  
State 7 
State 4 
Average 
Bajura 
Bajhang 
Achham 
Doti 
Kailali 
Kanchanpur 
Dadeldhura 
Baitadi 
Darchula 
Average 
Gorkha 
Lamjung 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1 
2 
Poverty 
rate 
(%) 
11.41 
7.3 
10.62 
16.51 
11.98 
15.92 
14.56 
20.96 
24.43 
25.43 
20.45 
25.01 
25.89 
18.39 
26.26 
28.80 
30.45 
35.82 
37.73 
42.80 
48.98 
57.93 
47.06 
56.02 
41.19 
7.64 
7.62 
12.47 
31.63 
25.58 
16.99 
64.05 
56.79 
47.22 
48.87 
33.55 
31.36 
43.27 
45.73 
53 
47.09 
20.41 
16.79 
Poverty 
disparity 
Poverty 
intensity 
1.88 
1.19 
1.87 
3.27 
2.22 
2.9 
2.52 
4.06 
4.79 
5.73 
4.06 
4.95 
5.78 
3.63 
5.75 
6.33 
7.46 
8.77 
9.03 
11.00 
13.09 
16.81 
12.52 
16.62 
10.74 
1.48 
1.51 
2.87 
7.21 
5.6 
3.73 
19.94 
16.18 
12.67 
13.53 
8.42 
7.96 
11.76 
12.31 
15.16 
13.10 
4.92 
4.92 
0.48 
0.31 
0.51 
0.98 
0.63 
0.81 
0.67 
1.18 
1.4 
1.88 
1.21 
1.46 
1.88 
1.08 
1.8 
2.05 
2.63 
3.08 
3.11 
3.99 
4.86 
6.60 
4.66 
6.66 
3.94 
45 
0.43 
0.99 
2.37 
1.81 
10.12 
8.22 
6.27 
4.73 
5.17 
3.03 
2.89 
4.47 
4.62 
5.92 
5.04 
1.8 
1.33 
Poor 
Head 
count 
21724 
21005 
85736 
158261 
89888 
25677 
14677 
33146 
44268 
26964 
30017 
51315 
81618 
718362 
27215 
69605 
104492 
93428 
64175 
15455 
52602 
78749 
25784 
27962 
559467 
128973 
34554 
36999 
13324 
51467 
265317 
85867 
110465 
120931 
101000 
256821 
140381 
60915 
114355 
70003 
1060738 
54875 
27895 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) review note 
State  
SN  District 
Tanahu 
Syangja 
Kaski 
3 
4 
5 
6  Manang 
7  Mustang 
8  Myagdi 
9 
Parbat 
10  Baglung 
11  Nawalparasi 
(East) 
Average 
Nepal  
Poverty 
rate 
(%) 
14.83 
11.77 
4.02 
36.9 
39.98 
28.98 
12.65 
22.94 
17.03 
20.57 
 25.16 
Poverty 
disparity 
Poverty 
intensity 
3.27 
2.27 
2.37 
9.89 
10.85 
7.31 
2.51 
5.29 
3.8 
1.09 
0.74 
0.25 
3.82 
4.17 
2.7 
0.77 
1.81 
1.27 
Poor 
Head 
count 
47535 
33909 
19330 
2150 
2150 
31323 
18426 
61163 
54397 
5.22 
1.80 
353153 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Unit 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Mentoring and mobilization of producers / POs 
  Producer Organisation mobilization sub-award Via NGOs 
Sub-award 
  Capacity Building of NGOs 
  Subtotal 
  B. Business Skills to Farmers 
Farmers Diary Design and Publication 
  Business Skills to supply chain groups 
TOT for business skills facilitators  
Training materials development and printing  
Establishment  and  Operation  of  Agriculture  Market 
Information System 
  Subtotal 
  C. Brokering and cluster facilitation 
  Provincial Level MSPs 
  Cluster level MSPs 
  B2B/B2S interactions at Cluster Level 
  Subtotal 
  D. Capacity Development 
  Capacity Development Training for Project Staff  
  Production and Post-harvest Training to Smallholders 
  Subtotal 
  E. Sector Development Facilities 
  Sector Development Facility  
  F. Knowledge Management Support 
  Knowledge Product Development and Publication 
  Subtotal 
  G. Vehicles and Equipment 
  Double Cab Pick-up (PO-5,PMU-1) 
  Motor-cycle 
Laptops 
  Photocopiers, Printers and Scaner 
Furniture Set and Other Logistics 
  Motor-cycle (heifer) 
Laptops (heifer) 
  Printer and other equipments (Heifer) 
  Subtotal 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
Event 
Group 
Group 
Event 
Number 
Number 
Event 
Event 
Event 
Event 
Event 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
3,815,280 
34,065 
57,229 
511.0 
15 
64 
6,241 
208 
6 
8,915 
120,960 
1,080 
224 
49,173.6 
784,000 
448 
2 
439.05 
7,000 
4 
1 
224,000 
2,000 
20 
45 
180 
392,000 
168,000 
19,600 
3,500 
1,500 
175 
672,000 
28,000 
6,000 
250 
7,741 
64,971 
1,398 
10,228 
4,704 
3,994 
224 
20,548 
7,840 
7,560 
3,528 
18,928 
5,376 
2,520 
7,896 
8 
90 
- 
1 
6 
48 
48 
6 
6 
4 
4 
2 
28,000,000 
250,000 
- 
2,240,000 
20,000 
5,600,000 
336,000 
112,000 
560,000 
560,000 
336,000 
112,000 
560,000 
50,000 
3,000 
1,000 
5,000 
5,000 
3,000 
1,000 
5,000 
2,240 
2,240 
33,600 
16,128 
5,376 
3,360 
3,360 
1,344 
448 
1,120 
64,736 
179,319 
69.1 
580.1 
12.5 
91.3 
42.0 
35.7 
2.0 
183.5 
70.0 
67.5 
31.5 
169.0 
48.0 
22.5 
70.5 
- 
20.0 
20.0 
300.0 
144.0 
48.0 
30.0 
30.0 
12.0 
4.0 
10.0 
578.0 
1,601.1 
HEIFER (32.2422%), LOAN 
(54.7578%), BANKS (13%) 
HEIFER (44.0916%), LOAN 
(42.9084%), BANKS (13%) 
CSR (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
CSR (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (69.1911%), CSR 
(17.8089%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS (13%) 
BANKS (100%) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
  A. Staff salary 
Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist 
Focal  Person  Coordinator  at  HO  (1  person  in  MSME 
Department) 
Focal  Person  Officer  at  HO  (1  person 
Department) 
Supply  chain  coordinator  at  province  level  (P2-3;  P5-6; 
P3:3) 
in  MSME 
  SEM Expert at HO (Heifer) 
  SEM coordinator at province level (Heifer) 
Supply  Chain  Officer  at  Branch  /  District  Level  (1-2 
number) 
  SEM Officer at District Level (Heifer) 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
Unit 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
1 
1 
1 
12 
1 
5 
28 
10 
2,329,600 
20,800 
2,329,600 
20,800 
1,601,600 
14,300 
2,329,600 
2,941,008 
2,124,752 
1,601,600 
1,125,152 
20,800 
26,259 
18,971 
14,300 
10,046 
2,330 
2,330 
1,602 
27,955 
2,941 
10,624 
44,845 
11,252 
103,877 
283,196 
20.8 
20.8 
14.3 
249.6 
26.3 
94.9 
400.4 
100.5 
927.5 
2,528.5 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Table 2: Expanding financial service to agriculture 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Private Investment Financing 
  Medium Term Credit (Net Capital) 
  Short Term Credit (Net Capital) 
  Beneficiary Investment Contribution 
  Private Sector Investment Contribution 
  Capacity enhancement and policy development facility 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Staff salary (ADBL Staff) 
  Financial Management Officer 
  Credit Officer - Part-time (15%) 
  Branch Manager - Part-time (15%) 
  Finance Officer - Part-time (15%) 
  Digital Banking Expert - Part-time (15%) 
IT Officer - Part-time (15%) 
  Subtotal 
  B. Staff salary (Project Staff) 
  Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert 
  Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist 
  Digital Banking Expert 
  Assistant Finance Officer 
  Subtotal 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
Unit 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
Lumpsum 
Lumpsum 
Lumpsum 
Lumpsum 
Lumpsum 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20,720,000 
185,000 
1,512,000 
492,800 
269,808 
134,960 
13,500.0 
4,400.0 
2,409.0 
1,205.0 
20,720 
2,430,288 
185.0 
21,699.0 
LOAN (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BEN (100%) 
PRIVATE (100%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
1 
5 
4.5 
5 
0.45 
0.45 
1,982,288 
2,180,528 
1,982,288 
1,982,288 
2,245,488 
2,180,528 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2,912,000 
2,329,600 
2,329,600 
728,000 
17,699 
19,469 
17,699 
17,699 
20,049 
19,469 
26,000 
20,800 
20,800 
6,500 
1,982 
10,903 
8,920 
9,911 
1,010 
981 
33,708 
17.7 
97.3 
79.6 
88.5 
9.0 
8.8 
301.0 
2,912 
2,330 
2,330 
728 
8,299 
42,008 
2,472,296 
26.0 
20.8 
20.8 
6.5 
74.1 
375.1 
22,074.1 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
BANKS (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Table 3. Supply chain infrastructure 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Civil Works 
Integrated Market 
  Satellite Market 
  Rural Roads (each 2.5 km) 
Irrigation Scheme (5 ha. each) 
  Subtotal 
  B. Vehicles and Equipment 
  Motor Cycle 
  Laptops 
  Subtotal 
  C. Capacity Development 
D. Consultation Workshop, Feasibility Study, Design and 
Estimate, Bid Evaluation 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
Infrastructure Specialist 
  Sub Engineer / Overseer 
  Procurement Specialist 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
Unit 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
Number 
Number 
Km 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Number 
Events 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7 
7 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
292,173,840 
2,608,695 
35,060,928 
313,044 
6,787,200 
60,600 
470,400 
4,200 
336,000 
134,400 
3,000 
1,200 
280,000 
2,500 
1,120,000 
10,000 
2,329,600 
20,800 
873,600 
7,800 
2,038,400 
18,200 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2,352 
941 
3,293 
280 
- 
3,573 
- 
- 
2,038 
2,038 
5,611 
LOAN (65.25%), 
LOCAL (34.75%) 
LOAN (52.2%), 
LOCAL (47.8%) 
LOAN (73.95%), 
LOCAL (26.05%) 
LOAN (73.95%), 
LOCAL (26.05%) 
LOAN (69.6%), 
LOCAL (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), 
LOCAL (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), 
LOCAL (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), 
LOCAL (30.4%) 
LOAN (80%), LOCAL 
(20%) 
LOAN (80%), LOCAL 
(20%) 
LOAN (80%), LOCAL 
(20%) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
21.0 
8.4 
29.4 
2.5 
- 
31.9 
- 
- 
18.2 
18.2 
50.1 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Table 4. Monitoring and Evaluation 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Capacity Development 
  Capacity Building of NGOs on M&E 
  B. System Development 
Unit 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
Event 
2 
392,000 
3,500 
784 
7.0 
  MIS System Development, Update, Financial Digitization 
Tablets for Data Collection  
(for Business Facilitators and Economic Mobilisers) 
  SIM Cards for Internet Connectivity and Data Uploading 
Number 
Number 
Number 
1 
3,360,000 
30,000 
270 
270 
15,680 
1,120 
140 
10 
3,360 
4,234 
302 
7,896 
30.0 
37.8 
2.7 
70.5 
  Subtotal 
  C. Studies and Documentation 
Baseline Studies including IFAD empowerment indicator 
+ MDD-W 
PPI Survey -  
(3 times per group - baseline, mid-line and end-line) 
  Subtotal 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Staff salary 
  Knowledge management manager (50% time) Heifer 
  Communication Officer (25%) 
  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
  PM&E officer at HO (Heifer) 
  MIS Officer 
  Data Collection (Remuneration to BSFs) 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
Number 
1 
8,960,000 
80,000 
8,960 
80.0 
Number 
297 
1,120 
10 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
   Group_year 
0.5 
0.25 
1 
1 
0.25 
297 
2,184,000 
2,180,528 
2,329,600 
1,110,480 
1,982,288 
2,240 
19,500 
19,469 
20,800 
9,915 
17,699 
20 
333 
9,293 
17,973 
1,092 
545 
2,330 
1,110 
496 
665 
6,238 
24,211 
3.0 
83.0 
160.5 
9.8 
4.9 
20.8 
9.9 
4.4 
5.9 
55.7 
216.2 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
LOAN (87%), BANKS 
(13%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (100%) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Table 5: Programme Management Office 
Unit 
Quantity 
Yr1 
Unit Cost 
Cost  
(NPR) 
(US$) 
(NPR'000) 
(US$'000) 
Other Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Meeting and Workshop 
  PSC Meeting 
  Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (National) 
  Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (Provisional) 
  Project Kick-off and Closure Workshop (District/Municipal) 
  Policy Formulation Workshop 
  Coordination and other meetings/workshop as required  
  Planning and Review Workshop 
  Planning and Review Workshop (Provincial Level) 
  Supervision / Implementation Support Missions' Preparation 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Staff salary 
  Chief Executive Officer (10% time) 
  Country Director: Heifer (10% time) 
  Deputy Chief Executive Officer (10% of time) - 4 persons 
  VITA PMU Coordinator (PIU Director) 
  Program director - Heifer (2 part time staff) 
  Finance Director - Heifer (40% time) 
  Senior Manager PM&E - Heifer (40% time) 
  MSME and Agriculture Finance Department Head (25%) 
  Province Director - 5 persons (10% time) 
  Planning office - 6 persons (25% time) 
  Human Resource Officer (10% time) 
  Procurement Officer (10% time) 
  Legal Expert (10% time) 
  HR officer (30% time) Heifer 
  Finance and Admin at Province level (Heifer) 
  Driver at Province level (Heifer) 
  Driver (1 part time) Heifer 
  Programme Assistant 
  Project Divers 
  Subtotal 
  B. Operational costs 
  Travel and DSA 
  Operation and Maintenance Cost 
  Staff insurance and recruitment costs (Heifer) 
  Travel and DSA (Heifer) 
  Operation and Maintenance Cost (Heifer) 
Number 
Event 
Number 
Number 
Event 
Event 
Event 
Number 
Number 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
pers_year 
2 
1 
5 
90 
- 
4 
1 
5 
1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.4 
1 
0.8 
0.4 
0.4 
0.25 
0.5 
0.6 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.3 
3 
5 
0.5 
1 
6 
56,000 
280,000 
168,000 
112,000 
560,000 
112,000 
560,000 
560,000 
112,000 
4,955,776 
7,758,016 
2,329,152 
2,245,488 
4,932,032 
3,923,248 
2,565,136 
2,245,488 
2,245,488 
2,180,528 
2,180,528 
2,180,528 
2,279,648 
1,397,536 
1,335,152 
817,824 
725,200 
873,600 
509,600 
500 
2,500 
1,500 
1,000 
5,000 
1,000 
5,000 
5,000 
1,000 
44,248 
69,268 
20,796 
20,049 
44,036 
35,029 
22,903 
20,049 
20,049 
19,469 
19,469 
19,469 
20,354 
12,478 
11,921 
7,302 
6,475 
7,800 
4,550 
   Office_year 
   Office_year 
   Office_year 
   Office_year 
   Office_year 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22,400,000 
11,200,000 
182,000 
17,197,040 
8,035,328 
200,000 
100,000 
1,625 
153,545 
71,744 
112 
280 
840 
10,080 
- 
448 
560 
2,800 
112 
15,232 
496 
776 
932 
2,245 
3,946 
1,569 
1,026 
561 
1,123 
1,308 
218 
218 
228 
419 
4,005 
4,089 
363 
874 
3,058 
27,454 
22,400 
11,200 
182 
17,197 
8,035 
1.0 
2.5 
7.5 
90.0 
- 
4.0 
5.0 
25.0 
1.0 
136.0 
4.4 
6.9 
8.3 
20.0 
35.2 
14.0 
9.2 
5.0 
10.0 
11.7 
1.9 
1.9 
2.0 
3.7 
35.8 
36.5 
3.2 
7.8 
27.3 
245.1 
200.0 
100.0 
1.6 
153.5 
71.7 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
LOAN (69.6%), BANKS (30.4%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
BANKS (70%), LOAN (30%) 
LOAN (100%) 
LOAN (80%), BANKS (20%) 
LOAN (26.1%), BANKS (73.9%) 
HEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%) 
HEIFER (100%) 
HEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
  Audit expenses and project compliance (Heifer) 
   Office_year 
1 
1,779,232 
15,886 
  Subtotal 
Total Recurrent Costs 
HEIFER (87%), BANKS (13%) 
1,779 
60,794 
88,247 
103,479 
15.9 
542.8 
787.9 
923.9 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Draft 
Procurement Plan SUMMARY 
Country: 
Project Name: 
Project ID: 
Version 
Version Date 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA) 
1.0 
Procurement Category 
Currency 
Plan 
Actual 
USD 
LCU 
USD 
LCU 
Goods 
Works 
Consulting Services 
TOTAL 
Prior Review Thresholds 
-   
-   
-   
83,374,000  
-   
96,358,800  
 179,732,800   -   
-   
-   
-   
         -   
            -   
            -   
            -   
-   
Thresholds 
Goods 
Works 
Non-Consulting  
Services 
Firms - Consulting 
Services 
Individuals - 
Consulting 
Services 
Prior Review 
> NPR 2000000.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are Prior Review (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook). 
Procurement Method Thresholds 
Goods 
Works  
Non-Consulting Services 
Individuals 
Firms 
Shopping 
< NPR 2000000.00 
< NPR 2000000.00 
< NPR 2000000.00 
ICS/CQS 
< NPR 2000000.00 
< NPR 2000000.00 
NCB 
ICB 
> NPR 2000000.00  > US$ 0.00 
> NPR 2000000.00  > US$ 0.00 
>NPR 2000000.00  > US$ 0.00 
LCS 
> US$ 0.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
QCBS 
>US$ 0.00 
> NPR 2000000.00 
Procurement Plan - GoodsNepalValue Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA)Total AmountProject ID: USDLCU0.0083,374,000Plan0.000.00ActualVersion1.00-Jan-00AWPB/Component Ref№DescriptionFundingLot №/ DescriptionProject AreaPlan vs. ActualPre-or Post QualificationPrior or Post ReviewProcurement MethodEnvelopesAmount(USD)Amount(LCU)Plan vs. ActualSubmission of PreQual DocsNo Objection DatePreQual Invitation DatePreQual Closing DateSubmission of PreQual ReportNo Objection DateSubmission of BDNo-objectionDateBid Invitation DateBid Closing-OpeningSubmissionTech Eval RptNo-objectionDateSubmissionCombined Eval Rpt*No-objectionDatePlan vs. ActualIssue of NOITA&StandstillDateContractAwardDateContractSignatureContract No.Vendor Name/IDAmount(USD)Amount(LCU)PlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB112,622,400     PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A1-Mar-218-Mar-2110-Mar-2124-Apr-21N/AN/A8-May-2115-May-21Plan27-May-213-Jun-215-Jun-21-                     12,622,400      Actual-                     -                     ActualPlanPost-QualPost ReviewNS1901,600           PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A11-May-21N/A12-May-2126-May-21N/AN/A2-Jun-21N/APlan2-Jun-214-Jun-216-Jun-21-                     901,600            Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB133,600,000     PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Mar-2122-Mar-2124-Mar-218-May-21N/AN/A22-May-2129-May-21Plan10-Jun-2117-Jun-2119-Jun-21-                     33,600,000      Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB118,480,000     PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Mar-2122-Mar-2124-Mar-218-May-21N/AN/A22-May-2129-May-21Plan10-Jun-2117-Jun-2119-Jun-21-                     18,480,000      Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB17,504,000        PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Mar-2122-Mar-2124-Mar-218-May-21N/AN/A22-May-2129-May-21Plan10-Jun-2117-Jun-2119-Jun-21-                     7,504,000        Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB13,994,000        PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A1-Jun-218-Jun-2110-Jun-2125-Jul-21N/AN/A8-Aug-2115-Aug-21Plan27-Aug-213-Sep-215-Sep-21-                     3,994,000        Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB12,240,000        PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A1-Jun-218-Jun-2110-Jun-2125-Jul-21N/AN/A8-Aug-2115-Aug-21Plan27-Aug-213-Sep-215-Sep-21-                     2,240,000        Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB13,024,000        PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A1-Mar-218-Mar-2110-Mar-2124-Apr-21N/AN/A8-May-2115-May-21Plan27-May-213-Jun-215-Jun-21-                     3,024,000        Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanPost-QualPost ReviewNS11,008,000        PlanN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A1-Mar-21N/A2-Mar-2116-Mar-21N/AN/A23-Mar-21N/APlan23-Mar-2125-Mar-2127-Mar-21-                     1,008,000        Actual-                     -                     ActualActualBasic DataPre-QualificationBidding ProcessBid EvaluationContract Award & SignatureProcurement MethodsNS: National Shopping IS: International Shopping NCB: National Competitive Bidding ICB: International Competitive Bidding LIB: Limited (International) Bidding DC: Direct ContractingPrepared by: Approved by: 1Tablets for Data Collection (Business Facilitators and Economic Mobilisers) - 805 Nos.2SIM Cards for Internet Connectivity and Data Uploading - 805 Nos.3Procurement ofDouble Cab Pick-up (6 Nos>)4Procurement of Motorcycles (55 Nos.)5Procurement of Laptops (67 Nos.)7Knowledge Product Development and Publication6Training materials development and printing of 70000 copies8Procurement of Motorcycles - Heifer (9 Nos.)9Procurement of Laptops - Heifer (9 Nos.) 
Procurement Plan - ConsultingNepalValue Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture (VITA)Total AmountProject ID: USDLCU0.0096,358,800Plan0.000ActualVersion1.00-Jan-00AWPB/Component Ref№Description*FundingLot №/ DescriptionPlan vs. ActualShortlist(Yes|No)Prior or Post ReviewProcurement MethodAmount(USD)Amount(LCU)Plan vs. ActualSubmission of REOINo Objection DateREOI Launch DateEOI Submission DeadlineSubmission of Shortlist ReportNo Objection DateSubmission of RFP/RCQNo-objectionDateRFP/RCQ Launch DateProposal submission deadlineSubmission of TERNo-objectionDateSubmission of CERNo-objectionDatePlan vs. ActualIssue of NOITA&StandstillNegotiations completedSubmission of Draft Contract and MoNNo-objectionDateDateContractAwardDateContractSignatureContract No.Vendor Name/IDAmount(USD)Amount(LCU)PlanYesPrior ReviewQCBS3,360,000        Plan44,256              8-Mar-2110-Mar-2131-Mar-2114-Apr-2121-Apr-2114-Apr-2121-Apr-2123-Apr-217-Jun-2121-Jun-2128-Jun-2112-Jul-2119-Jul-21Plan31-Jul-2121-Aug-2125-Aug-211-Sep-213-Sep-2110-Sep-21-                     3,360,000                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewQCBS8,960,000        Plan44,256              8-Mar-2110-Mar-2131-Mar-2114-Apr-2121-Apr-2125-Apr-212-May-214-May-2118-Jun-212-Jul-219-Jul-2123-Jul-2130-Jul-21Plan11-Aug-211-Sep-215-Sep-2112-Sep-2114-Sep-2121-Sep-21-                     8,960,000                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS2,329,600        Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     2,329,600                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS1,601,600        Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     1,601,600                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS27,955,000     Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     27,955,000                Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS44,845,000     Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     44,845,000                Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS2,939,600        Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     2,939,600                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS2,038,400        Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     2,038,400                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualPlanYesPrior ReviewICS2,329,600        Plan44,262              14-Mar-2116-Mar-216-Apr-2120-Apr-2127-Apr-211-May-218-May-2110-May-2131-May-2114-Jun-2121-Jun-21N/AN/APlan3-Jul-2117-Jul-2121-Jul-2128-Jul-2130-Jul-216-Aug-21-                     2,329,600                  Actual-                     -                     ActualActualProposal ProcessEvaluationEOI  Shortlist ProcedureContract Award & SignatureApproved by: Selection MethodsQCBS: Quality and Cost-Based SelectionQBS: Quality-Based SelectionCQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications LCS: Least-Cost SelectionFBS Fixed Budget SelectionICS: Individual Consultants SelectionSSS: Sole Source Selection2Baseline Studies including pro-WEAIPrepared by: 1MIS System Development, Update, Financial DigitizationBasic Data3Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist4Focal Person Officer at HO (1 person in MSME Department)5Supply chain coordinator at province level 12 Nos. (P2-3; P5-6; P3:3) (Cost for each person = NPR 2,329,000.00)6Supply Chain Officer at Branch / District Level (1-2 number) Total 28 Nos. (Cost for each person = NPR 1,601,600.00) 7Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist8Procurement Specialist9Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual 
DRAFT 
Nepal 
Value Chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture 
Programme Implementation Manual  
1 
Part 1 – Rationale, results and approach 
1  Programme objectives, geographic area of 
intervention and target groups  
1.1  Programme Objectives 
The programme goal, development objective and outcomes are: 
Goal 
Improved livelihoods, climate resilience and nutrition of poor and vulnerable people  
Development 
Objective 
Farm enterprises of poor and vulnerable rural people are more resilient to climate change, 
increasingly profitable, strengthen their market linkages and use appropriate financial 
services. 
Outcome 1 
Outcome 2 
Improved small-scale producers’ capacities to run profitable farm enterprises and establish 
linkages with suppliers and buyers. 
Transformational increase in investment in the smallholder agricultural sector in supported 
programme states. 
Outcome 3 
Improved access by smallholder farmers and clusters’ actors to productive infrastructure. 
1.2  Target groups  
VITA  will  target  small-scale  producers,  including  landowners  and  landless,  and 
labourers involved in selected supply chains. Inclusion of small-scale producers and poor 
and  vulnerable  rural  populations  will  be  ensured  by  selecting  supply  chains  that  have 
promise to deliver the biggest benefits to the largest number of poor and by propagating 
technologies that benefit the intended target group most. VITA will have a strong focus of 
women and youth – with at least 60% women beneficiaries and 30% youth. This will 
involve selection of crops and livestock with high returns on labour and technologies that 
are  labour  saving  and  help  reducing  drudgery  of  women.  Similarly,  disadvantaged 
individuals  including  Dalits,  Janjatis,  landless  and  other  disadvantaged  groups  will  be 
specifically targeted using similar approaches and to be outlined in an inclusions strategy 
to be included in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM). A secondary target group 
are MSMEs and producer groups also active in the targeted supply chains.  
Graduation  in  VITA.  To  maximize  the  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  individuals  and 
households, the programme will adopt an explicit ‘graduation’ approach among supported 
small-scale  producers  and  groups,  building  on  experience  from  HVAP.  In  the  context  of 
VITA, this means that producer groups will be mobilized on an inclusive basis, i.e. with the 
voluntary  participation  of  like-minded  small-scale  producers  in  a  community  but  with 
varying levels of individual resources and starting incomes. More able and less risk averse 
small-scale  producers  from  a  community  may  be  the  first  to  mobilize  themselves  into 
producer  groups  to  interact  jointly  with  the  market.  As  initial  linkages  with  buyers  and 
service  providers  become  more  established,  other  interested  but  poorer  or  risk  averse 
individuals will then be supported by the programme and existing groups members to join 
these producer groups and learn from the experience of their friends and neighbours. This 
natural ‘graduation-based’ growth of producer groups allows the groups to achieve scale 
and  so  attract  more  buyers  and  services  providers,  hence  delivering  benefits  to  all  the 
members and creating a natural self-motivation within groups to support these graduation-
based inclusion processes, as was seen in HVAP.    
1.3  Geographical area 
  While  the  programme  will  have  a  mandate  to  operate  nationwide  as  part  of  its 
scaling-up  objective,  it  will  initially  focus  intensive  activities  within  28  districts  in  three 
states where all three programme components will operate (see table below). Within these 
districts,  the  programme  will  work  in  specific  locations  linked  to  clusters  for  specific 
supported commodities with priority given to locations with high agricultural potential and 
higher concentrations of poorer households. State 5 and State 2 have strong agricultural 
2 
potential combined with highest numbers of people living in poverty – together they are 
home to 55% of all people living in multi-dimensional poverty in the country (NPC, 2018). 
In  State  3,  the  programme  be more  focused,  working in  districts  with  good  agricultural 
potential that  were  the  most  severely  impacted  by  the  2015  earthquake.  VITA  will  also 
provide financial services under Component 2 to small-scale producers in State 1 and Sate 
6  in  partnership  with  other  ongoing  programmes  providing  business-focussed  support 
similar to that provided under Component 1. In the IFAD portfolio, this includes the ASDP 
in State 6 and RERP in State 1. RERP is also already active in State 2 and VITA is designed 
to build-on RERP activities there.  
Initial programme focus districts and estimated outreach are shown in Table 1 
1.4  Outreach  
120,000  small-scale  producers  are  expected  to  directly  benefit  from  programme 
supported services, falling into three categories:  
In addition to the above, many more individuals and MSMEs will benefit as users of 
public  infrastructure  supported  by  the  programme,  such  as  markets  and  access 
roads. 
Table 1 Programme locations and outreach 
VITA 
Coverage 
Full 
programme 
coverage 
Comp:  
1, 2 & 3 
State   Districts 
by Agro-ecological zone 
Terai and Siwalik  Mid and High 
Mountain 
Newly engaged groups 
Five  All - 12 
Two  All - 8 
Three  81 of 13 
Nawalparasi West, 
Banke, Bardiya, 
Dang, Kapilvastu, 
Rupandehi 
Saptari, Siraha, 
Dhanusha,  Bara, 
Mahottari, Sarlahi, 
Rautahat, Parsa 
Chitwan 
Sub-
total 
28  
15 
Arghakhanchi, 
Palpa, Pyuthan, 
Rolpa, Gulmi, 
Rukum East 
Makawanpur 
Sindhuli, Kavre, 
Dhading, Dolakha 
Sindhupalchok 
Nuwakot 
13 
Small-scale 
producers 
under VITA 
Branches 
ADBL 
30,000 
33 
25,000 
37 
15,000 
20 
70,000 
90 
Co-ops already supported by Heifer 
Finance services only, Comp 2 only - with partner projects 
Total 
20,000 
30,000 
120,000 
1 Severely affected district from 2015 earthquake - see National Planning commission (2015) Nepal Earthquake 2015, 
Post Disaster Needs Assessment 
3 
1.5  Duration  
of the programme will be a minimum of 72 months, with the actual completion date 
to  be  the  end  of  the  financial  year  in  which  72  months  of  implementation  have  been 
passed. 
2  Targeting  
  Geographic targeting: The three focus states and 28 districts have been selected 
as they have good agricultural potential and one or both of a) high numbers of poor and 
vulnerable households living in them or c) were severely affected by the 2015 earthquake. 
Poverty data is included in the SECAP. 
  Self-targeting will then be applied within the focus districts through the following: 
  Commodity and cluster selection within programme areas is a critical element of 
the  targeting  strategy  and  also  drives  the  selection  of  priority  municipalities  for  more 
intensive programme support. A portfolio of seven main commodities plus a further five 
locally  specific  commodities  has  been  pre-screened  and  approved  during  the  design  to 
confirm that they meet the commodity selection criteria outlined in para 30 below – making 
them particular of interest to poor and vulnerable small-scale producers as well as women 
and youth. 
  The  programme  team  will  conduct  a  Corridor  Opportunity  mapping  exercise 
along the road corridors in each focus state and district. The mapping exercise will identify 
the most  suitable  opportunities from  among  the  12  commodities  by municipality.  It  will 
then be used to identify and prioritise the candidate location for clusters for the various 
commodities. It is expected that, typically between 2-4 focus commodities will be identified 
for  each  municipality  and  that,  overall,  VITA  may  work  in  around  90  such  rural 
municipalities.  Prioritization  of  municipalities  and  cluster  will  be  based  on  achieving  the 
greatest impact on target beneficiaries while meeting the criteria referred to above.  
  An indicative mapping of commodity opportunities and districts is shown in Table 2. 
  Affordable investment pathways will be identified for all 12 commodities. These 
must  be  credible  and  allow  for  poor  and  vulnerable  small-scale  producers  to  make 
affordable initial investments and, through reinvestment of part of their increased income, 
generate net income per family worker at least 125% of unskilled-wage rates within not 
more than 4 years of their first investment. As of Dec 2019, this means target net incomes 
of at least NPR15,000 per month for full time work (USD145).  
  The  affordable  investment  pathways  will  be  documented  in  ‘template’  farm 
investment  plans  that  show  a  credible  sequence  of  costed  investments,  phased  over  a 
number  of  production  cycles  with  realistic  changes  in  farm  income  and  costs.  For  each 
commodity,  several  investment  pathways  will  be  produced,  for  farmers  starting  from 
different initial production sizes. The smallest starting point for the affordable investment 
pathways for each commodity must be below the size limit for collateral free loans from 
ADBL and other partner FIs – currently [NPR300,000].  
  The  affordable  investment  pathways  will  be  deliberately  small-scale to  be  of  most 
interest  to  poorer  and  vulnerable  produces.  They  will  be  promoted  both  in  the  initial 
awareness  raising  for  the  programme  and  then  in  more  detail  via  the  business  skills 
training.  This  is  vital  to  help  create  a  genuine  appetite  among  the  next  generation  of 
producers  and  micro-entrepreneurs  (18-40  yrs)  to  live  and  work  in  their  villages  and 
reduce rural to urban and overseas migration. 
  Small loan sizes: Term loans to producers supported via VITA financing will have a 
maximum loan limit of NPR 20 lakh (2 million). This will ensure that such resources are 
not captured by larger producers. 
  Inclusive producer groups will be mobilized in each ward/municipality such that 
no one interested is be left behind. While some poor and vulnerable producers may choose 
not to participate in the commercial aspects of the group initial, due to the perceived risk, 
they will be encouraged to participate after they have seen a few production cycles succeed 
4 
for  their  neighbours  and  they  have  greater  confidence  in their  capacity  and  the  market 
linkages.  
  Beneficiaries are expected to increase over time in each group and cluster areas. It 
is  fully  expected  that  in  an  initial  stage  mostly  those  able  to  assume  risks  more  easily 
(those living just below or above the poverty line) be the first ones to engage in the cluster.  
Subsequently,  it  is  expected  that  more  poorer  households  and  youth  will  be  ready  to 
engage  in  larger  numbers  as  they  witness  proof  of  concept  and  the  local  economy 
improves. While the better off are not the main target group, their participation in producer 
organization will be beneficial to increase production volumes and generate market appeal 
that other participating households can benefit from, so long as they do not dominate such 
organizations.   
  Critical activities such as Business Skills training will be conducted in multiple rounds 
so that those more risk averse producers that join latter, can also gain the same skills. 
  Based on Heifer’s proven approaches, there will be an emphasis on good governance 
within the groups, to ensure they are representative and inclusive and not subject to elite 
capture.  This will be actively monitored through the regular group capacity assessments. 
  Pier-based capacity development will be used as a key strategy for the program 
to  make  the  skills  and  knowledge  more  accessible  and  relevant,  especially  women-to-
women, with most business skills facilitators to be women. This has proved highly effective 
in HVAP. 
  To attract youth to join the programme specific measures will be taken including: 
  Direct targeting will be used in two specific aspects to promote women’s voice and 
leadership in the supply chains; 
  Enabling measures to improve the institutional environment among stakeholders 
and partners that is favourable to poverty targeting will include; 
5 
  Empowering and capacity-building measures  will focus on two critical aspects 
to ensure small-scale producers have the skills and confidence to profitable work in the  
supply chains: 
  Monitoring  of  targeting  effectiveness  will  be  conducted  on  a  regular  basis 
including via participatory monitoring, with beneficiary led data collection (as outlined in 
the M&E section of this PIM). Targeting and tracking data will be at the individual/MSME 
level (i.e. individuals) and not based on households unless specifically set-out for a given 
activity.  This  will  capture  characteristics  include:  gender,  age,  ethnic/social  groups. 
Additional  data  will  also  be  collected  to  calculate the  Poverty  Propensity  Index  for  each 
beneficiary.  
In practice, there may be more than one participating beneficiary in each household 
– a young women may start a small fish farm while her mother expands her goat rearing. 
This  is  to  be  encouraged  and  the  MIS  system  will  enable  the  linking  of  different  lead 
producers to any given household.  
6 
Table 2. Matrix of Potential commodities and respective Districts 
Value Chian 
Vegetable  Goat  Milk 
Fish 
Banana  Potato 
Cereal 
Seed   
+5 VCs 
- Local 
Potential 
Total  
16250  16250  6500  9750 
8 
8 
8 
8 
S.N. 
Total HHs 
State 2 
A 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
Parsa 
Bara 
Rauthat 
Sarlahi 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5  Mahottari 
Dhanusha 
6 
Siraha 
7 
Saptari 
8 
State 5 
B 
B1  Rupendehi PO 
Kapilvastu 
1 
Rupendehi 
2 
Nawalparasi West 
3 
Palpa 
4 
Gulmi 
5 
6 
Arghakanchi 
B2  Nepalgunj PO 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
C 
C1  Kathmandu PO 
Banke 
Bardia 
Dang 
Pyuthan 
Rolpa 
Rukum East 
State 3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Dolkha 
Sindhuli 
Kavre 
Sindupalchowk 
Nuwakot 
C 2 
Birendranagar, 
Chitwan PO 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
3 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Dhading 
1 
2 
Chitwan 
3  Makwanpur 
26 
27 
28 
Total Districts  (S2+S5+S3) 
1 
1 
1 
28 
1 
1 
1 
28 
HHs per 
VC   
% HHs by 
state  
HH by 
state 
%  
HHs  
State 2 
State 5 
State 3 
Total % 
State 2 
State 5 
State 3 
Total % 
24 
16848  17550  5616  9126 
13 
25 
13 
17 
8 
25 
45 
30 
100 
4212 
7582 
30 
45 
60 
30 
60 
30 
25 
100 
10 
10 
100 
100 
5265  3370  5476 
7898  1685  2738 
5054 
913 
16848  17550  5616  9126 
4388 
562 
4550 
2 
6500 
0 
5200 
8 
5200  70200 
42 
1 
1 
5 
3 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
8 
8 
5616 
25 
60 
15 
100 
1404 
3370 
842 
5616 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
3 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
4 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
7 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
11 
7 
4914 
0 
30 
70 
100 
0 
1474 
3440 
4914 
16 
7 
4914 
55 
40 
5 
100 
2703 
1966 
246 
4914 
5 
6 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
5 
2 
3 
3 
6 
6 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
5 
4 
3 
4 
6 
3 
100 
8 
5616  70200 
15 
40 
320 
210 
45 
100 
842  23271 
2246  28958 
2527  17971 
5616  70200 
7 
3  Components and activities 
3.1  Component 1: Inclusive Supply Chain Development 
Inclusive  supply  chain  development  is  the  component  within  the  programme  that 
facilitate  and  provide  non-financial  services  in  creating  enterprises  for  producers, 
including small-scale producers through the development of competitive & inclusive 
agricultural  commodity  clusters  that  are  part  of  supply  chains  for investment.  The 
component  will  focus  on  an  iterative  process  of  cluster  brokering,  facilitation  and 
capacity building support to SC actors for inclusive growth of higher value product 
supply chains - covering livestock, cereals and horticulture crops. 
3.1.1  Commodity Selection  
  The programme will initially focus on seven main commodities as vegetables, goats, 
fish,  cereal  seed,  seed  potato,  dairy  and  banana.  These  commodities  have  been 
prioritized based on the following criteria: 
  Clear,  current  market  demand  for  the  specific  products  -  sufficient to  absorb 
the expected increase in production;  
  Substantial confirmed interest from:  
  Opportunities 
for  competitive,  profitable  and  sustainable  small-scale 
production via affordable investment pathways;  
  Practical  intervention  opportunities  for  the  programme  to  facilitate  the 
accelerated development of the particular supply chain and local clusters. 
  Commodities  and  smallholder-based  production  systems  can  be  viable  and 
competitive in target production areas under current and future agro-climatic 
conditions, including via the adoption of climate smart agriculture practices. 
In addition to the seven main commodities initially prioritized, in Year 2 onwards, the 
programme will work on additional commodities relevant to specific locations within 
the programme area as: Citrus; Backyard chicken (traditional breed); Coffee; Honey, 
and; Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (MAPS), however, all commodities should pass 
the  criteria  outlined  above  as  well  as  economically  and  financially  viable  when 
evaluated.  
  VITA will operate more intensively in 28 districts of state 2, 3 and 5, through approx. 
90  bank  branches2  with  actual  clusters/locations  determined  by  above  mentioned 
priority supply chains potential and higher concentration of poorer households (HHs), 
having access to road connectivity. In some districts, there will be few supply chains 
and clusters active initially, while there may be multiple supply chains and clusters 
in other districts driven by the market player and demand. 
  Moreover, the programme will provide financial services under component 2 to small-
scale producers in State 1 and 6 in partnership with IFAD ongoing programmes RERP 
and ASDP respectively. The programme will consider additional supply chains as spice 
crops,  walnut  etc.,  undertaken  by  RERP  and  ASDP  besides  outlined  above  for 
development.    
  The  expected  potential  supply  chains  and  respective  districts  are  summarized  in 
Table 3 below. However, supply chains having credible market opportunities, growth 
potential and impact potential will be considered as first set of supply chains. 
2 See Annex for potential branches by districts 
8 
Table 3: Potential Supply Chains by Districts Expected Outreach  
S.N 
No of  
District 
Supply chain 
SC 1 
SC 2  SC 3  SC 4 
SC 5 
SC 6 
Vegetable  Goat  Milk  Fish  Banana  Potato 
A 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
B 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
C 
1 
State 2 
Parsa 
Bara 
Rautahat 
Sarlahi 
Mahotari 
Dhanusa 
Siraha 
Saptari 
State 5 
Kapilvastu 
Rupendehi 
Nawalparasi 
West - Parasi 
Palpa 
Gulmi 
Arghakanchi 
Banke 
Bardia 
Dang 
Pyuthan 
Rolpa 
Rukum East 
State 3 
Dolkha 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Sindhuli 
Kavre 
Sindupalchowk 
Nuwakot 
Dhading 
Chitwan 
Makwanpur 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
Total Districts  (A+B+C) 
Total Target HHs (70000) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
28 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
28 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
SC 8 
Local 
Potential4 
SC 7 
Cereal 
Seed3 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
13 
16848  17550  5616  9126 
17 
8 
5616 
1 
11 
4914 
16 
4914 
5616 
3.1.2  Component Approach 
  Supply  Chain  Development  (SCD)  upgrading  strategies  mainly  includes  technical 
capacities  development  for  processes;  managerial  capacities  development  for 
functions and networking capacities development for cooperation. Creating mutual 
benefits for the producers, traders, input suppliers and service providers involved in 
the  supply  chain  and  surrounding  market  is  key  to  the  success  of  supply  chain 
development. 
  The programme will adopt a Cluster development approach, that will build on existing 
and/or new emerging production clusters. Cluster approach will geographically group 
3 Cereals Seed: Maize and Paddy 
4  Coffee  in  3  districts,  citrus fruit  (9), Honey  (4),  MAPs  (13)  and  Backyard  chicken/Local  (7)  in  all  three 
provinces based on their local potential accounts 5600 HHs 
9 
the key actors along the supply chain of a particular commodity in the same areas. 
Cluster  development  processes  will  be  driven  by  the  primary  actors  themselves, 
principally farmers and MSMEs, who make investments for profit and carry the risk 
of failure. Facilitating an ongoing process of action-oriented dialogue and brokering 
among these key actors (buyers, producers and service providers) through MSP or 
similar  mechanism  in  each  commodity  cluster  is  a  central  element  of  the  cluster 
development approach.  
  The initial focus of these dialogue and brokering processes is grounded in immediate 
opportunities  for  actions  and  improvements  that  help  build  trust  and  momentum 
within the cluster. Only once momentum and trust begin to emerge it will be feasible 
to  jointly  consider  longer-term  aspirations  and  begin  to  tackle  them. The  dialogue 
and brokering process among key cluster actors will establish jointly owned, albeit 
informal,  action  plans  and  progress  tracking  for  the  development  of  their  cluster 
addressing bottlenecks.  
  Support market development forms a vital part of the cluster development process. 
Vibrant  support  markets,  including  commercial  supply  of  inputs  and  services (e.g. 
technical, financial) are essential for sustaining competitive clusters and for enabling 
other  clusters  to  emerge  to  copy  the  initial  successes  (sometime  called  “crowding 
in”).  Within  profitable  clusters  and  supply  chains,  the  costs  of  such  services  and 
inputs should be an affordable routine business cost for producers and businesses 
and  should  not  require  external  subsidy.  The  programme  will  therefore  focus  on 
facilitating investments that develop, in a broadly harmonized manner, the demand 
and supply of these market-based services and inputs in the clusters, consistent with 
the pluralistic framework envisaged in the ADS. 
  Clusters (See Box 1) offer many advantages for small-scale producers in competitive 
commodity  markets  and  can  make  it  possible  for  clusters  to  be  more  inclusive. 
Clustering  is  vital  if  small-scale  producers  are  to  succeed  in  becoming  reliable 
suppliers in the market as it will facilitate to aggregate supply and reduce transaction 
costs between buyers and farmers as well as in the delivery of critical services (e.g. 
financial  or  technical  services).  It  is  especially  important  for  younger  and  poorer 
households  who  are  only  able  to make the minimum  initial  investments  and must 
expand  their  farm  business  gradually..  Clustering  can  thus  help  improve  market 
access for small farmers and hence make the above investment pathways viable. 
In VITA, as an approximate guide, a typical local cluster when mature might include 
8-10  producer  groups  of  30  -  40  farmers  per  group  –  approximately  200-  400 
producers, though some groups and cluster may be much larger, with the size of the 
group often influenced by characteristics of the commodity. These producer groups 
would ideally be supplying regularly to 3-5 buyers to ensure adequate competition. 
VITA may therefore expect to support approx. 2300 producer groups spread across 
200-250 local commodity clusters.  
10 
Box 1: Clusters and their importance 
A  cluster  is  a  geographic  concentration  of  interconnected  producers,  businesses, 
suppliers,  service  providers,  and  associated  institutions  (government  and  non-
government)  which  creates  direct  and  indirect  synergies  among  them,  resulting  in 
market linkages (USAID, 2008). In VITA, cluster will be commodity specific (i.e. each 
cluster  focuses  on  one  commodity)  and  will  typically  be  defined  geographically  by 
zones of commercially viable production volume which form distinct buying zones of 
several competing buyers/traders. i.e. there will be several different clusters each in 
a  different  location  for  a  single  commodity  and/or  one  village  may  have  farmers 
participating in several different clusters, each for a different commodity in VITA. 
A cluster is useful when:  
• 
• 
supply  chain  is  highly  fragmented  or  unstructured  throughout  its  segments 
(production,  transportation,  distribution,  enabling  environment  etc),  thus 
requiring interventions by numerous stakeholders who could not resolve any 
single issue alone,  
trust among stakeholders is weak and hence a special effort is necessary to 
create trust and ‘social capital’ and  
•  obstacles to objectives (e.g. increased sales and income) need to be addressed 
by multiple stakeholders and supply chain segments on building relationships 
and trusts among each other (USAID, 2008).   
A cluster-based approach creates a more enabling environment for supply chain actors 
(producers, buyers & service providers) for growth and government agencies /support 
organisations to optimize the resources and ensure sustainability as follows; 
Benefits to farmers: (especially concerned about price, production plan and 
availability of time/inputs) 
•  Aggregation and creating Better market access with greater bargaining power;  
Increased  income  as  a  result  of  attaining  higher  prices  and  increased 
• 
production 
Improved interaction with buyers due to improved relationship and trust 
•  Better relationship among producers and with other actors 
• 
•  Lower production cost due to better relationship with input suppliers 
•  Long term group business development 
Benefits to buyers: (especially concerned about quantity, quality and delivery 
reliability) 
•  Access to a larger scale of supply (quantity, quality and regularity)  
• 
•  Assurance of a steady supply of product volume and quality at a reasonable 
improved trust with suppliers and other cluster members 
price 
•  Efficient  communication  of  market  feedback  and  preferences  for  quick 
response to market needs 
Benefits to relevant service providers/support institutions: 
•  More efficient utilization of project resources and services 
•  Start from cluster actors but can increase to more beneficiaries & Sustainability  
11 
  The state level supply chain team and ADBL staff will work closely involving State 
government and Municipalities during the cluster development process, including via.  
MSPs. The team will need to consider following points when applying a cluster-based 
approach: 
  With  multiple  stakeholders  involved  in  clusters,  leadership  can  create  a 
challenge. In that case, honest neutral brokers are required who take up the 
role of bringing the stakeholders together and stimulate trust. It is important 
that the brokers gain the respect of all stakeholders. 
  To  create  trust  among  numerous  stakeholders,  it  is  very  helpful  to  have  a 
common goal and indicator e.g. increased sales and incomes. The MSP process 
facilitates  in  bringing  together  and  developing  ownership  and  mutual 
understanding among stakeholders. 
  Quick  wins  and  early  accomplishments  are  essential  in  fostering  trust.  This 
should be incorporated in early, doable action plans.  
  Clusters are not an end in themselves; through clusters, the stakeholders need 
to achieve demonstrable, quantifiable and successful results based on market 
demands:  supply  chains  need  to  focus  on  what  buyers  want  not  on  what  is 
currently  produced.  Agribusiness/Buyers  -  Producers  Interactions  meeting 
helps  in  driving  this  market  led  production.  These  wins  will  stimulate  the 
stakeholders to continue in the same spirit of cooperation. 
  Supply chain enhancement requires the involvement of supporting institutions 
e.g. government (federal, state and local), research institutions. To support the 
clusters,  the  stakeholders  need  to  be  able  building  on  existing  institutions, 
amongst others this will contribute to sustainability. 
  The  sub-component  and  major  activities  under  this  component  broadly  include: 
Cluster brokering & Investment facilitation ii) Farm Business Capacity Development 
and iii) Inclusive supply chain knowledge and policy as outlined in figure 1 below. 
Figure 1: Inclusive Supply Chain Development Process 
12 
3.1.3  Sub-component 1.1: Farm business capacity development  
1.1.1 Mentoring and Mobilization of small-scale producers  
  Mobilization  of  small-scale  producers  into  the  supply  chains  within  clusters  and 
programme  activities  will  be  led  by  a  team  of  market-oriented  SEMs  of local NGO 
partners managed by Heifer in all districts with support from the Supply Chain teams 
at State and District level. This will draw on Heifer’s successful experience in Nepal, 
using  its  Values-based  Holistic  Community  Development  (VBHCD)  approach  and 
Cornerstones tool. The NGOs will work closely with local government in leveraging 
the resources for synergy and maximizing the programme outputs.   
  Heifer will select around [xx no.] local NGOs of proven competence and sustainability 
to provide full coverage of the programme areas, with each sub-award expected to 
cover around 2000 households (HHs) and more. The LNGOs will be responsible for 
pre-group  facilitation,  group  formation,  conducting  Heifer  group  strengthening  12 
Corner Stones trainings, consolidation of group into cooperative and registration at 
cluster level and supporting group/coop in particular to enhance production meeting 
the  traders/buyers  requirement  at  cluster  level  in  close  coordination  with  local  
government.  
  Each LNGOs will have a [Programme coordinator, Accountant and 3-4 socio-economic 
mobilisers]  on  average.  The  number  of  HHs  per  SEM  will  be  approx.  500  HHs. 
However, the number of LNGOs and field staff will vary based on the number of SCs, 
number of POs, number of cluster/sub award covered in municipality/district. LNGOs 
will work under the guidance and supervision of Heifer staff and coordinators based 
at district and state branch office.  
It is expected that the starting point for each commodity in each community may fall 
into one of three categories and the detailed mobilization process may be fine-tuned 
to accommodate these different starting points: 
  Existing active producer group focused on the target commodity 
  Existing production of the target commodity by many farmers but not organized 
in a producer group 
  Minimal current production of target commodity by farmers and no organized 
producer groups 
  The detailed mentoring and mobilization approach will draw on Heifer’s established 
VBHCD  approach  and  Cornerstones  tool  and    successful  experience  in  Nepal, 
including  its  flagship  “Strengthening  Smallholder  Enterprises  of  Livestock  Value 
Chains” (SLVC) project now in its second phase (SLVC II). The programme will work 
with newly mobilized groups where needed, including women-led groups, as well as 
linking  with  ‘market-ready’  existing  producer  groups,  such  as  the  many  groups 
supported by Heifer and other IFAD-backed projects.  
  Heifer’s  Cornerstones  tool  is  based  on  a  set  of  12  core  values.  All  small-scale 
producers  Component  1  will  take  part  in  training  around  the  Cornerstones, 
establishing  a  set  of  common  values  between  them  at  the  beginning  of  the 
partnership.  The  Cornerstones  include,  inter  alia:  1.  Passing  on  the  Gift    2. 
Accountability 3. Sharing and Caring 4. Sustainability and Self-Reliance 5. Improved 
Animal  and  Resource  Management  6.  Nutrition  and  Income  7.  Gender  and  Family 
Focus  8.  Genuine  Need  and  Justice  9.  Improving  the  Environment  10.  Full 
Participation 11. Training, Education and Communication 12. Spirituality. Several are 
notable in the context of VITA: Passing the Gift embodies the expectation that the 
first wave of beneficiaries in the producer organization will be expected to actively 
mobilize  and  support  their  less  able  friends  and  neighbours  to  join  as  soon  as 
possible.  This  gift  being  the know-how,  market  networks  and  mutual  support (not 
physical or monetary inputs) – a practical graduation approach to inclusion.  
  On  nutrition,  the  Cornerstones  tool  supports  individuals  within  the  POs  to  identify 
practical  ways  to  improve  the  nutrition  of  their  families.  In  VITA  this  will  include 
nutritional practices in the home and also how to better use increased incomes and 
13 
increased local supply of high nutritional value foods created by the programme. A 
specific focus will be on improving the nutritional status of women, especially teenage 
girls, as well as early childhood nutrition.  
  The  tool  includes  facilitation  on  climate  smart  agricultural  focusing  on  the 
capacitating  small  scale  producers  on  soil  quality  improvement  and  waste 
management. VITA will avoid land with more than 300 slope and flood and landslide 
prone areas, tillage operation will be regulated in the moderate to steep slopes (5-
300). The chemical fertiliser and pesticides will be discouraged by adopting integrated 
paste  management.  The  program  will  reduce  the  stress  on  natural  resources  by 
encouraging  to  manage  livestock  size  herds  by  carrying  capacity  assessment  and 
suggesting  quality  breed,  adopting  stall  feeding  and  encourage  fodder  and  forage 
plantation. VITA will only use the certified and verified varieties and priority will be 
given  to  the  native  species  to  reduce  the  treat  of  pest  outburst  and  impact  on 
environment (ESMP matrix, annex 13). 
  The small scall producers and local service providers will be capacitated on managing 
environmental,  social  and  climate  impacts  through  the  activities  listed  in  ESMP 
matrix  (annex  13)  via  business  skill  classes  and  local  service  providers  through 
supply chain development.   
  Mentoring and mobilization of producers and producer organizations will enable them 
to make successful investments and become reliable supply chain partners for buyers 
and  customers.  Regular  coaching  and  mentoring  of  producers  via  the  cluster 
development processes will also help producers to access essential technical services 
and inputs; improve and sustain links to buyers for assured market, and; increasingly 
work together in producer groups with like-minded neighbours to be more efficient 
in the supply chain.  
1.1.2 Business skills training to small-scale producers 
  The programme will provide small-scale producers of respective supply chain group 
essential  foundational  business  skills  so  they  can  transform  their  farming  as  a 
business.  The  business  skills  course  will  cover  essentials  of  financial  skills  and 
household finances; managing own farm as a business; managing a group enterprise 
as well as aspects of climate change and environmental safeguard, youth, nutrition 
and GALS.  
  The  programme  will  develop  business  skills  course  curriculum  and  associated 
modules  incorporating  financial  education,  GALS,  Nutrition,  women’s  land  rights, 
climate change, and environmental safeguard aspects and TOT materials, adapting 
existing  financial  and  business  skills  education  programmes  of  RERP  and  others 
where appropriate. The programme will conduct about 10-12 days long TOT trainings 
on the business skill modules mentioned above to Business Skill Facilitators (BSFs) 
before  mobilizing  them in the  field.  BSF  will  be  selected  from  a  short-list  of those 
nominated by the producer groups and community themselves. 
  On climate adaptation, the modules will apply the Participatory Integrated Climate 
Services  for  Agriculture5  (PICSA)  approach  (or  similar  approaches)  to  help  small-
scale producers identity and access relevant climate and weather information; assess 
pertinent options for crops and livestock investments and adaptations; and the use 
of participatory planning tools to improve and enlighten their decision-making based 
on  their  situations.  These  adaptation  investments  for  all  priority  commodity  are 
summarized  in  the  attached  SECAP  Report  (Table  15)  and  will  be  financed  under 
Component 2.1. 
  The  programme  trained  BSF  will  run  Business  Skills  training  courses  that  will  be 
approx. 60-70 hours spread over 32-36 session, over 1-2 session per week, delivered 
on a peer-to-peer basis by BSF trained by the programme.  Socio-economic mobiliser 
will  provide  regular  backstopping  and  supervision  of  the  BSFs  and  to facilitate  the 
5 https://cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/68687  
14 
participation of suitable resource person from relevant Institutions to attend selected 
sessions of the Business Skills training. BSF’s may be able to run multiple courses 
concurrently,  with  evening  session  up  to  3  or  4  times  per  weeks  –  each  with  a 
different  class,  as  well  as  running  daytime  courses  for  those  wanting  more 
concentrated training; 
  The programme will train around 800 BSF trained, who will run 3 business skill class 
in  clusters  so  as  to  ensure  delivery  of sufficient  training  during  the  programme  to 
approx.  2300  producers  groups  engaged  in  respective  supply  chains  and, 
importantly, also to ensure a small pool of experienced service providers remain in 
the clusters that can be paid by the local government, trainees themselves and/or 
other organization to run similar courses in the future to meet ongoing demand; 
  The  programme  will  use  farmer’s  diary  specific  to  individual  supply  chain  to  track 
and  record  data  on  individual  households  of  producers  group  of  their  farming 
activities.  The  experience  from  IFAD  programme  HVAP  is  that  the  farmers 
themselves place a very high value on the insights they gain from their own records 
and a majority are keen to keep their records books up to date once they are given 
the skills and support to do so.  
  BSF’s will also play an important role on the programmes M&E and data collection, 
especially in regularly capturing data on the sales and financial performance of the 
producers and producer groups in supported clusters and supply chains through farm 
business  diaries  and  entering in  M  &  E system  using  MIS-enabled  tablet.  The BSF 
will be trained by the programme on data entry on VITA MIS using tablet and also 
paid an honorarium of for data collection and entry in MIS on per group basis.  
3.1.4  Sub-component 1.2 Brokering & Investment facilitation 
1.2.1 Brokering & investment facilitation 
  Cluster  brokering  helps  to  improve  linkages  between  farmers,  buyers  and  service 
providers along the supply chain of a particular commodity within specific area and 
develop action plan together for addressing issues and make investment to better 
exploit market opportunities for increased sales and income/economic growth. The 
main steps to be considered in each supply chain clusters for cluster brokering will 
be as shown in Figure 2 below.  
  The respective supply team lead in each State/Regional Hub Office with support from 
territory-based  supply  chain  staff  and  Economic  mobilizers  will  take  the  lead  in 
coordinating  these  activities  in  the  respective  SC  they  are  responsible  for.  The 
programme  Implementation  Unit  (PMU)  will  ensure  coordination  and  consistency 
between Regional Hub teams working in the same supply chain. Each of these main 
steps is summarized below. 
In  the  context  of  COVID-19  and  the  potential  prolonged  need  for  safe  social 
distancing practices, the substantial increase in collective marketing of farm produce 
through  POs,  with  trucks  collecting  produce  in  bulk  directly  from  the  village,  will 
dramatically reduce the number of small-scale producers having to regularly go to 
the  market  to  sell  their  producer  one  by  one.  Greater  use  of  electronic  payments 
between buyers and producers will also reduce the need for face to face transaction. 
However, physical produce will still need to be aggregated and transported along the 
supply chain in a safe manner. Similarly, there will still need to be some safe face-
to-face  interaction,  especially  in  the  early  stages  as  relationships  are  built,  for 
example via safe MSPs. VITA will support the widespread adoption and adherence to 
such safe working practices in supported supply chains. 
15 
Step I: Cluster Identification/selection and verification  
  For each commodity, the potential clusters in each geographical area will be identified 
by rapid mapping exercise led by the programme supply chain team. The program 
will develop site selection criteria including the characteristics of i) having sufficient 
agriculture land where farmers are traditionally doing farming, ii) irrigation facility 
for  the  cereal  crops,  iii)  not  prone  for  flood  and  landslide,  iv)  gentle  to  moderate 
slope,  cultivation  will  be  discouraged  in  lands  with  slope  more  than  300  and  v) 
confined  only  in  agriculture  lands  with  no  any  pressure  on  the  natural  resources. 
Rapid  mapping  is  carried  out  for  all  commodities  /  products  of  interest  in  a  given 
location using semi-structured interview questionnaires for all levels of stakeholders 
followed  by focus  group  discussion  (FGD)  as  required.  The  Programme  will  also  in 
collaborate with other organizations (development programmes, progressive banks 
and financial institutions etc) that are actively pursuing similar objectives during this 
exercise  and  hold 
involving 
representatives of the primary actors (producers, buyers, suppliers) to validate the 
rapid mapping findings including confirming buyers demand.  
further  consultation/workshop 
if  necessary 
  Rapid Mapping will identify the main actors and supporters in the local supply chain, 
including  their  demands,  downstream  and  upstream  linkages,  contributions  and 
expectations  within  an  area/sector.  This  will  also  provide  existing  (and  potential) 
market  segments,  product  volume  and  flows,  driving  forces,  and  leverage  points, 
constraints  and  opportunities  and  finally  indications  of  potential  interventions  for 
supply chains development.    
  The rapid mapping for identification of identified SC potential clusters includes three 
parallel elements: 
  Scouting  and  meeting  with  traders/buyers  to  confirm  specific  demand  for 
products  and  explore  their  interest  working  with  producer  groups  in  cluster 
areas.  
  Mapping  geographical  production  clusters,  encompassing  existing  producer 
groups and other potentially interested groups, and estimating supply potential 
over time (to match to identified demand from traders/buyers). 
Identify  existing  (and  potential)  markets  segments  potential  to  provide 
additional  incentives  for  the  supply  chain  actors  including  small-scale 
producers, each of whom may have differing interests and constraints.    
Step II: Cluster Development 
  Based on the information generated, the SC team will develop clusters in relevant 
geographical areas. The SC teams will select the potential areas of action for each 
commodity  having  viable  size  of  SC  actors:  producers,  agribusinesses,  service 
providers  (business,  technical  &  financial)  for  having  dialogue  and  to  work  with. 
Mobilization of farm and non-farm households into the clusters will be led by a team 
of  market-oriented  Socio-economic  mobilisers  (Comp  1.2)  with  support  from  the 
Supply  Chain  teams.  The  different  actors  will  also  be  approached  individually  to 
explain the purpose, discuss expectations and contributions and agree on the next 
16 
steps.  The  projected  number  of  households  per  cluster  in  VITA  varies  as  per  the 
supply chain considering the viability of business including services. The households 
range from 100-200 HHs in vegetable, Banana, Milk, Fish and potato seed, 300 HHs 
in goat to 400 HHs in cereal seed.  
  A  first  concrete  action  after  the  identification  of  clusters  will  be  rolling  process  of 
action-oriented brokering, dialogue among the concerned actors/stakeholders (see 
MSP) with the aim to foster cooperation among actors to catalyse investments and 
remove bottlenecks to increase trading and profits and make the most of practical 
opportunities for growth in a win-win manner. 
Step III: Multi-stakeholder Platforms (MSPs)  
  MSPs in VITA are central element of the cluster development approach to facilitate 
inclusive  development  of  each  SC  cluster.  MSPs  are  platforms,  processes  or 
partnerships  of  different  stakeholders  /  actors  together  with  similar  interests 
interacting  each  other  for  improving  the  situations  affecting  them  through  shared 
learning,  joint  decision-making  and  collective  action  as  shown  below  (fig  3.). 
Producers,  traders/  processors,  commercial  and  non-commercial  suppliers  (of 
technical  or  financial  services  or  inputs)  as  well  as  government  agencies  (states, 
municipalities)  and  other  Supporters  including  research  institutions,  insurance 
companies are be active participants of such MSP meetings as illustrated below.  
  The MSPs will bring together the main actors involved in the supply chain to establish 
relations  between  different  (types  of)  supply  chain  actors  as  a  means  for  supply 
chain upgrading and fostering collaboration and innovation. MSP also enables action-
oriented  dialogues  between  groups  of  buyers  and  producers  for  B2B  linkages  and 
actors with service providers (input suppliers, service centres, financial institutions 
etc.)  for  B2S  linkages  to  deepen  mutual  understanding,  catalyse  investments  to 
increase trading and profits creating win-win opportunities for greater collaboration, 
and make the most of practical opportunities for growth.  
  MSP will be organised at regular intervals in VITA separately for each SC driven by 
the  actors  both  at  State/corridor  and  cluster  level  with  anticipated  objectives 
evolving in a gradual manner, starting by a focus on creating ownership, stimulating 
B2B,  B2S  linkages  relationship,  addressing  sector  priorities  and  investments 
including experience sharing and knowledge development as outline in Figure 3 below. 
17 
Figure 2.MSP Participants 
Figure 3. MSP Anticipated Functions and Purposes 
  The  MSPs  for  each  SC  are  driven  by  the  actors  and  expected  to  serve  following 
purposes as outlined below in general: 
18 
  MSP  validate  the  information  generated  from  SC  Mapping  and  Market 
assessment study and set priorities for SC upgrading. The initial priorities need 
to focus on immediate market opportunities and over time, the plans need to 
address more strategic opportunities that may affect longer term growth and 
vibrancy of the local sector as well as developing critical local service markets 
necessary for sustaining growth; 
  MSPs  strengthen  the  internal  coherence  of  the  supply  chain,  promoting 
inclusive  business,  and  improving  the  productivity  or  earnings  in  order  to 
generate higher supply chain earnings, which in turn are aimed to particularly 
benefit small-scale producers; 
  Facilitate  meetings  between  groups  of  buyers/agribusinesses  and 
farmers/producer  for  B2B  linkages  including  contract  facilitation  and  actors 
with other service providers (banks, nurseries, input suppliers, service centres, 
technical  production  consultancy  providers  etc.)  for  B2S  linkages  to  deepen 
mutual  understanding  and 
for  greater 
collaboration; 
identify  win-win  opportunities 
  Develop and agree on joint action plans (SC road map) among producer, agri-
businesses  and  service  providers  for  developing  supply  chain  cluster  and 
commit themselves for implementation through individual or joint investments 
and also serve the foundation for programme resource planning; 
Involved SC actors (via MSP strategy and action plan) to set priority areas for 
programme and support organisation including government entities support - 
e.g.  critical  public  and  market  infrastructure  investment,  types  of  typical 
technical  support  needed,  sector  development 
investment  as  Quality 
standards, Lab strengthening etc.); 
  Developing  capacity  through  relating  and  engaging  and  Increased  ownership 
of supply chain upgrading process; 
  Enhance transparency,  improved  trust, quality  and  relevance  of  relationships 
between actors at different levels; and   
Improves coordination and partnership among the stakeholders for sector level 
investment,  policy  dialogue  for  improved  business  environment  as  well  as 
experience  sharing  and  knowledge  brokering  in  specific  supply  chain 
stimulating sector growth as a whole. 
Initially, MSP will be facilitated by the VITA SC team involving Provincial and Local 
government. In order to strengthen the consultative process and institutionalize MSP 
mechanism,  MSPs  will  be  assisted  to  become  self-governing  forum,  owned  by  the 
producers and businesses themselves and aligned with Provincial, DCC and Municipal 
institutions as they establish. 
In VITA, State/Corridor level MSPs that will last up to 2 days will be held at respective 
state/corridor  (1-2  times  per  year)  to  create  shared  vision  and  common 
understanding  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges  among  primary  actors  and 
stakeholders concerned and to foster trust among different players, which is vital for 
sustaining longer-term relationships. 
Step IV: Business-to-business (B2B) Linkages  
  The B2B linkages also termed as Cluster level  MSP are expected to evolve after the 
MSPs at State /cluster level. Business to Business (B2B) meetings/interactions will 
be held, typically between buyer and group of producers who met during the MSPs 
and explore business opportunities of working together.  
  The  B2B  follow-up  meetings  will  focus  on  developing  and  negotiating  market  led 
production/sourcing plan between producers and buyers a reliable supply of products 
as  required  by  the  market  to  have  competitive  advantage  (volume,  seasonal  & 
varietal) creating win-win situation for both parties as illustrated in figure 5 below. 
In turn, the agreed market production/trading plans will often lead to the need for 
19 
specific actions or investments to be made by the producers, buyer/business or both. 
The investments and actions may be taken individually or jointly, depending on what 
has been agreed.  
In VITA, Cluster level MSP or Business to Business Interactions (B2B/B2S) meetings, 
as follow up of State/Corridor level MSP, will be held 2-3 times per year depending 
on the nature of commodities between producers and businesses that form the basis 
for individual or joint plans for financing. 
  Like B2B meetings, after the MSPs, Business to services meetings/interaction will be 
held so as to facilitate linkages between supply chain actors in particular producers 
and service provider (input supply, business, technical, financial etc. ) with a focus 
to  deliver  wide  range  of  services/products  to  help  them  operate  and  grow  their 
businesses.  
  The SC team will facilitate this type of B2B, B2S interaction at group and cluster level 
on  regular  interval  followed  by  regular  support,  and  monitoring  to  ensure 
implementation of joint action plan. 
20 
Figure 4: MSP and SC actor interaction sequence 
Step V: Investment Plan Development, Financing and Execution  
  Following  the  B2B/B2S  interaction  meetings,  the  producer’s  organisation  and 
traders/  agribusiness  and/or  service  providers  will  develop  investment  plan  in 
responses  to  their  agreed  trading  plans  or  for  their  own  business  development 
purposes. It is important that such plans are well informed, credible and realistic and 
based  on  sound  technical  and  business  foundations  without  being  unduly 
complicated. The VITA team including ADBL staff will facilitate and provide technical 
support to producers and MSMEs/agribusiness to prepare well-informed investment 
plans for own financing or to submit to respective ADBL or other financial institutions 
for loan financing. The programme will support in developing service providers and 
facilitate  producers  group/individuals  requiring  such  support  to  acquire  it  from 
commercial  service  providers  in  order  to  stimulate  development  of  critical  support 
markets. 
Individual producers will be participating in Farm business skill class in their producer 
group, will have growing confidence in understanding the financial aspects of their 
investment plans they are now considering. As needed, the programme will arrange 
additional  pre-investment technical  advice  to  the  producers/farmers to  ensure the 
plans  are  sound.  Such  advice  will  be  in  terms  of  better  understanding  associated 
risks to the proposed investment, but also to identify technologies or strategies that 
can reduce those risks.  
  The  programme  will  facilitate  and  link  individual  farmers  or  group  to  respective 
branch  of  ADBL  and  other  financial  institutions  for  loan  finance  if  need  for  their 
investments. Bank credit officers will participate in the MSPs and cluster process, so 
should be increasingly familiar with the market opportunities and risks by the time 
the loans application begin to be received. Individual producers participating in FBL 
will  have  growing  confidence  in  understanding  the  financial  aspects  of  their 
investment plans they are now considering.  
If investments are to be made as multiple small investments by several cooperating 
producers  in  a  community,  the  loan  applications  and  investment  proposal  will  be 
aggregated and pre-screened to ensure adequate quality and completeness before 
they  are  submitted  to  banks  by  field  staff.  Likewise,  for  multiple  similar  small 
investments,  loan  application  may  either  be  consolidated  into  a  single  loan 
application or as a single bundle of multiple smaller loans depending on the decisions 
of the applicants and the acceptability to the bank. 
21 
22 
Execution of investment Plans  
their  own 
Investment plans will be implemented by the producers themselves who will carrying 
the  risks  and  rewards  of 
investment 
implementation  will  be  supported  through  the  ongoing  process  of  producer  group 
mentoring  by  supply  chain  team  and  Socio-economic  mobilisers.  Producers  will  be 
advised in buying the necessary quality inputs and technical services they need for 
success.  Technical  advice  required  by  producers  to  implement  their  plans  will  be 
provided  by  commercial  service  providers.  The  programme  will  support  for  the 
development  of  strong  support  markets  by  developing  and  strengthening  such 
service providers and facilitate their linkages with producers/ MSMEs. 
investments.  However, 
Step VI: Participatory Monitoring and reporting 
  Data on performance of the farm investments will be collected by Individual farmers 
through Farm Business Diary. These data from the farm dairy will be entered using 
tablets  by  Farm  Business  Skills  Facilitators  (BSF),  compiled  and  analysed  via  the 
programme MIS. Where potential performance issues are identified, the supply chain 
&  ADBL  team  will  work  with  the  SC  actor  investor  (producer  /  MSMEs)  to  take 
corrective actions to prevent the investment failing.  
  The field teams in cooperation with SCT will regularly monitor and report on progress 
against defined milestones for the development of each of the priority SCs cluster. 
All monitoring done will be captured in the MIS system of the programme and guided 
by the M&E team. 
1.2.2 Capacity Development of Staff and Stakeholders including local and state 
government  
  The  Programme  will  capacitate  Programme,  Bank  staffs,  key  government  partners 
(local  and  state  government  personnel)  and  stakeholders  on  brokering  inclusive 
supply chain cluster development including MSP, B2B/ B2S linkages & relationships 
among business and producers’ organizations in developing efficient and competitive 
supply  chain  through  trainings,  interaction  sessions  and  national/international 
exchange visits.  
  The  programme  and  bank  staff  will  be  oriented  /sensitized  on  inclusive  planning, 
gender and targeting as well as Inclusive and green financing to meet the programme 
targeting outreach and business investment addressing the possible climate change 
risks. This will support facilitate transformation of agriculture financing to be climate 
smart and inclusive too. In addition, the socio-economic mobiliser will be trained on 
market led social mobilization, Gender, social inclusion and targeting.    
  Likewise,  the  programme  will  orient  and  capacitate  state  and  municipal 
representatives/  relevant  staff  on  MSP  and  cluster  development  process  through 
their  full  participation  in  MSP  and  business  interactions  as  well  as  exposures  in 
building their confidence on market driven supply chain development. 
1.2.3 Supply chain development facility:  
  Under  supply  chain  development  facility  (SDF),  the  programme  will  make  "public 
good"  investments  to  address  issues  that  emerge  from  the  supply  chains,  as 
identified and prioritized by the SC actors during the MSPs. These will primarily be 
"software"  type  investments  (e.g.  market  research,  varietal  trials,  climate  change 
resilience production technologies as suggested by SECAP and listed in ESMP matrix 
(annex 13), SPS protocol development, Quality standard of sexed semen, planting 
materials,  improved  technologies  demonstration  etc.)  that  cannot  otherwise  be 
financed as private investments.  
  The  facility  will  also  be  used  to  improve  the  quality  and  coverage  of  local  market 
based technical services that are essential for developing competitive supply chains. 
This  will  include  advanced  professional  training  and  investment  support  to  local 
23 
service  providers  and  embedded  service  providers  to  improve  and  expand  their 
technical services in supported clusters.  
  For support market development, a key focus will be to expand the network of local 
private technical service providers that can provide advice to small-scale producers 
on  appropriate  climate  adaptation  investments  and  climate  smart  agriculture 
practices for their farm enterprises – for crops, livestock and fish. VITA will partner 
with  municipal  authorities,  POs  and  buyers  to  identify,  train  and  mentor  suitable 
technical  service  providers  in  the  municipality  –  operating  as  either  embedded  or 
independent  service  providers.  Similarly,  VITA  will  partner  with  state  MOLMACs  to 
ensure  the  Agriculture  Knowledge  Centres  (AKCs)  and  Veterinary  Hospital  and 
Livestock  Specialist  Service  Centres  (VHLSSCs),  who  have  more  higher  qualified 
staff, provide technical backstopping to the municipalities and local service providers 
supported  by  the  municipalities  and  the  programme  -  which  is  a  stated  role  and 
justification for the AKCs/VHLSSCs. 
  The  SDF  is  also  expected  to  support  the  greater  use  of  information  and 
communication  technologies  (ICT)  in  the  supply  chains,  based  on  demand.  Three 
areas are anticipated as priorities: 
  The facility will specifically not finance public infrastructure – which will be addressed 
by  collaboration  with  local,  state  and  federal  government  investment  programmes 
and Component 3.  
General Principles  
  SDF will invest on "public goods", the sectors which are not generally expected to 
attract exclusively private investment. Thus, “Public goods” are financed through a 
combination of public and private investment. While SDF may typically cover 85% 
percent  of  the  total  investment,  private/  public  actors  in  the  supply  chain  will  be 
expected  to  make  a  financial  contribution  of  typically  15%  (cash  or  in-kind 
equivalent) in order to confirm that these are indeed an immediate priority for the 
supply  chain  actors  themselves.  The  share  of  private  finance  should  consider  the 
degree  to  which  specific  private  actors  capture  the  financial  benefits  of  the 
investments in comparison to the wider socio-economic benefits.   
  A  variety  of  ‘public  goods’  investments  are  anticipated  to  be  needed  during  the 
programme period to develop competitive and inclusive clusters of targeted supply 
chains.  The  types  of  investments  under  the  SDF  may  include,  among  others, 
hardware and software investments, for example: (list is not exhaustive) 
carrying capacity assessments (box 2) at municipality or ward level of proposed 
production clusters. 
  action research on production issues,  
  variety/production trials in targeted agro-ecological zones,  
  demonstration of new technologies,  
strengthening  public  lab  facilities  or  sanitary  and  phyto-sanitary  (SPS) 
inspection capacity (detail in ESMP matrix, annex 13),  
piloting novel or untested business model;  
  market research ; 
24 
  measures  to  accelerate  the  development  of  critical local  support  markets for 
key technical services and inputs.  
Box 2: Carrying Capacity Assessment 
The  livestock  density  in  Nepal  is  considered  highest  among  the  South  Asian 
countries. In the mixed farming system of the mountains of Nepal, pressure from 
livestock  is  heavier  per  units  of  land.  Over  stocking  with  unhealthy  and 
unproductive  animals 
important 
management  factor  in  livestock  production  and  the  sustainable  development  of 
agro-ecosystem is the maintenance of an optimum number of livestock in relation 
to the carrying capacity of an ecosystem to maintain its productivity, adaptability 
and capability of renewal.  
this  situation.  One 
further  aggravates 
VITA  will  conduct  carrying  capacity  assessment  for  the  livestock  supply  chain, 
specially for the goat farming aiming to increase production with managing herd 
size and no any pressure to the natural resources. The program will conduct the 
carrying  capacity  assessment  at  the  municipality  or  ward  level  as  per  the 
requirement.  
Generally, the carrying capacity is calculated by taking the ratio of total amount of 
total  digestive  nutrients  (TDN)  and  TDN  required  per  unit  of  livestock  (Das  and 
Shivakoti,  20066;  Thapa  and  Paudel,  2000).  This  requires  study  on  the  feed 
demand and supply analysis.  
Demand analysis:  
The ruminant population is estimated through the secondary sources to estimate 
demand.  Nutrients  requirement  differ  according  to  age  and  production 
performance. Livestock number can be converted to livestock units (LSU) in order 
to  calculate  their  nutrient  requirement.  Conversion  factors  can  be  found  in 
secondary  sources.  Total  digestive  nutrients  (TDN)  can  be  calculated  as  follows 
(Banerjee 19867): 
TDN = %Digestive protein + % Digestible nitrogen-free extract+ % crude fibre + 
% digestible ether extract * 2.25 
The carrying capacity study can use the already calculated TDN requirement of the 
similar locality studies.  
Supply analysis:  
Agriculture  land  provides  livestock  feed  in  the  form  of  crop  residues,  crop  by-
products and lead fodder for privately owned trees and also from planted grass. 
Crop residues such as straw, maize bran and maize cobs, are important sources 
of animal feed, especially during winter when there is a scarcity of green grass.  
The supply status can be calculated by the secondary sources like master plan of 
forestry  sector,  Land  utilization  report.  The  household  survey,  focus  group 
discussion  would  be  helpful  to  supplement  and  verify  the  information  gathered 
through documents.  
The analysis of GIS land use map can be helpful to calculate annual feed supply 
from different land resources.   
Carrying capacity of improved scenario (Thapa and Paudel, 20008):  
The project will assist on three key major areas: i) replace the local unproductive 
breed by the hybrid productive breed considering not to increase livestock number, 
ii)  financial  support  to  smallholders  to purchase  nutritious  food  and  to  maintain 
hygiene  of  livestock,  and  iii)  facilitate  to  plant  fodder  species  to  their  land, 
6 Das R and Shivakori GP (2006). Livestock carrying capacity evaluation in an integrated gfarming system: A case sty 
from the mid-hills of Nepal. International Journal of Sustainable Development. Word Ecology 13 (2006) 153-163. 
7 Banerjee GC. Feeds and Principles of Animal Nutrition. New Delhi: Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. Pvt 
8 Thapa, GB and Paudel GS, 2000. Evaluation of the livestock carrying capacity of land resources in the Hills of Nepal 
based on total digestive nutrient analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 78 (2000) 223-235.  
25 
especially on fellow land. Thus, the project support will not increase the livestock 
unit but increase the availability of TDN.  
The carrying capacity of improved scenario will be calculated as: Total amount of 
TDN  available  after  the  project  support  from  different  sources/TDN  required  per 
unit of livestock  
The  sub  watershed  management  planning  guideline  (2016)  published  by  then 
Department of soil conservation and watershed management has also elaborated 
the methods of carrying capacity assessment. VITA will discuss with the nationally 
like  Geokrishi  on  the  suitable  methodology  and 
available  organizations 
collaboration for the assessment.  
In addition, the SDF fund will be used to provide technical capacity development of 
state and local governments working with the programme. 
  All  investments  under  the  SDF  will  be  implemented  as  defined  sub-project,  with 
specific objectives, expected results, resources and deliverables defined in a simple 
SDF sub-project documents.  
for partnership activities will follow the same process as other grants under SDF.  
  SDF sub-project implementers may be any suitably qualified organization, including 
inter  alia:  government  agencies,  research  institutions,  private  enterprises,  non-
governmental organizations. 
Management of SDF  
  SDF  will  be  managed  directly  by  the  PMU  under  a  Public-Private  Partnership 
Framework/Model.  Investments  under  the  SDF  will  be  managed  as  distinct  sub-
projects,  implemented  either  by  a  suitably  qualified  contracted  organization  from 
either the government, research institutions, public or private sector. Selection of the 
contracted organization for each sub-project will be based on purposeful selection of 
the  best  qualified  to  deliver  the  sub-project  objectives  and  activities  but  with  an 
element of competition where multiple equally-well qualified and interested potential 
partners are available. Procurement of goods, civil works and consultancy services 
directly under the SDF will be governed by the agreed procurement arrangements 
for the programme.    
Overview of SDF Sub-project Approval Procedure   
  Investment under the SDF will be identified by the supply chain (SC) actors through 
the  MSP  dialogues  processes  and  /or  SC  team  will  identify  the  area  of  investment 
that  address  SC  bottlenecks/  constraints  and  propose  it  for  endorsement  through 
MSP or similar consultative meetings.   
  Where  sub-projects  under  the  SDF  are deemed necessary  prior  to  a  relevant MSP 
being  constituted,  e.g.  carrying  capacity  assessments,  such  activities  may  be 
included in the AWPB and approved through the regular AWPB approval processes. 
  The PMU will finalise Notice and call for Expression of Interest for implementation of 
sub-projects as identified through MSPs and disseminated through appropriate media 
and  means  including  notice  dispatched  to  respective  local  bodies  for  wider 
dissemination.  If  the  implementation  agency  is  Government  Organisation,  a  letter 
will be sent requesting to submit Concept note.   
  Submission  of  brief  Expressions  of  Interest  (EOI)  /Concept  note  along  with  the 
proposed implementation/management modality will be done at Branch, State and 
PMO office.   
26 
  A Supply Chain Investment Committee (SIC) will review EOIs and suitable EOI  from 
qualified organizations shall be invited to submit full proposals.  
  Supply  Chain  Team  will 
interested  partners  as 
group/Cooperatives,  market  management  committee,  Private  sector,  government 
agencies etc. to submit SDF investment proposals with support from Private Business 
Service Providers (BDSPs) in consultation with technical assistance from experts and 
organizations.   
facilitate  and  support 
  Supply Chain Investment Committee (SIC) will do assessment and evaluation of the 
detail  investment  proposal  using  per-defined  criteria.    SIC  will  seek  support  from 
technical expert for evaluation of the proposal as required.      
  For proposal recommended by the SIC, PMU will complete a compliance check of the 
evaluation  sheet, investment  proposal and  supporting  documents  and  recommend 
to the Project Director for final approval and contract as shown in figure 1.   
  SDF  sub-projects  investment  greater  than  USD  25,000  need  to  be  reviewed  and 
approved by PSC and also send to IFAD for review and no objection.   
  Payment will be released as per pre-defined schedule confirming achievement of pre-
defined milestones as per grant agreement in advance.   
  Supply  chain  Team  will  provide  technical  support  as  required  in  sub-project 
implementation, conduct regular monitoring visit to sub-project sites to confirm that 
the fund is being used properly and the intended output are in right track.  
  Supply Chain Investment Committees may be constituted at State level as well as 
central  level  in  order  to  accelerate  workflow,  as  deemed  appropriate  by  the 
Programme Director. 
3.1.5  Sub-component 1.3: Inclusive supply chains knowledge and policy 
  The  programme  will  carry  out  activities  to  strengthen  knowledge-sharing  and 
learning  processes  and  develop  more  supportive  knowledge-sharing  and  learning 
infrastructure as well as foster partnerships for broader knowledge-sharing, learning, 
and  public  awareness  in  several  thematic  areas:  inclusive  cluster  development 
process, evidence based targeting approach, climate smart and inclusive financing. 
The  programme  will  also  prepare  a  series  of  evidence-based  inputs  into  policy 
dialogue and development processes at federal, state and local levels. Some of the 
examples may be free or heavily subsidized services not provided unnecessarily to 
profitable clusters that can afford to pay for them.  
  In  addition,  the  programme  will  actively  monitor  the  commercial  development  of 
each  cluster  from  season  to  season,  providing  insights  back  to  producers  and 
business as well as data for evidence-based management of activities and results, 
including on targeting and inclusion.  
  The  programme  will  also  prepare  a  series  of  evidence-based  inputs  into  policy 
dialogue  and  development  processes  at  federal,  state  and  local  levels  once  the 
learning and practices get established during the course of implementation.  Some 
of  the  examples  may  be  free  or  heavily  subsidized  services  not  provided 
unnecessarily to profitable clusters that can afford to pay for them.  
  A key policy focus under the Component will be on strengthening the processes and 
capacities for local economic development policies and plans at state and municipal 
level,  in  particular  to  create  the  space  for  genuine  voice  from  women,  youth  and 
other  target  groups  as  well  as  MSMEs  into  the  policy  processes.  The  MSPs  under 
VITA will act as practical role models for this, often focusing on priority local sectors. 
The sub-component will then use evidence and insights from these to champion the 
adoption  of  similar  policy  dialogue  processes  into  other  aspects  of  local  economic 
development  policy  and  planning,  including  potentially  into  sectors  other  than 
agriculture.  VITA  will  collaborate  with  other  project  working  on  these  issues, 
including those of GIZ. 
27 
through 
  The overall implementation of Component 1 will be led by ADBL as the Lead Programme 
Agency  through  dedicated  supply  chain  teams  working  with  the  Socio-Economic 
Mobilization  (SEM)  teams  inbuilt  within  Local  NGOs  to  be  managed  by  Heifer.  This 
component  will  be  coordinated  centrally 
the  dedicated  Programme 
Management  Unit  (PMU)  at  Kathmandu,  led  by  full  time  Project  Coordinator  deputed 
from the LPA and a team of project contracted expert as Targeting Specialist; Climate 
Smart Agriculture  Finance  Specialist  (see  cost  tables  for  component  2)  to  assist  on 
climate change and environmental risk assessment and technically support on climate 
smart  agriculture  practices  and  M&E  Specialist  to  provide  technical  leadership  and 
capacity building of programme teams on specific areas besides staff from ADBL’s SME 
and  Agriculture  Department  and  Heifer.  PMU  will  support  and  implement  the  major 
activity  in  the  field  through  five  regional  provincial  office  and  28  district  level  bank 
branches.  
  The  5  regional  hub  offices  in  3  states  under  the  supervision  and  guidance  of ADBL 
Provincial  Director  and  PMO  will  be  responsible  for  overall  delivery  of  field  activities 
under Component 1 through district and cluster level bank branches (approx. 66 Nos). 
The regional and district level offices for VITA will be hosted in respective regional and 
participating branches offices, having staff from both ADBL and Heifer. In addition, the 
VITA team will be assisted partially by bank core staff of various discipline as required 
to meet the objectives of the project at central, provincial and branch offices. All staff 
under ADBL and Heifer will operate a ‘one programme’ approach with all staff working 
as a single team at all level.  
  The staff in each regional hub offices will be organised by supply chain teams with each 
team accountable for delivery of results and managing all relationship in their assigned 
supply  chains.  Each  regional/hub  supply  chain  team  will  be  2-  4  experienced  supply 
chain coordinators responsible to look after 1-3 commodities depending on the potential 
HHs that can be covered in each SC as driven by market demand potential within the 
region/hub.  Each  regional  supply  chain  team  will  be  supported  by  1  cluster  Social 
Mobilization  and  Capacity  Development  Coordinator  from  Heifer  to  coordinate  and 
support social mobilization and other activities under the component 1.1.  
  The supply chain team recruited from ADBL will be responsible for overall delivery of 
Component 1 and activities under Sub-component 1.1 cluster brokering and facilitation 
through multi-stakeholder platform process at Provincial, corridor and group level with 
active  participation  of  agri-businesses/traders,  small-holder  producers,  service 
providers, banks and government agencies as provisioned in the project whereas the 
staff managed by Heifer Nepal and Heifer contracted Local NGOs at regional/district and 
supply chain cluster level will have lead responsibility for delivery of Sub-component 1.1 
i.e.  mobilization  and  strengthening  small  holder  producers  in  meeting  the  demand  of 
traders/agribusiness in terms of volume, quality and other requirements.  
  There will be 28 supply chain officer based at potential district/corridor bank branches 
responsible for coordination of SC activities in the district and function as honest broker 
in  running  corridor  level  MSP,  business  linkages  with  traders/service  providers  and 
contract facilitation in respective supply chain within the project with technical support 
and  guidance  from  supply  chain  coordinators  at  regional  hub  office.  The  8  Socio-
economic  officers  will  be  based  in  potential  districts  /corridors  with  the  SC  team  and 
28 
provide technical supervision to local NGOs for implementation of field level activities as 
mentoring  and  support  producer  organisations  so  that  they  can  build  successful 
commercial  relationships  with  buyers/customers,  participate  effectively  in  the  MSP 
processes and plan and execute profitable business and investment plans. 
29 
3.2  Component 2: Expanding financial services to agriculture 
3.2.1  Sub-component 2.1: Private investment financing 
  The subsidiary loan to ADBL, part of which it will on-lend to PFIs (Class A and Class 
D financial institutions) on wholesale basis, is specifically for increased provision of 
medium-  and  longer-term  credit  (>12  months  term)  to  farmers  and  MSMEs  in 
supported supply chains. ADBL will provide such loans to partner FIs and bear the 
administrative  responsibility  and  credit risk  in  a  way that  will  limit  the  transaction 
cost of GON. Short-term working capital finance expansion, to compliment the term 
finance above, will be financed by ADBL and PFI from their own resources. 
  It  is  expected  that  a  large  majority  of  the  investments  by  small-scale  producers 
financed under the sub-component will be to upgrade their farm production practices 
including  adapting to  climate  risks.  Such  investment  decisions will  be  informed  by 
the business skill training under Component 1.1, including the tools for farmers to 
factor  in  climate  considerations  into  their  investment  and  production  plans.  For 
example, these include investment in poly-tunnels for vegetables, in water efficient 
technologies  like  drip  irrigation,  developing  in-field  water  catchment  ponds, 
construction of shed and shifting to stall-fed production systems for livestock with 
increased planting of fodder and forage, adaptation of fish ponds to reduce risks from 
flooding, planting of wind breaks to protect from more frequent storms etc. Expected 
typical adaptation investments for all commodities and which farmers will select from 
using a defined selection criteria are listed in the attached SECAP Report (Table 15).  
Financial and operational specifications for the lending facility 
  The proceeds of IFAD loan set aside for Component 2 will be on-lent by GON to ADBL 
under a subsidiary loan agreement (SLA) in local currency terms at an interest rate 
of about xx% per cent per year. The total repayment period of the loan will be xx 
years, including a grace period of x years. GON will bear the foreign exchange risk 
associated  with  the  IFAD  loan.  Further  details  related  to  such  relending  will  be 
defined in the SLA which will be subject to the endorsement by IFAD.  
  ADBL in its credit operation applies sound banking principles and has elaborated in 
significant details the main principles for providing credit, eligibility requirements for 
various types of loan applicants, and different steps within the credit cycles Its first 
credit  principle  requires  it  to  reduce  potential  credit  risk  by  basing  its  decision  on 
estimated cashflow of the proposed project. It also requires its loan appraisal process 
to take into account of managerial, technical, marketing, financial, economic, social, 
environmental,  and  legal  aspects  diligently.  It  also  puts  significant  emphasis  on 
SWOT and risk analyses of the proposed project.9 In general, these principles and 
practices will be applied diligently for the loans provided under the Programme. The 
main features of such principles and practices with upgrades and revisions applicable 
for the credit operation under the VITA Programme is described below.  
Scope of financing.  
  ADBL  will  sub-lend  the  funds  made  available  under  the  SLA  to  the  small  farmers 
residing  within  the  project  area  for  specific  agricultural  value  chains  selected  for 
development under the project. In undertaking such sub-lending operation ADBL will 
finance viable agricultural activities in production clusters with concentration of small 
farmers who plan to produce for the market. ADBL will also sub-lend part of the loan 
proceeds  to  the  enterprises  which  plan  to  engage  in  input  supply,  processing, 
marketing,  trading  and  otherwise  value  adding  activities  and  thereby  directly 
contribute to the strengthening of the selected agricultural value chains.  
  In providing loans under the Programme ADBL, following sound and prudent banking 
practices, will minimise enterprise failure risk and consequently the credit risk by: 
(i) selecting enterprises only from among the value chains that are proposed to be 
in strengthened under the project; (ii) selecting enterprises which are profitable and 
remunerative and which significantly contribute to meeting the financial needs of the 
9 ADBL Credit Procedure (Karja Karyabidhi), 2073, P 1-62. 
30 
to the small farmers/entrepreneurs; and (iii) closely aligning credit terms with the 
projected cashflow of the enterprise being financed.  
Targeting 
  Since  the  project  is  specifically  targeted  to  small  farmers  and  other  rural  poor 
households,  the  average  sub-loan  size  will  be  significantly  lower  than  the  current 
average size of the ADBL’s agricultural loans. The negative impact of this change on 
the operational efficiency of ADBL will be reduced by adopting a corridor approach in 
selecting project villages and concentrating lending activities in production clusters. 
This strategy will be complemented by adopting a ‘saturation’ approach aiming at: 
(i)  further  reducing  the transaction  cost  of  ADBL;  and  (ii)  minimising  the  ‘left-out’ 
error  in  targeting  project  beneficiaries.  In  addition,  ADBL  will  follow  a  modular 
approach to sub-loan appraisal by specifying standard investment levels and credit 
terms for specific, commodities, corridor and production clusters. To this end ADBL 
has  been  developing  technical  and  cost  norms  with  priority  accorded  to  the  value 
chains  selected  under  VITA.  This  approach  will  help  significantly  in  reducing  the 
Bank’s transaction cost.   
Eligibility criteria for individual borrowers 
  For  individual  borrowers  who  are  natural  persons  the  minimum  eligibility 
requirements for being a loan applicant will be:   
  In  minority  of  cases  when  the  loan  applicant  is  a  sole  proprietorship  firm,  a 
partnership firm, a privately- or publicly held company; and a co-operative society 
eligibility requirement will be as per the normal requirement of ADBL.    
Interest rate, penalty charges and fees 
  ADBL  currently  expects  interest  accrued  on  its  loans  to  be  paid  on  monthly  basis 
irrespective of the cashflow generated by enterprise financed. Since any changes on 
this will be very disruptive, interest will be paid by VITA borrowers on monthly basis. 
This requires some attention to the analysis of household level cashflow which is an 
inherent part of ADBL loan appraisal process. This practice will be continued under 
VITA as well.     
Current loan products and proposed changes 
  Most loans under the Programme will be provided using the provision made under 
simplified agricultural credit loan product (Product Paper 1), with recent amendments 
accompanying10. This loan product provides for: 
10 Saral Krishi Karja, Credit Procedure 2073, P 64 along with amendment effected on various dates.   
31 
  Loans  under  simplified  procedure  fall  also  under  the  category  of  loans  eligible  for 
receiving  interest  subsidy  from  the  Government  of  Nepal  (GoN)  through  Nepal 
Rashtra Bank, central bank of the country. Such loans can be up to NPR 50 million 
with a maximum term of 5 years. Loans up to NPR one million can be provided only 
with  group  guarantee  and  so  collateral  in  the  form  of  land  and  building  is  not 
required. Such loans attract an interest subsidy of 5 percentage points, 6 percentage 
point  in  the  case  of  women  borrowers.  Insuring  the  enterprise  under  this  Loan 
Product  is  compulsory.  Of  this  75%  of  premium  amount  is  subsidised  by  GON.  In 
addition, 75% of credit guarantee fee is subsidised by NRB11.    
  The above terms and conditions applicable under the simplified loan product matches 
with the projected cashflows of initially prioritized main commodities of vegetables, 
goats,  fish,  cereal  seed,  potato  (seed),  dairy  and  banana.  From  among  the 
commodities selected for limited support in specific locations within the programme 
area backyard chicken (traditional breed); Honey, and Medicinal and Aromatic Plants 
(MAPS) will also be able to meet the applicable terms and conditions. From among 
the  latter  category  of  commodities  Citrus  and  Coffee  will  not  generate  adequate 
cashflow  to  meet  the  grace  total  repayment  period  specified  given  the  longer 
gestation  period  and  economic  life.  ADBL  therefore  will  have  to  revise  the  loan 
product to allow for financing these commodities, where applicable. Applicable NRB 
guidelines for such loans allows financial institutions to offer appropriate repayment 
period. Interest subsidy, however, would not be available for loans with repayment 
period above 5 years (?)12.    
  In  minority  of  cases  which  may  find  above  provisions  restrictive,  loans  under  the 
Programme will be provided under Loan Products No 2 (crop, horticulture, forestry,  
production, no maximum limit, term loan up to 15 years, with 2 years grace period);  
Loan Product No 3 (livestock, no maximum limit, term loan up to 10 years with grace 
period of 1 year); Loan Product No 4 (fish farming, no maximum limit, term loan up 
to  10  years  with  grace  period  of  1  year);  Loan  Product  No  5  (cold  storage,  no 
maximum limit, term loan up to up to 10 years with grace period of 2 years); and 
Loan Product No 10 (agro-industry, no maximum limit, of requirement for up to 10 
years with grace period of 1 year). Under these loan products ADBL finances up to 
70%  of  the  total  term  loan  requirement,  except  for  cold  storage  for  which  the 
maximum limit is 60%. Working capital financing is up to 80% in all cases.  
  Since the available loan products with ADBL adequately cater to the requirements of 
intended  target  group  under  the  Programme,  no  changes,  except  the  grace  and 
repayment period as mentioned above, have been proposed at this stage. Changes 
have been suggested with respect to lending to the borrowers who cannot furnish 
collaterals in the form of land and building or operate the enterprise in leased lands. 
This is described below. 
Collateral requirement and waiver 
  Most  financial  institutions  in  Nepal  including  ADBL  require  borrowers  to  provide 
adequate  collateral  against  the  loans  approved.  The  loan  provisioning  guidelines 
issued by Nepal Rashtra Bank, the central bank of Nepal, encourages banks to adopt 
11 NRB, Unified Guidelines 2076 (BS), Karyabidhi 2.2 P 120- 127.  
The maximum on-lending rate for this loan in the case of ADBL will be xx% (base rate of 10.X% plus 25 spread).  
12 NRB, ibid, Clause 4, P 122. 
32 
this  approach  for  financing13.  ADBL,  however,  has  exception  for  loans  for  creating 
self-employment  for  the  youth  in  non-traditional  (?)  enterprises14.  The  maximum 
loan  limit  under  this  loan  product  is  NPR  2  lakh  for  individuals,  NPR  20  lakh  for 
groups, and NPR 50 lakh for institutions. As noted, under the GON programme for 
subsidised credit, NRB has relaxed collateral requirement and group guarantee alone 
is sufficient (para 6 above).  
  In addition, ADBL along with other financial institutions in Nepal, requires the project 
site to compulsorily be part of the collateral. While this requirement would usually 
not  pose  a  problem  with  most  enterprises,  this  affects  the  enterprises  that  are 
operated in leased land. ADBL waives this requirement, however, for loans required 
for  working  capital.  In  the  case  of  term  loans,  waivers  can  be  made  in  the  cases 
where: (i) adequate collateral from other sources is made available; and (ii) lease 
agreement with double the duration of the project period has been agreed upon15.  
  As some proportion of the beneficiaries are likely to face the situation of not being 
able  to  provide  adequate  collateral  and/or  collaterise  project  site,  waivers  for 
collateral  requirement  under  the  Programme  will  be  extended  to  beneficiaries 
requiring such waivers following above provisions, subject to following restrictions: 
  While preparing the list of potential loan recipients, the SC team will clearly identify 
the list of beneficiaries who cannot back their loan with adequate collateral and/or 
who  would  be  operating  the  enterprise  in  leased  land  and  provide  such  list  to 
concerned ADBL branch in advance. Such list will also contain information related to 
the type of enterprise selected and maximum loan amount required for the purpose.       
Loan application, appraisal, approval, and supervision 
   Under the simplified lending procedure ADBL has integrated loan application form 
(Annex  5.1)  with  pre-loan  supervision,  collateral  valuation,  staff  recommendation 
and  loan  approval  by  the  manager.  This  practice  will  be  continued  with  following 
changes: 
13 See NRB, Unified Guidelines 2076 (BS) Clause 5 and 6; Loan classification and loan loss provision, Instruction 
2/076. P 95-96.  
14 Yuba Sworojgar Karja (Loan product no 8), ADBL credit Procedure, 2073, P74. 
15 Ibid, Clause 43 (Jha) P 38. 
33 
   In  cases  involving  loan  application  for  above  NPR  2  million,  provided  under  Loan 
Products  other  than  simplified  procedure  ADBL  applies  separate  loan  appraisal 
process for individuals (Annex 12.1) and institutions (12.2. 12.3 and 12.4, depending 
upon  the  loan  amount).  As  these  forms  also  lack  the  cost-benefit  analyses  of 
proposed  enterprise  these  will  also  be  upgraded  to  include  enterprise  cost-benefit 
analyses.  For  these  loan  proposals  specific  CBA  will  be  undertaken  in  each  case 
separately. 
Loan approval authority 
  In  general,  ADBL  has  substantially  decentralized  the loan  approval  authority to  its 
branch offices located in the field. The loan approval authority delegated to its lowest 
level field office – a sub-branch – is NPR 3 million for single transaction and NPR 120 
million for total credit limit. This increases respectively to NPR 200 million and NPR 
650  million  to  a  Provincial  Office16.  Almost  all  loans  under  VITA  will  therefore  be 
approved within the office accepting loan application in the first place. If these offices 
are fully staffed and properly equipped, the time taken from application for a loan to 
its final approval can be very short, usually not longer than a week. 
Loan monitoring and follow-up 
  ADBL requires its branches to undertake utilization supervision as well as quarterly 
post  loan  supervisions.  This  provision  will  apply  for  the  loans  provided  under  the 
Programme.  These  supervisions  could  be  supplemented/complemented  by  the 
Cluster  Team.  Farm  business  diaries  being  used  by  IFAD-assisted  value  chain 
development projects can provide a very useful basis for monitoring the costs and 
beनेfits  of  the  enterprises  financed,  in  particular,  when  it  is  a  crop.  Since  VITA 
intervention involves loan financing of the enterprise, inclusion of cashflow, interest 
costs can make those dairies more meaningful.  In the longer term these diaries can 
provide valuable inputs on production costs, benefits, productivity, input and output 
prices, profitability and revise technical and financial norms applied by the financial 
institutions. 
Wholesale lending 
  Relative to the size of national economy, manufacturing sector in Nepal is miniscule 
and  agriculture  sector  is  only  served  scantily,  Nepalese  banks  and  financial 
institutions  (BFIs)  compete  mainly  for providing  credit to  trade  and  service  sector 
(wholesale  and  retail  trade,  21%;    construction  services,  11%;  gas  and  energy, 
including  hydro  power  production,  4%;  and  consumption  loan,  5%).  Financial 
product-wise, term loans are limited to less than 20% of total portfolio and short-
term loan products such as working capital loan (21% of total) and overdraft (15%) 
dominate.  While  BFIs  report  relatively  low  level  of  non-performing  asset  in  Nepal, 
this may be explained at least in part by the ‘evergreening’ of loans which while may 
not  be  wide-spread  seems  to  hide  the  extent  of  problem  to  some  extent.17  These 
factors  call  for  a  more  prudent  approach  to  credit  operation  of  the  BFIs  which 
includes,  inter  alia,  development  of  appropriate  loan  products,  more  rigorous 
analyses of the financial attractiveness of the enterprise being financed and setting 
of  loan terms based on realistic cashflow, introduction of measures to reduce real 
sector  risks  associated  with  the  enterprises  being  financed,  including  through  the 
adoption of a value chain approach, and robust mechanisms for risk transfer when 
enterprises failure cannot be avoided.         
1.1 
16 See circular dated 2075-10-16, Abhilekh no 205.  
17 Finding of recent IMF follow-up mission as reported in Kantipur 12 Jan 2020 (?). Also see a report by Sanjeev 
Sharma, quoting panel discussion, Banking Strategies and Disruptions: Nepali Banking Industry’s New 
Direction, New Business Age, November 2018.  
34 
  Almost all BFIs in Nepal rely overwhelmingly on the short-term funds for financing 
their credit programme, including for agriculture, and therefore encounter the issue 
of  term-mismatch.  Relative  lack  of  specialised  human  resources  and  dedicated 
organizational units also play a role. These factors have caused commercial banks to 
significantly fall short of the minimum lending target of 10% set by the Central Bank. 
In fact, of the 28 commercial banks, only ADBL has been able to meet this minimum 
target (Annex1) and almost 40 per cent of them have been unable to meet even a 
quarter  of  the  minimum  lending  target.  Currently,  NRB  imposes  no  disincentive 
(penalty)  against  the  unmet  target  for  agricultural  lending.  This  policy  may  not 
continue for long, however.  
  In response to the situation explained above, the Programme will also assist other 
interested commercial banks (Category A and D institutions) to act as Programme’s 
participating  financial  institution  (PFI)  aiming  at  assisting  the  Nepalese  financial 
sector to gradually increase their financing for agricultural value chain development. 
To  this  end,  ADBL  will  offer  wholesale  lending  to  the  selected  Category  A  and  D 
institutions so that they can actively participate in the value chain development of 
selected  commodities  adopting  lending  policies  and  procedure  similar  to  what  is 
described above with revisions as suggested.  
  During its interaction with selected BFIs, the Design Mission found significant interest 
among commercial banks to act as a partner financial institution under VITA. Their 
chief motivation seems to be the desire to expand their portfolio of agricultural loans. 
This  was  true  particularly  among  commercial  banks  who  report  relatively  low 
proportion  agricultural  loans  to  total  portfolio  (For  example,  NMB  Bank,  Sanima 
Bank, Laxmi Bank). Interest were shown also by banks with relatively larger share 
of agricultural portfolio (Sunrise, Prabhu). 
  ADBL’s current lending policy allows for wholesale lending of its funds to development 
banks, financial institutions, groups, and money lenders to on-lend to small farmers 
and  micro  and  small  enterprises.18  The  maximum  loan  limit  and  the  repayment 
period under this policy will not be adequate for participating commercial banks. The 
relevant  Product  paper  will  be  revised  in  order  to  accommodate  the  terms  and 
conditions mentioned above.  
  Targeting  and  use  of  wholesale  loans.  PFIs  using  wholesale  borrowing  facility 
will cater to the same target group of small farmers and adopt a saturation approach 
to lending to prevent any left-out error. PFIs will work towards developing specific 
value chains within the cluster selected under the programme with average loan size 
similar to  that  of  the  Programme  overall  average.  This  will  require  PFIs to  finance 
primary  producers  and  engage  in  financing  processing  and  marketing  enterprises 
only when it caters to the primary producers already financed by the PFI concerned. 
In no case PFIs will be allowed to ‘cherry-pick’ only large-sized enterprises requiring 
high-volume loans. 
  Estimated amount of wholesale lending. Since the proposed wholesale lending 
approach  is  without  any  precedent,  any  estimate  of  the  volume  of  such  lending  is 
inevitably a guesswork. From a PFIs point of view it will basically be a pilot which 
they will use to test the efficacy of proposed value chain financing. Such pilot may 
be meaningful if it is in a scale of at least NPR 300-400 million (US$ 3-4 mn) and if 
3 to 4 FIs participate their uptake will be about $ 12 mn. On this basis, 20% of the 
line  of  credit  provided  to  ADBL  by  GON  is  estimated  to  be  funds  on-lent  under 
wholesaling arrangement. 
  Provisional  terms  and  conditions  for  wholesale  loans.  The  funds  under  the 
programme  will  therefore  be  extended  to  them  on  terms  that  encourage  them  to 
finance agriculture on sustained basis. The total repayment period will be xx years, 
inclusive of x years as grace period. The on-lending interest rate payable to ADBL 
would be x%, implying a spread of x% to ADBL.  
18 ADBL, op. cit., Product paper No 9, Pg76. 
35 
  Process to selected recipient banks. The preparatory work on the part of ADBL 
will involve: (i) identifying potential PFIs for wholesale lending; (ii) short-listing 7-9 
PFIs, (iii) issuing request for proposal to the short-listed Category A and D FIs; (iv) 
evaluating  proposals  and  selecting  3-5  PFIs;  (v)  agreeing  on  project  area  and 
negotiating  on  changes  that  aligns  concerned  PFI’s  operational  policies  and 
procedures with that of VITA; and (vi) signing of MOU. The preparatory work will be 
initiated and completed in the second half of PY 1 and lending operation will begin in 
PY 2.   
  Identification of the potential FIs will be done mainly through informal consultations, 
possibly  with  the  involvement  of  Nepal  Banker’s  Association.  Following  such 
consultation short-list of potential institutions will be prepared and submitted to the 
Project  Steering  Committee  for  its  review  and  approval.  Selection  criteria  for 
selecting  FIs,  inter  alia,  will  be:  (i)  field  office  network  of  the  FI  overlapping  with 
VITA; (ii) delegation of authority and approval process that ensures timely approval 
and lower transaction cost to the farmer-entrepreneurs; (iii) presence or otherwise 
of  organizational  units  dedicated  to  lending  to  small  farmers  and  micro-
entrepreneurs  in  FI  HQ;  (iv)  state  of  development  of  agriculture  and  appropriate 
lending policies, procedures and loan products; and (v) willingness to align processes 
and systems with that of VITA on sustained basis so that concerned FI’s engagement 
in agricultural lending continues in the long run. 
  To  the  extent  possible,  PFIs  will  be  provided  with  refinancing  facility  for  the  loans 
they have disbursed to the Programme target group in line with the wholesale lending 
agreement entered with ADBL. If this arrangement does not become feasible, each 
PFI will be provided with an advance against the projected lending programme which 
will be replenished by ADBL on eth basis of the claims submitted by the concerned 
PFI. The advance amount extended thus will be interest-bearing from the date such 
fund is released by ADBL. 
  To the extent possible PFIs will participate in the VITA process suggested for value 
chain  development  including  in  multi-stakeholders  platform  in  the  areas  they  are 
assigned to serve. Staff of the PFIs will also participate in the training orientation, 
monitoring  and  review  programmes  along  with  ADBL  staff.  While  this  will  help 
smoother implementation of VITA, it will also facilitate mutual learning. 
  A  smaller  part  of  the  line  of  credit  amount  has  been  set  aside  for  wholesaling  to 
savings  and  loan  co-operatives  as  well  as  micro-finance  institutions.  This 
part  aims  at  strengthening  selected  institutions  in  the  programme  area  and  build 
rather than disrupt the relationship that has developed between farmers and these 
institutions over the years. While ADBL refinancing will be mainly on back-to back 
basis, the total repayment period will be slightly higher than the one offered by these 
institutions to their borrower to allow for some time lag between their collection of 
loans and repayment to ADBL.  The on-lending interest rate payable to ADBL would 
be x%, implying a spread of x% to ADBL.           
Credit Disbursement plan 
  The  credit  disbursement  plan  is  based  on  the  indicative  list  of  agricultural  value 
chains  identified  for  development  under  the  Programme.  In  selecting  these 
commodities  and  determining  the  scale  in  which  the  enterprises  will  be  financed, 
inclusiveness has been assigned the highest weight keeping in consideration of the 
project objectives. The loan sizes have been determined after undertaking financial 
viability  tests  (Financial  Analyses  Annex  x)  and  are  significantly  smaller  than  the 
average loan size of the agricultural loans disbursed by ADBL and other commercial 
banks. This will allow for serving maximum possible households while ensuring that 
the enterprises selected generate adequate return to investments. 
  The gross credit disbursement has been calculated by first determining the total unit 
investment  cost  for  each  type  of  11  enterprises  spread  over  7  commodities 
considered to be representative activities that will be undertaken by the target group 
(Annex Table 2). A development phasing of these enterprises was projected with a 
36 
modest beginning accompanied by rapid build-up (Annex Table 3). Then the gross 
total  investment  requirement  was  projected  multiplying  the  no  of  enterprises  for 
each  year  by  unit  investment  costs  (Annex  Table  4).  Subsequently,  gross  credit 
requirement  was  estimated  taking  a  standard  financing  percentage  for  term  and 
working capital (Annex Table 5). Likewise, loan amount due was calculated based on 
typical  repayment  schedule  determined  considering  the  net  cash  inflow  of  each 
enterprise. 
  Of the loan amount due, for term loans 94% were assumed to be repaid on time, 
3% within one year of due date and 3% as loan loss, as a provision. The short-term 
loans respective numbers are 95%, 3% and 2%. The proposed loan loss provision is 
slightly  higher  than  currently  incurred/  provided  by  commercial  banks  in  Nepal  in 
agricultural loans in view of the need to impose rigorous discipline on portfolio quality 
reporting and prevent even an isolated event of ‘evergreening’ of loans. Significant 
reduction  in  the  real  sector  risks  of  the  enterprises  financed  as  is  expected  to  be 
achieved under VITA should help in improving the quality of loan portfolio further.      
  The  net  credit  requirement  was  calculated  thereafter  after  deducting  repayment 
amount  from  the  gross  disbursement  (Annex  Table  6).  In  reimbursing  the 
expenditures under the line of credit component IFAD will finance 100% of the net 
disbursement  made  by  ADBL  and  PFIs  for  medium  term.  All  loan  disbursements 
made by ADBL and PFIs for short term working capital will be using their own capital 
and  therefore  the  line  of  credit  provided  under  IFAD  loan  will  not  be  used  for this 
purpose.  
  Funds provided by GON to ADBL using IFAD loan as line of credit will be ring-fenced 
and disbursements made, loans repaid, net loans outstanding, loans overdue, loan 
loss  provision  made,  and  loans  repaid  under  subsidiary  loan  agreement  will  be 
reported separately until the loan under SLA is fully repaid. This will require ADBL 
and PFIs to distinctly identify each enterprise funded under VITA. 
  The  approach  to  IFAD  financing  of  only  the  net  incremental  credit  has  enabled 
significant amount of investment leveraging within the project period. To illustrate, 
IFAD’s term financing of US$58.7 million generates total investment of over US$119 
million. Since the recycling is faster for working capital, ADBL and PFI financing of 
US$ 25.7 million will fund total working capital of almost US$99 million over the 6 
years  of  project  period.  Since  IFAD  requires  borrowing  countries  to  invest  its 
resources to similar target group, such leveraging will continue till ADBL fully repays 
the loan to the GON.                
  In order to ensure that the reimbursement, loan recording and loan portfolio quality 
reporting is made as per stipulation, following mechanism will be put in place: 
3.2.2  Sub-component 2.2: Capacity enhancement and policy support 
  Capacity  enhancement  and  policy  development  facility  (CEPD)  -  will  provide  for 
capacity  enhancement  across  all  its  activities  pertaining  to  financial  inclusion  and 
supply of financial services to agriculture and rural communities. The programme will 
use this facility for any relevant technical support during implementation, including 
the following: capacity development for financial intermediaries on rural MSME and 
smallholder  lending;  improvements  in  digital  banking  operations  for  rural  areas; 
internal  systems  and  processes  improvement  to  reduce  transaction  costs  and 
improve  supply  chains  analysis  and  financing,  including  consideration  of  climate 
change  on  financial  risks  and  mitigation;  development  of  specific  value  chain 
financing and risk assessment manuals; improvement of remittance related products 
and services; capacity for the design of new financial products more suitable to rural 
MSMEs  and  small-scale  producers,  including  micro-insurance;  relevant  financial 
37 
market  research,  thematic  studies,  sectoral  assessment  and  analysis.  Amongst 
others, priorities will be to support further business enhancement of ADBL and digital 
innovation.  On  insurance,  the  programme  will  harmonize  its  support  with  the 
proposed new project on insurance between ADBL and GIZ, to be coordinated by the 
same PMU. 
  Expansion of rural digital financial services by ADBL and others, for example including 
electronic  payment  systems  as  well  as  savings  and  loans  products,  will  be  an 
important focus for the sub-component. To increase youth access to finance for farm 
investment,  specific  measure  and  instruments  will  be  developed  to  address  the 
current  obstacles  –  including  piloting  of  arrangements  for  institutional  guarantees 
provided by the local municipality and or POs. 
  On  policy,  the  priority  will  be  to  generate  high  quality  evidence  to  contribute  to 
improvements in the policies, regulations and strategies for expanding agricultural 
finances,  especially  to  small-scale  producers  and  MSME,  as  well  as  digital  rural 
financial services. A related area for policy engagement will be to demonstrate the 
viability and practical policies and strategies to use loan finance to support productive 
investments  by  small-scale  producers  and  MSME  instead  of  through  grants  and 
subsidies.  Where  feasible,  the  programme  will  seek  to  collaborate  with  others 
economic research institutions to enhance the quality of the evidence and analysis 
generated through the programme to feed into this policy dialogue.  
  VITA  will  support  capacity  enhancement  of  the  ADBL  and  PFI  aiming  at  achieving 
financial deepening by serving hitherto unbanked or underbanked communities using 
a variety of financial instruments. In doing so while the micro credit support for value 
chain  development  will  be  the  principal  instrument,  it  will  be  complemented  by 
enhancing savings, insurance and remittance handling services. Activities related to 
this sub-component has been presented in Annex Table 7 and summarised below in 
4 clusters. 
  Financial  systems  development  through:  (a)  hardware  and  software 
development support for branchless banking that will help ADBL to extend its 
outreach  in  a  cost-effective  manner;  (b)  digitization  of  participating  co-
operative  societies  and  micro-finance institutions  in  project  clusters;  and  (c) 
support to co-operatives for providing debit card services to their members. 
  Financial  product  adaptation  and  efficiency  enhancement  of  loan  processing 
through: (a) IT strategy development; (b) credit and other financial products 
review and adaptation; and (c) development of a portal-based automated and 
standardized system for loan processing. 
  Staff  capacity  building  of  ADBL  and  PFIs  through  orientation  programmes, 
training,  and  exposure  and  observations  visits  aiming  at:  (a)  leadership 
building;    (b)  orientation  to  VITA  and  innovative  approaches  to  financial 
deepening;  (c)  value  chain,  enterprise  cost-benefit  and  risks  analyses;  (d) 
planning  and  monitoring  of  VITA  activities;  and  (e)  learning  from  successful 
experiences within the country and from among regional countries. 
  Policy  analyses  and  advocacy  focussing  on:  (i)  real  sector  risk  reduction 
through  value  chain  approach;  (b)  assessment  of  the  efficacy  of  group-
/community-based  group  insurance  scheme  and  its  adaptation  based  on 
learning  from  the  field  and  in  relation  to  the  crops  and  livestock  insurance 
products  offered  by  formal  insurance  companies;  and  (c)  empirical  study  of 
interest  subsidy  on  the  access  to  credit  and  income  of  small  farmers, 
dissemination of findings and recommendations for policy changes. 
Enhanced access to wider range of financial products 
  Efforts will be made by ADBL and other PFIs to develop and give access to a range 
of  financial  products  to  the  small  farmers  residing  in  VITA  area.  To  this  this  end, 
ADBL will: 
38 
  Similarly, in addition to requiring all borrowers to open a savings account, ADBL will 
actively  promote  savings  mobilization  programmes  which  may  involve  effecting 
transactions through bank branches when farmer-entrepreneurs sell their products 
or  buy  inputs  under  tri-partite  arrangements  for  channelling  transactions  through 
the  bank  have  been  agreed  upon.  Financial  literacy  training  proposed  to  be 
undertaken under VITA will include a module highlighting the importance of savings 
and effecting transactions through banking system.  
  In addition, ADBL in collaboration with co-operative societies will provide remittance 
services in VITA project area and thereby significantly reduce the transaction cost of 
remittance  recipients  which  in  turn  will  encourage  the  recipients  to  withdraw 
remittance amount in smaller instalments and thereby increase their savings, even 
if  transiently.  This  will  help  forming  savings  habit  and  forge  closer  relationship 
between the financial system and small farmers. While this service will serve clients 
both in Terai and hills, its need is more in the hills where only a very small part of 
the remittance income is saved. 
  Agricultural insurance. Government of Nepal (GoN) has been implementing crop 
and livestock insurance scheme which is subsidised by the government to the extent 
of 75% of the premium.19 Overall, insurance coverage is higher for livestock than for 
the  crops.  Although  participation  in  this  insurance  scheme  is  voluntary,  there  are 
some agricultural development schemes which make insurance compulsory. Despite 
these  developments  the  penetration  of  agricultural  insurance  is  severely  limited, 
unless it has been made compulsory.  
  Responding to the felt need for making risk transfer mechanism available, ADBL has 
been  helping  framers  implementing  group/  community-based  insurance  scheme 
since 1980s20. Overall, farmers appear to be satisfied with the scheme.21 Adoption 
of  this  scheme  is  not  very  widespread,  however.  Lack  of  information,  inter  alia, 
explain  relatively  low  adoption  rate.  For  very  poor  farmers,  a  community-/  group- 
based scheme is more attractive as they are more readily accessible, and they can 
see directly how the risk sharing mechanism operates in practice. VITA beneficiaries 
will be actively encouraged to opt for insurance coverage with options for choosing 
either the group-based insurance or the formal insurance. Since awareness continues 
to mar the expansion of insurance coverage, a module will eb added in the financial 
literacy  package  highlighting  the  benefits  of  insurance  and  options  available  with 
attendant cost.        
3.2.3  Component 2 implementation arrangements 
  Overall coordination will be by the PMU. ADBL’s SME and Agriculture Department will 
provide technical leadership supported by a fulltime agri-finance specialist attached 
19 So far over 70 insurance products have been developed. Premium rate is fixed five percent to cost of production based and 
seven percent to value based insurance for most of crops and livestock except apple (8%), turmeric (5%), spring rice (5%), 
cereal seed multiplication (5%), fish pond (one percent), ostrich (2%) and broilers (1.25 percent). Coverage is up to 90% of 
the insured amount. 
20 Current provisions for livestock insurance charges a premium of 5%. Policies are issued on annual basis and are 
renewable. Limits have been set for the cost of type of animal and their age. Loss coverage is limited to 6o% in first 
year, 70% in second year and 80% from third year onwards against the insured value. In case of epidemic and the 
funds available are not enough, claims are settled on proportionate basis as there is no provision for re-insurance. 
For crops premium rate has been set at 8% on yearly basis (for longer term crops). A maximum amount of coverage 
per farmer has been set along with fixed amount as cost of production and a minimum size. Compensation against loss 
is limited to a maxim of 80%.  
21 An impact study conducted by ADBL shows that the participants are highly satisfied (79%) or satisfied (18%). Some 
73% of those participating find the scheme useful and of those incurring losses find getting compensation very easy 
(59%) or moderately easy (35%).    
39 
to  the  PMU.  However,  as  primarily  a  lending  operation  the  component  will  be 
mainstreamed in  ADBL  structures.  As  ADBL  is  already  a  wholesale  lender  to  other 
financial institutions, the wholesale loans under VITA will be managed by the relevant 
departments in ADBL responsible for these activities. Similarly, the specific identified 
capacity  development  sub-project  will  be  managed  by  the  relevant  departments  – 
e.g. on Digital Bank – and accountable to the PMU. For capacity building activities 
with  external  partner  financial  institutions  (PFI),  the  PMU  will  be  responsible  for 
coordinating these activities with the relevant PFI.  
3.2.4  Action Plan for first 18 months 
  The  proposed  programme  has  been  designed  in  a  way  that  will  ensure  expedited 
start-up and implementation. To this end ADBL had set-up a PMU for supporting the 
design of the programme which will be converted into a PMU that will act as a co-
ordinating  unit  during  implementation  phase  as  well.  Early  start-up  will  also  be 
facilitated by this unit working on loan negotiations, loan signing and in fulfilling the 
conditions  of  loan  effectiveness  conditions  and  getting  eth  Programme  declared 
effective by IFAD. In view of this key activities have been listed for 5 months prior 
to  the  Loan  Effectiveness  and  18  months  following  that.  A  self-explanatory  Gantt 
chart has been developed on that basis and presented in Annex Table 8.      
40 
Annex Table 1: Percent Share of Individual Banks in Total Agricultural Credit of Commercial Banks 
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
2.17
2.18
1.26
1.35
1.56
2.51
1.69
1.72
1.77
1.80
3.53
3.20
3.60
5.47
5.24
5.01
2.05
2.06
2.11
2.26
2.30
2.31
2.58
2.78
2.80
2.80
2.80
4.48
4.50
4.01
3.46
4.69
4.67
3.45
3.02
3.25
3.27
4.00
3.81
4.10
4.19
4.21
4.44
0.00
2.00
4.00
5.55
5.16
5.10
5.27
5.15
5.38
6.00
8.60
8.00
6.20
6.38
7.48
8.89
14.21
17.71
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
41 
Annex Table 2: Unit Enterprise Cost and Financing 
Enterprise 
1  Vegetables - Terai 
2  Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
3 
Seed Potato - Terai 
4 
Paddy seeds, Wheat - 
Terai 
Banana 
5 
6 
7  Goats 
8  Dairy Buffalo 
9  Aquaculture - New Ponds 
Aquaculture - 
Rehabilitation 
10 
11  Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
Fixed 
Cost- 
NPR ' 
000 
155  
180  
160  
100  
120  
276  
150  
230  
227  
163  
163  
Working 
Capital- 
NPR '000 
162  
60  
105  
75  
120  
75  
15  
15  
68  
61  
61  
Average 
Investment 
Cost/ 
Enterprise- 
US$ 
Total 
cost NPR 
'000 
Av Loan 
size - 
US$ 
Description 
317  
240  
160  
175  
240  
351  
165  
245  
294  
224  
224  
2830  
2143  
1429  
1563  
2143  
3131  
1473  
2188  
2629  
2004  
2004  
2126   5 Kattha 
1554   1 Ropani, Tunnel (.075 Ha) 
1750   7 Ropani (0.3ha) 
1161   10 Kattha (0.3 ha) 
1607   1 Ha 
2258   10 Kattha (0.3 ha) 
1045   5 Does unit 
1545   2 buffaloes unit 
1901   5 Kattha (0.15 ha) 
1457   5 Kattha (0.15 ha) 
1457   5 Kattha (0.15 ha) 
42 
Annex Table 3: Indicative List of Enterprises and Phasing 
 Enterprises  
 Yr 1  
 Yr 2  
 N o  o f  S u b - p r o j e c t s  
 Yr 5  
 Yr 4  
 Yr 3  
 Yr 6  
 Total  
 A. Term Loan for Fixed Capital/ No of New Enterprises Inducted  
   1  
   2  
   3  
   4  
   5  
   6  
   7  
   8  
   9  
## 
## 
 Vegetables - Terai  
1,500  
2,000  
3,000  
3,000  
3,000  
3,000  
15,500  
 Vegetables - Hills  
2,000  
3,000  
4,000  
5,000  
6,000  
5,000  
25,000  
 Seed Potato - Hills  
300  
500  
700  
1,000  
1,500  
1,000  
5,000  
 Seed Potato - Terai  
1,000  
1,500  
2,000  
2,500  
2,500  
2,500  
12,000  
 Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai  
100  
200  
400  
400  
400  
400  
1,900  
 Banana  
 Goats  
300  
500  
1,000  
1,200  
1,500  
1,400  
5,900  
1,000  
3,000  
5,000  
7,000  
7,000  
6,000  
29,000  
 Dairy Buffalo  
1,000  
1,200  
1,500  
1,600  
1,600  
1,600  
8,500  
 Aquaculture - New Ponds  
500  
1,000  
1,200  
1,200  
1,500  
1,500  
6,900  
 Aquaculture - Rehabilitation  
100  
200  
300  
300  
300  
300  
1,500  
 Aquaculture - Pond leasing  
50  
150  
200  
300  
300  
300  
1,300  
 Total Term loans  
 B. Short-term production loans and working capital, 2 years carry-over of customers  
13,250  
23,500  
19,300  
7,850  
25,600  
23,000  
112,500  
   1  
   2  
   3  
   4  
   5  
   6  
   7  
   8  
   9  
10 
11 
 Vegetables - Terai  
1,500  
3,500  
5,000  
6,000  
6,000  
6,000  
28,000  
 Vegetables - Hills  
2,000  
5,000  
7,000  
9,000  
11,000  
11,000  
45,000  
 Seed Potato - Hills  
300  
800  
1,200  
1,700  
2,500  
2,500  
9,000  
 Seed Potato - Terai  
1,000  
2,500  
3,500  
4,500  
5,000  
5,000  
21,500  
 Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai  
100  
300  
600  
800  
800  
800  
3,400  
 Banana  
 Goats  
300  
800  
1,500  
2,200  
2,700  
2,900  
10,400  
1,000  
4,000  
8,000  
12,000  
14,000  
13,000  
52,000  
 Dairy Buffalo  
1,000  
2,200  
2,700  
3,100  
3,200  
3,200  
15,400  
 Aquaculture - New Ponds  
500  
1,500  
2,200  
2,400  
2,700  
3,000  
12,300  
 Aquaculture - Rehabilitation  
100  
300  
500  
600  
600  
600  
2,700  
 Aquaculture - Pond leasing  
50  
200  
350  
500  
600  
600  
2,300  
 Total Short-Term Working Capital 
Sub-projects  
7,850  
21,100  
32,550  
42,800  
49,100  
48,600  
202,000  
43 
Annex Table 4: Total Investment Cost for Enterprises 
   Yr 1  Yr 2  Yr 3  Yr 4  Yr 5  Yr 6 
Total 
NPR Million 
A. Term Loan for Fixed Capital/ No of New Enterprises Inducted 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
Seed Potato - Terai 
Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
310 
540 
80 
150 
24 
138 
450 
276 
227 
33 
24 
233 
360 
48 
100 
12 
83 
150 
230 
113 
16 
8 
465 
720 
112 
200 
48 
276 
750 
345 
272 
49 
33 
465 
900 
160 
250 
48 
331 
1,050 
368 
272 
49 
49 
465 
1,080 
240 
250 
48 
413 
1,050 
368 
340 
49 
49 
465 
900 
160 
250 
48 
386 
900 
368 
340 
49 
49 
2,403 
4,500 
800 
1,200 
228 
1,626 
4,350 
1,955 
1,566 
245 
212 
Total cost of enterprises 
1353  
2252  
3270  
3942  
4353  
3915  
19,085  
B. Short-term production loans and working capital, 2 years carry-over of customers 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
243  
567  
810  
972  
972  
972  
4,536  
120  
300  
420  
540  
660  
660  
2,700  
Seed Potato - Hills 
48  
128  
192  
272  
400  
400  
1,440  
Seed Potato - Terai 
75  
188  
263  
338  
375  
375  
1,613  
Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
12  
23  
15  
15  
36  
72  
96  
96  
96  
60  
113  
165  
203  
218  
60  
120  
180  
210  
195  
33  
41  
47  
48  
48  
408  
780  
780  
231  
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
68  
149  
182  
209  
216  
216  
1,040  
Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
6  
3  
18  
12  
31  
21  
37  
31  
37  
37  
37  
37  
165  
141  
Total for Working Capital 
627  
1551  
2264  
2886  
3253  
3253  
13,833  
Total cost of sub-projects 
1980  
3803  
5533  
6828  
7606  
7168  
32,918  
44 
Annex Table 5: Estimated Gross Credit Requirement 
Proportion of Credit in Total Sub-project Cost in % 
 Short-term production loans and working Capital 
 Term loans for fixed capital 
70  
80  
In NPR Million 
Enterprises 
Yr 1 
Yr 2 
Yr 3 
Yr 4 
Yr 5 
Yr 6 
Total 
A. Term Loan for Fixed Capital/ No of New Enterprises Inducted 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
Seed Potato - Terai 
Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
10  Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
11  Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
163  
252  
34  
70  
8  
58  
105  
161  
79  
11  
6  
217  
326  
326  
326  
326  
1,682  
378  
504  
630  
756  
630  
3,150  
56  
78  
112  
168  
112  
105  
140  
175  
175  
175  
34  
34  
34  
34  
560  
840  
160  
193  
232  
289  
270  
1,138  
17  
96  
315  
525  
735  
735  
630  
3,045  
193  
242  
258  
258  
258  
1,369  
159  
191  
191  
238  
238  
1,096  
23  
17  
34  
23  
34  
34  
34  
34  
34  
34  
171  
148  
Total Gross Credit Requirement - Fixed Capital 
947  
1,576  
2,289  
2,759  
3,047  
2,741  
        13,359  
B. Short-term production loans and working capital, 2 years carry-over of customers 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
Seed Potato - Terai 
Aquaculture- Fixed Capital 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
10  Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
11  Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
Total Gross Credit Requirement - Working 
Capital 
194  
454  
648  
778  
778  
778  
3,629  
96  
38  
60  
10  
18  
12  
12  
54  
5  
2  
240  
336  
432  
528  
528  
2,160  
102  
154  
218  
320  
320  
1,152  
150  
210  
270  
300  
300  
1,290  
29  
48  
48  
26  
58  
90  
96  
32  
77  
77  
77  
132  
162  
174  
144  
168  
156  
37  
38  
38  
119  
146  
167  
173  
173  
15  
10  
25  
17  
29  
25  
29  
29  
29  
29  
326  
624  
624  
185  
832  
132  
113  
502  
1,241  
1,811  
2,309  
2,602  
2,602  
        11,067  
Total Loans, Term Loan +WC 
1,449  
2,817  
4,100  
5,068  
5,649  
5,343  
        24,426  
US$ equivalent in million 
13  
25  
37  
45  
50  
48  
218  
45 
Annex Table 6: Estimated Net Credit Requirement 
Proportion of Credit in Total Sub-project Cost in % 
Short-term production loans and working Capital 
Term loans for fixed capital 
Enterprises 
Yr 1 
Yr 2 
Yr 3 
Yr 4 
217  
378  
56  
105  
17  
96  
315  
193  
159  
23  
17  
1,576  
14.1  
270  
270  
255 
1322 
11.8  
2269  
8.1 
8.8 
0.4 
163  
252  
34  
70  
8  
58  
105  
161  
79  
11  
6  
947  
8.5  
24  
24  
23 
947 
8.5  
947  
0.7 
0.7 
0.1 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
Seed Potato - Terai 
Paddy seeds, Wheat - Terai 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
A. Term Loan for Fixed Capital/ No of New Enterprises Inducted 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Total Gross Credit Req-Term Loans NPR mn 
Total Gross Credit Req-Term Loans $ mn 
Amount disbursed - NPR Million 
Total Amount Due - NPR million 
Amount repaid - NPR million 
Net Incremental credit 
Net Incremental credit - US$ mn 
Gross Loans Outstanding - NPR million 
Of which, Credit risk fund provided per Year 
Credit risk fund, cumulative 
Credit risk fund, cumul as % of loans outstanding  
B. Short-term production loans and working capital, 2 years carry-over of customers  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Total Gross Credit Req - Working Capital- NPR mn 
Gross Credit Req - Working Capital US$ 
Total Amount Due - NPR million 
Amount repaid - NPR million 
Net incremental credit requirement - NPR 
Net incremental credit requirement - US$ 
Gross loans outstanding 
Of which, Credit risk fund provided per Year 
Credit risk fund, cumulative 
Credit risk fund, cumul as % of loans outstanding  
TOTAL Portfolio 
Gross Credit requirement-NPR mn 
Gross Credit requirement-NPR mn 
Amount Due 
Amount repaid - NPR million 
Net incremental credit requirement - NPR 
Net incremental credit requirement - US$ 
Gross Loans Outstanding - NPR million 
Of which, Credit risk fund provided per Year 
Credit risk fund, cumulative 
Credit risk fund as % of loans outstanding 
Vegetables - Terai 
Vegetables - Hills 
Seed Potato - Hills 
Seed Potato - Terai 
Aquaculture- Fixed Capital 
Banana 
Goats 
Dairy Buffalo 
Aquaculture - New Ponds 
Aquaculture - Rehabilitation 
Aquaculture - Pond leasing 
194  
96  
38  
60  
10  
18  
12  
12  
54  
5  
2  
        502  
4.5  
502  
0  
502  
4.5  
502 
0.0  
1449  
12.9  
37.1  
525.9  
947.2  
510.2  
1449.0  
0.7  
0.7  
0.05  
454  
240  
102  
150  
29  
48  
48  
26  
119  
15  
10  
     1,241  
11.1  
1241  
477  
1266  
11.3  
1266 
10.0  
10  
0.8  
2817  
25.2  
295.4  
1510.7  
1798.2  
1277.4  
3534.4  
18.1  
18.9  
0.53  
326  
504  
78  
140  
34  
193  
525  
242  
191  
34  
23  
2,289  
20.4  
726  
726  
691 
1598 
14.3  
3867  
21.8 
30.6 
0.8 
648  
336  
154  
210  
58  
90  
96  
32  
146  
25  
17  
     1,811  
16.2  
1811  
1181  
1896  
16.9  
1896 
24.8  
35  
1.8  
4100  
36.6  
762.6  
2537.0  
2779.3  
1909.8  
5762.5  
46.6  
65.5  
1.14  
326  
630  
112  
175  
34  
232  
735  
258  
191  
34  
34  
2,759  
24.6  
1391  
1391  
1329 
1430 
12.8  
5297  
41.7 
72.3 
1.4 
778  
432  
218  
270  
77  
132  
144  
37  
167  
29  
25  
  2,309  
     20.6  
2309  
1740  
2464  
22.0  
2464 
36.2  
71  
2.9  
5068  
45.2  
1436.4  
3699.7  
3169.5  
2477.2  
7761.3  
78.0  
143.4  
1.85  
70  
80  
Yr 5 
326  
756  
168  
175  
34  
289  
735  
258  
238  
34  
34  
3,047  
27.2  
2114  
2114  
2029 
1018 
9.1  
6315  
63.4 
135.8 
2.2 
778  
528  
320  
300  
77  
162  
168  
          38  
173  
29  
29  
     2,602  
23.2  
2602  
2247  
2819  
25.2  
2819 
46.2  
117  
4.2  
5649  
50.4  
2164.6  
4716.6  
3265.3  
2828.5  
9134.2  
109.6  
253.0  
2.77  
In NPR Million 
Yr 6 
Total 
326  
630  
112  
175  
34  
270  
630  
258  
238  
34  
34  
2,741  
24.5  
2569  
2569  
2479 
262 
2.3  
6577  
77.1 
212.8 
3.3 
778  
528  
320  
300  
77  
174  
156  
38  
173  
29  
29  
2,602  
23.2  
2602  
2542  
2880  
25.7  
2880 
52.0  
169  
5.9  
5343  
47.7  
2617.0  
5171.7  
2803.7  
2882.6  
9457.3  
129.1  
382.1  
4.04  
1,682  
3,150  
560  
840  
160  
1,138  
3,045  
1,369  
1,096  
171  
148  
13,359  
119.3  
7071  
7071  
6782 
6577 
58.7  
3,629  
2,160  
1,152  
1,290  
326  
624  
624  
185  
832  
132  
113  
   11,067  
98.8  
11067  
8186  
24426  
218.1  
7288.9  
18137.4  
14763.3  
58.7 
46 
Annex Table 7: Capacity enhancement and policy support 
 Description   
SN  
 Unit  
 No of Programmes  
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Total  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
 Unit 
cost- 
NPR'000  
 Yr-1  
 Yr-2  
 Yr-3  
 Yr-4  
 Yr-5  
 Yr-6  
 Total  
 Total cost - NPR' '000  
 A. Financial Systems Development (FSD) for Inclusive Value 
Chain Financing  
 Extending outreach through branchless banking- ADBL  
1  
2  
3  
   One-time system development cost  
   Hardware  
   Training and awareness raising  
   Annual Maintenance cost ("10% of Hardware cost)  
 Sub-total for branchless banking  
Digitization and upgrading of Selected Agricultural Co-
operatives and MFIs in project clusters  
 POS 
machines  
60  
120  
-    
-    
-    
180  
-    
60  
120  
-    
-    
30  
210  
Lumpsum  
700  
-    
-    
50  
15  
-    
3,000  
6,000  
-    
900  
1,800  
-    
300  
-    
-    
700  
3,900  
8,100  
-    
-    
-    
900  
900  
10  
20  
30  
-    
60  
300  
-    
3,000  
6,000  
9,000  
 ADBL-coordinated debit card service for cooperative society 
members in project clusters  
 No of 
Co-op  
25  
50  
125  
-    
-    
200  
25  
625  
1,250  
3,125  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
700  
9,000  
450  
3,150  
900  
900  
3,000  
900  
1,350  
15,850  
-    
-    
-    
18,000  
-    
5,000  
 Sub-total - FSD  
 B. Credit and savings product adaptation and efficiency enhancement for inclusive value chain financing 
12,325  
8,150  
19,225  
9,900  
2,900  
1,350  
53,850  
1  
2  
3  
 IT strategy development for inclusive value chain financing  
 Credit and other financial product review and development   
Software adaptation and development of a portal-based 
productivity enhancing IT tools for standardized loan 
processing  
 Total for system enhancement  
 Lump 
sum  
 Pers-
mth  
 Lump 
sum  
1  
6  
 C. Staff Capacity Building of ADBL and PFIs, including Co-ops 
and MFIs  
 Description  
 Participants 
type  
 No of 
persons  
 No of 
Days  
 No of Programmes  
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Yr-
 Total  
20  
2  
1  
1  
2  
1  
3  
1  
4  
1  
5  
1  
6  
1  
2  
1  
2  
1  
2  
14  
400  
2,400  
800  
400  
800  
400  
800  
5,600  
5,000  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
5,000  
6,000  
-    
2,000  
-    
2,000  
-    
10,000  
400  
13,400  
800  
2,400  
800  
2,400  
800  
20,600  
 Unit 
cost- 
NPR'000  
 Cots/year  
 Yr-1  
 Yr-2  
 Yr-3  
 Yr-4  
 Yr-5  
 Yr-6  
 Total 
Cost  
8  
400  
400  
400  
400  
400  
400  
400  
2,400  
SN  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
 Strategic programme leadership building - 
including for staff turnovers  
 Programme Orientation, including staff 
turnover  
 Business Officers Training, VCA, 
Enterprise selection & loan appraisal for 
specific value chains (Including staff 
turnover) PFIs, inc Coop+MFIs  
 Business Officers Training - Refresher/- 
annual  
 Annual Planning, monitoring, review and 
learning at Provincial level  
 Top+Senior 
managers- 
HO+States  
 Province 
Mgr+Branch 
managers 
(BM)  
 Business 
Officers (BO)  
 Business 
Officers  
 BM+ BOs  
 Domestic Exposure and Mutual learning 
visits  
 BMs+ Bos+ 
Prov Staff  
 Regional International Exposure Visits  
Top 
managers, 
PMs, BMs, 
BOs  
2  
4  
6  
2  
2  
2  
2  
20  
300  
1,200  
1,800  
600  
600  
600  
600  
5,400  
7  
40  
35  
45  
30  
20  
18  
188  
100  
4,000  
3,500  
4,500  
3,000  
2,000  
1,750  
18,750  
2  
3  
5  
10  
10  
15  
-    
40  
35  
45  
30  
20  
170  
30  
-    
1,200  
1,050  
1,350  
900  
600  
5,100  
3  
5  
5  
1  
5  
7  
1  
5  
8  
1  
4  
8  
1  
4  
8  
1  
23  
36  
400  
1,200  
2,000  
2,000  
2,000  
1,600  
1,600  
10,400  
600  
-    
3,000  
4,200  
4,800  
4,800  
4,800  
21,600  
3,000  
-    
3,000  
3,000  
3,000  
3,000  
3,000  
15,000  
 C. Sub-total for staff capacity building  
4,830  
6,800  
14,900  
15,750  
15,150  
13,300  
12,750  
78,650  
47 
Annex Table 7: Capacity enhancement and policy support, continued  
 Description   
SN  
 D. Policy analyses and advocacy  
 Unit  
 No of Programmes  
 Yr-
1  
 Yr-
2  
 Yr-
3  
 Yr-
4  
 Yr-
5  
 Yr-
6  
 Total  
1  
2  
Study and Dissemination of Impact of Inclusive Value Chain Financing on 
reducing the real sector, including marketing, risks of small agri-
entrepreneurs  
Efficacy of community-based risk sharing mechanism through group 
insurance  
Agricultural credit subsidisation and access of micro and small agri-
entrepreneurs to institutional credit - evidences from the field  
3  
 Sub-total for policy analyses and advocacy  
 LS  
 LS  
 LS  
1  
1  
1  
 Unit 
cost- 
NPR'000  
2,500  
2,000  
2,500  
 Total for Capacity enhancement and policy support - NPR '000  
 Total for Capacity enhancement and policy support - US$ '000  
  32,525  
    23,850  
 Total cost - NPR' '000  
 Yr-1  
 Yr-2  
 Yr-3  
 Yr-4  
 Yr-5  
 Yr-6  
 Total  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
2,500  
-    
-    
2,500  
-    
-    
-    
-    
2,000  
2,500  
-    
5,000  
   42,375  
2,000  
 27,850  
-    
-    
-    
2,000  
2,500  
7,000  
 160,100  
 18,600  
   14,900  
-    
-    
-    
-    
290  
213  
378  
249  
166  
133  
1,429  
48 
Annex Table 8: Action Plan for first 18 months following IFAD Board approval of VITA  
 Activities  
Prior to Loan 
Effectiveness 
 Month  
Subsequent to Loan Effectiveness 
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10  
11  
12  
13  
14   15   16   17   18  
 Preparation of Action Plan for Loan Signing & Effectiveness  
 Briefing to Top and Senior Management on Action Plan and 
approval  
 Review of loan effectiveness conditions and initiate actions on 
fulfilment   
 Drafting of Subsidiary loan agreement and discussion with MOF  
 Fulfilling conditions for loan signing & loan signing  
 Strengthening of Central PMU, MSME Division and Provincial 
Units  
 Final Selection of ADBL branches to be inducted in PY-1 in close 
consultation with co-financier/ implementing INGO  
 Fulfilment of loan effectiveness conditions and Declaration  
 Strategic programme leadership building workshop  
 Strengthening of selected branches through staff reallocation & 
recruitment (credit administration part)  
 Finalisation of technical and cost norms for the enterprises under 
selected value chains  
 Review of existing loan process, loan products and adaptation  
 IT strategy development for inclusive value chain financing 
Development of portal-based automated loan processing system  
 Design of training curricula on loan processing, including on 
automated loan appraisal  
 Request for proposal, selection and MOUs with PFIs  
 Business Officers Training, VCA, Enterprise selection & loan 
appraisal for specific value chains (Including staff turnover) PFIs, 
inc Coop+MFIs  
Programme implementation Launch on the ground 
Selection of VC clusters for first year intervention 
 Extending outreach through branchless banking- ADBL  
 Digitization and upgrading of Selected Agricultural Co-operatives 
and MFIs in project clusters  
 ADBL-coordinated debit card service for cooperative society 
members in project clusters  
 First Annual Planning and monitoring - review of PY-1 activities 
and planning for PY-2 activities  
Domestic exposure visits to successful value chain programmes 
Recruitment of credit staff 
2nd batch of training on VCA and loan appraisal 
Selection of final list of branches  
Selection of VC clusters for 2nd year intervention 
Launch of programme in 2nd year clusters 
49 
3.3  Component 3: Supply Chains Infrastructure 
  To improve supply chain efficiency, the enabling environment, and reduce the risks 
and impacts of changing weather patterns and climate conditions, VITA will invest in critical 
supply chain infrastructure prioritized via the MSP processes at corridor and regional level 
(which includes climate risk assessments and integration of measures to strengthen the 
infrastructure against changing weather patterns and climate conditions). Three types of 
infrastructure to be supported include: 
  All  infrastructure  will  apply  locally  relevant  climate  smart  design  principles  and 
practices. Furthermore, due to COVID-19, the design of new market infrastructure will also 
take into account the likely need for greater physical spaces as well as improved hygiene 
facilities in physical markets and other changes to market operating practices to reduce 
the risk of markets becoming centres of transmission.  
  Increased variability of rainfall due to climate change has been identified as a specific 
risk  to  small-scale  producers.  Investments  in  multi-use  water  systems,  infield  water 
harvesting,  water  catchment  pond,  including  for  livestock  and  domestic  purposes,  and 
small-scale irrigation for crops are specially intended to mitigate these risks by reducing 
reliance on purely rainfed production systems. Similarly, improved farm access roads will 
further  reduce  risks  from  periods  of  more  intensive  rainfall  disrupting  the  ability  to  get 
produce to market, especially during the monsoon season. 
  VITA will work with market management board and local authorities to develop and 
execute solid waste management plans. The program will support on capacity building to 
the  stakeholders  on  recycling  and  reuse  of  waste  generated  during  production  to 
processing and to make the bio-compost (Annex …).  
  VITA  funding  share:  Based  on  recent  experience  in  Nepal,  including  discussion 
with state and municipal government on the availability and interest in co-financing similar 
types  of  investment,  the  following  levels  are  proposed  for  the  maximum  share  of  VITA 
finance for each sub-project: 
  Window 1: 75% 
  Window 2: 60% 
  Window 3: 85% 
  Phasing of Windows and sub-projects: Prioritization of infrastructure needs for 
each local supply chain will be via the MSPs for all 3 windows and be based on actual 
needs  to  enable  growth.  Investments  in  wholesale  market  infrastructure  will  be 
required once there is clear growth in the supply chains in the concerned corridors. 
Investment in community-scale productive infrastructure are likely to be needed up-
front in order to drive growth. Windows will be phased-in with growth of the local 
50 
supply  chains  in  each  corridor.  At  the  programme  level,  the  following  phasing  will 
apply: 
  An estimated schedule of the type and number of sub-projects is shown below. The 
number, timing and unit costs of each type of sub-project is subject to change based 
on specific demands confirmed via each MSP. 
Unit 
Yr1 
Yr2 
Yr3 
Quantities 
Yr4 
Yr5 
Yr6 
Total 
Unit Cost 
(US$) 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Civil Works 
Integrated Market 
  Satellite Market 
  Rural Roads 
Irrigation / water scheme 
Number 
Number 
Km 
ha. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
25 
300 
2 
15 
25 
300 
1 
15 
25 
300 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
30 
75 
900 
2,608,695 
313,044 
60,600 
4,200 
  Technical assistance  to  state  and  municipal  authorities  will  be  provided through 
the component budgets to support them on the technical design of the associated 
works,  including  incorporation  of  climate  proof  design  principles.  In  addition,  the 
component  may  support  municipalities  to  develop  their  infrastructure  master  plan 
subject to requests from the municipal authorities to do so and available resources 
within the component. 
  Modalities: The Component will operate as a financing facility available to eligible 
sub-project  implementers.  Sub-project  implementers  awarded  works  will  be  fully 
responsible for the implementation of all aspects of the works. The programme will 
hire  appropriate  technical  staff  to  conduct  site  inspections  to  supervise  works and 
for payment release purposes. In the case of municipal authorities, the programme 
will additionally offer capacity building support as necessary to raise the permanent 
capacity of the local authorities and their staff to implement such works. 
  For regional and satellite wholesale markets, VITA will finance up to 75% of approved 
costs with the balance financed by sub-project implementers or other sources. Financing 
will  be  on  a  reimbursement  basis  with  verified  physical  and  financial  progress  against 
payment milestones. For small-scale community infrastructure VITA will finance up to 85% 
of the approved costs.  
  Eligible sub-project implementers may submit EoIs for sub-projects to the LPA. EoIs 
meeting  the eligibility  criteria  will  be  ranked  against  an  agreed  set  of  criteria,  linked  to 
their  contribution  to  the  programme’s  development  objectives  and  key  performance 
indicators. Within the limits of available funding for each round, the highest ranked EoIs 
for each category of infrastructure will be invited to submit fully costed technical designs 
alongside  a  clear  business  case  and  rationale  for  the  sub-project.  The  programme  will 
contribute to the costs of necessary technical assistance to the sub-project implementers 
to  develop  the  detailed  proposals  to  the  required  standard.  Detailed  design  will  be 
evaluated  by  the  LPA,  with  evaluation  sub-contracted  out  as  necessary,  and  those 
confirmed  as  meeting  the  agreed  criteria  will  then  be  approved  by  the  LPA  for  full 
implementation  by  the  respective  sub-project  implementer.  All  procurement  and 
contracting  of  design  and  works  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  assigned  sub-project 
implementer. 
  Implementation of component 3. The LPA will appoint a small team of technical 
advisors,  including  engineers,  overseers  and  procurement  specialists  to  oversee  the 
component.  They  will  coordinate  the  evaluation  of  all  Expressions  of  Interest  (EoI)  and 
technical review of the detailed designs and proposal. The Component team will include 
staff at both PMU and state level who will carry out site inspection of the proposed sites 
and actual works to authorize payment release. The PMU staff will be recruited from the 
51 
start of Yr1, while the staff at Provincial offices will be in post by the tie the first Windows 
open. 
  The infrastructure team will comprise: 
Infrastructure Specialist x1  
Infrastructure Procurement Specialist  x1 
  Sub Engineer / Overseer x5 (1 per office) 
  Infrastructure Facility Guidelines.  A detailed Guidelines will be prepared by the 
PMU  Infrastructure  team  to  set  out  all technical,  fiduciary  and  operational  aspects 
and norms. Care will be taken when preparing the guidelines to ensure that they are 
fully aligned with the evolving practices and spirit of operation of the funding of such 
works in the federal context. The Guidelines will be approved by the PSC and subject 
to no-objection approval from IFAD. 
  Financial  management  and  procurement  procedures  within  the  guidelines  will  be 
consistent with those set out in the approved PIM for VITA. 
52 
Part 3: Implementation arrangements 
4  Programme governance and management 
4.1  Institutional framework 
  A  Programme  Steering  Committee  will  provide  overall  policy  guidance, 
coordination and supervision. 
  The  Lead  Programme  Agency  (LPA)  will  be  the  ADBL,  on  behalf  of  the  GON, 
responsible for achievement of the programme development objectives and overall 
performance of the programme. The dedicated Programme Management Unit (PMU) 
of ADBL, reporting directly to the Chief Executive Officer, will lead overall programme 
implementation. The LPA will lead implementation of all aspects of the Component 1 
and 2. Within this, it will act as a wholesale lender providing wholesale loans for term 
financing  to  PFIs  participate  in  the  programme.  Within  ADBL,  programme 
implementation will be mainstreamed in its organizational structures, supplemented 
where necessary with targeted technical assistance and additional human resources. 
For  Component  3,  LPA  will  provide  overall  coordination,  monitoring  and  reporting 
while infrastructure sub-projects will be implemented by sub-project implementers 
(see below).  
  The  Implementing  Partner  will  be  Heifer  Nepal,  on  behalf  of  Heifer,  as  a  co-
financier and full implementing partner particularly on Component 1 on aspects of 
socio-economic mobilization and supply chain development as well providing parallel 
financing towards the costs of their activities within VITA.  
  Partner  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs),  including  Class  A  and  Class  D  regulated 
institutions,  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for  wholesale  loans  under  the  programme,  to 
increase availability of term financing to small farmers and MSMEs in the sector, and 
supported supply chains in particular. PFIs will be expected to be active participants 
in the MSPs in each supply chain. PFIs will also be eligible to receive capacity building 
support for building their competence in offering appropriate rural financial services 
(Component 2). 
  It is noted that banks and financial service providers will be proactively encouraged 
to participate in the MSPs and offer financial services to small-scale producers and 
businesses in the supported supply chains regardless of whether they are in receipt 
of  wholesale  financing  or  capacity  building  support  under  Component  2  of  the 
programme. 
  State and municipal governments will be key partners to the programme, both 
for overall coordination within programme locations and, importantly, in coordinated 
investment  in  supply  chain  infrastructure  in  support  of  local  supply  chain 
development.  State-level  coordination  committees will  be  established  between the 
programme and local stakeholders, including State and Municipal authorities in each 
State and meet at least annually. In addition, the programme will put in places MoUs 
signed  between  the  LPA  and  the  relevant  government  bodies.  In  addition, 
representatives from State and Municipal authorities will be active participants of the 
MSP processes in each supply chain. The MSPs will be a key mechanism for achieving 
practical  coordination  and  harmonization  of  public  support.  The  programme  will 
provide capacity building support to municipal authorities so they can internalize the 
VITA  approach.  For  Component 3,  State  and  Municipal  government  will  be  eligible 
sub-project implementers. 
  Sub-project  implementers  for  infrastructure  sub-projects  (Comp  3)  will  sign 
agreements with the LPA to implement the approved sub-projects Procurement and 
contracting of design and works for each sub-project will be the responsibility of the 
assigned sub-project implementer. 
  Sub-project implementers for each of the three types of infrastructure will be:  
53 
  Partnerships  with  other  projects  and  organizations.  Federal  government 
programmes,  especially  those  of  MoALD  focused  on  market  and  value  chain 
development  (including  ASDP  (State  6))  and  RERP  (States  1  and  2),  will  be  key 
partners  to  ensure  coordinated  investments  in  supported  supply  chains.  Similarly, 
partnerships with other programmes and organizations beyond government will also 
be  developed,  as  appropriate.  As  open  rolling  platforms,  the  multi-stakeholder 
platforms in each supply chain are a key mechanism for practical coordination and 
harmonization among the numerous federal investment programmes in support of 
the priorities of the supply chain actors themselves. 
4.2  Programme Steering Committee 
Mandate 
  The  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  is  established  by  the  Government  of 
Nepal to ensure overall execution of the Programme and effective coordination and 
cooperation  among  key  stakeholder  including:  small-scale  producers,  farmer 
organizations, the private sector and government agencies.  
54 
  The  PSC  will  provide  overall  policy  guidance,  coordination  and  supervision  of 
programme delivery. It will serve as the decision maker for strategic direction of the 
Programme, including approval of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB).  
  The PSC will periodically review performance against the specified Programme Goal 
and Development Objectives and ensures any required remedial actions are taken to 
ensure these objectives are met.  
Membership 
  Regular Members of the Steering Committee will include representatives of: 
  MoF – Chair, [Position to be confirmed]  
  National Planning Commission (NPC) - representative 
  Nepal Rastra Bank – [Executive Director of Research Department] 
  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development – [Secretary] 
  Ministry  of  Federal  Affairs  and  General  Administration  (MoFAGA)  - 
representative 
Farmers Commission representative  
  ADBL CEO 
  Heifer Nepal – Country Director 
  VITA Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director) as member secretary. 
  Invite members shall include representatives of: 
  States 2,3 and 5 MoLMACs and State Planning Commissions  
  Nepal Bankers Association 
  Nepal Microfinance Banker's Association 
  Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
PSC Meetings 
  Meetings will be held twice per year as a minimum with further meetings as required.  
Responsibilities 
  The main responsibilities of the PSC will be: 
  Ensure  complementarity  between  the  Programme  and  key  government 
strategies, initiatives and other programmes for the efficient use of programme 
resources; 
  Provide  a  supportive  public  policy  framework  and  guidelines  for  efficient 
programme  implementation  and  supporting the  resolution  of  any  issues  with 
the relevant institutions; 
  Ensure  timely  provision  of  government  counterpart  funds,  in  line  with 
Programme needs as defined by annual work plans and budgets. 
  Ensure effective coordination between relevant authorities at federal, state and 
municipal  level  in  support  of  programme  delivery  and  instilling  a  system  of 
accountability for performance and proper use of resources at all levels; 
  Facilitate  effective  coordination  and  information  sharing  between  VITA  and 
other government and donor-funded programmes and projects through annual 
review  workshops  and  drawing  upon  and  sharing  of  policy  forums  and 
communication facilities; 
  Business enabling environment strengthening for private sector engagement in 
agriculture:  Soliciting/proposing  amendments  to  regulations  and  policies  for 
government  approval,  where  needed,  to  facilitate  implementation  of  the 
Programme, especially in regard to private sector engagement in the targeted 
supply chains and agriculture sector in general;   
55 
  Review and approval of key programme guidelines, including the Programme 
Implementation Manual  
  Review and approval of annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs); 
Periodically  review  performance  against  the  specified  Programme  Goal  and 
Development Objectives and ensures any required remedial actions are taken 
to ensure these objectives are met;  
  Co-ordinate  with  IFAD  and  Heifer,  as  donors,  to  conduct  annual  Joint 
Supervision and Mid Term review missions of the programme and agree actions 
to be taken based on the findings of these missions. 
Interfacing  between  PCO  and  MoAD/Ministry  of  Agriculture  or  equivalent  for 
State 6 on matters of policy formulation, revision and implementation, with a 
view to ensure effective implementation of the Programme. 
4.3  Programme Management Unit 
  The  Project  Management  Unit  of  ADBL  will  serves  as  the  VITA  Programme 
Management  Unit,  led  by  the  ADBL  PMU  Director  who  will  serve  as  the  VITA 
Programme Coordinator. Staff of ADBL and Heifer will work together in a single PMU. 
  The PMU will report to the Programme Director, who will be the CEO of ADBL. The 
PMU will be responsible for all aspects of programme management and reporting on 
behalf  of  the  LPA.  The  PMU  will  work  closely  with  the  heads  of  the  relevant 
departments  in  ADBL  Head  Office  and  the  Regional  Directors  in  the  five  regional 
offices overseeing VITA field activities. 
  Key staff in the PMU include: 
  VITA Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director) 
  Programme Chief Finance Officer (deputed from ADBL) 
  Accounts Assistant 
  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
  Planning, M&E officer (Heifer) 
Targeting, Gender & Social Inclusion Specialist 
  Socio-economic Mobilization Expert (Heifer) – with responsibly for nutrition 
  Supply Chain Focal Person Coordinator at HO (in ADBL MSME Department) 
  Supply Chain Focal Person Officer at HO (in ADBL MSME Department) 
  Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert 
  Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist 
  Digital Banking Expert 
  Assistant Finance Officer 
Infrastructure Specialist 
Infrastructure Procurement Specialist 
  The PMU will be supported by the following senior staff in Heifer on a part time basis: 
  Program Director  
  Finance Director  
  Senior Manager PM&E  
  Knowledge management manager 
  The organizational structure of the full programme team is illustrated in the figure 
below. Terms of reference for all key posts are attached as an Annex to this PIM. 
56 
VITA whole programme team structure: Matrix reporting for all VITA staff – i) via regular ADBL management line (horizontal)  ii) via 
component/technical line in VITA (vertical) 
Central 
ADBL 
Management 
CEO (10%) 
Deputy CEOs 
(x2, 10%) 
  Full time VITA team 
  Programme Management Unit 
  PMU Director 
Comp.1 
Senior SC Coordinator  
@ SME & Agriculture Dept 
  Focal Person Officer  
@ SME & Agriculture Dept. 
Targeting/GESI 
Specialist 
SEM Expert (H) 
Comp. 2 
Agricultural VC 
Financing Expert 
Digital Banking 
Expert 
Climate Smart Agri-
finance Specialist 
Assistant Finance 
Officer 
Provincial Office 
(x5) 
Provincial 
Director (x5, 
10%) 
  Provincial Office Programme teams 
  Supply chain coordinator x 
SEM coordinator x5 
(H) 
12 
  District & Municipal Level 
Branch teams 
  Supply chain officer  
Branch 
Manager (x90. 
15%) 
x 28 
SEM Officers  
x10 (H) 
  Part-time support to VITA 
  ADBL Departments 
Comp 3 
Infrastructure 
Specialist 
Infrastructure 
Procurement officer 
FM 
Programme Chief 
Financial Officer 
Accounts Assistant PM&E officer (H) 
KM / PM&E 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist 
  SME & Agri (25%) 
Digital Banking 
  Credit (x3, 15%) 
KM manager (50%) (H)   HR & Training 
Heifer (H) 
Country Director 
Program Directors (x2, 
40%) 
Finance Director - (40%) 
Senior Manager PM&E - 
(40%) 
HR Officer (30%) 
Sub-engineer / 
overseer x5 
Admin & Finance 
Officer x3 
(H) 
Finance / Procurement 
  IT / MIS 
Communications 
  Credit & Loans (x3, 15%) 
Finance Officer (x3, 15%) 
  Planning officer (25%) 
  Accounts Assistant (x90, 
15%) 
Credit & Loans (x90, 15%) 
  Planning officer (x5, 25%) 
Branch Office – 
district (x28) 
Other branches 
(x62) 
Municipalities 
 (~90) 
Coverage  
~75,000 HH 
  Municipal-level teams 
Local NGO22 
SEM Supervisors x28 
(@ 1 per district) 
Socio-economic mobilizer/Community facilitators 
~150  
(@1 per 500 HH) 
VITA paid peer positions  
Business Skill Facilitators ~750  
(@ 1 per 100 HH)   
22 Staff levels/coverage for LNGOs still to be agreed. Numbers are based on initial planning assumptions. 
57 
VITA Team Structure – per Provincial Office (x5) 
Matrix reporting for all VITA staff – i) via regular ADBL management line (horizontal)  ii) via component/technical line in VITA (vertical) 
Central 
  Programme Management Unit 
  Full time VITA team 
ADBL 
Management 
CEO 
Deputy CEOs     
    Part-time support to VITA 
    ADBL Departments 
Heifer HO 
  PMU Director 
Comp.1 
Senior SC Coordinator  
@ SME & Agriculture Dept 
Comp. 2 
Agricultural VC 
Financing Expert 
Comp 3 
Infrastructure 
Specialist 
FM 
Programme Chief 
Financial Officer 
KM / PM&E 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist 
  Focal Person Officer  
SEM Expert (H) 
@ SME & Agriculture Dept 
Provincial Office 
(x5) 
Provincial 
Director (p/t) 
  Provincial Office Programme teams 
  Supply chain coordinator  
x 2-3 
SEM coordinator x1 
(H) 
Sub-engineer / 
overseer x1 
Branch Office – 
district (~6) 
Branch 
Manager(p/t) 
  District Branch teams 
  Supply chain officer  
x 4-8 
  Municipal-level teams 
Other branches (~7)  
Municipalities 
 (~15) 
Coverage  
~15,000 HH 
SEM Officers  
x2(H) 
Local NGO23 
SEM Supervisors x 5-6 
(@ 1 per district) 
Socio-economic 
mobilizer/Community 
facilitators x 25-30  
(@1 per 500 HH) 
VITA paid peer 
positions 
Business Skill 
Facilitators ~120-180  
(@ 1 per 250 HH)   
    Credit & Loans (p/t) 
    Planning Officer (p/t) 
Accounts Officer 
(p/t)   
Admin & Finance 
Officer x1 
(H) 
Accounts Assistant  (p/t) 
23 Staff levels/coverage for LNGOs still to be agreed. Numbers are based on initial planning assumptions. 
58 
4.4  State / Municipality Coordination Forum 
  In each of the three focus states, and all supported municipalities, the programme 
will organize a regular Coordination Forum among relevant stakeholders. The Supply 
chain team will lead this at the sate level while the local NGO partners under Heifer 
will lead this at the municipality level. 
  At the sate level, membership is expected to include, as a minimum, representatives 
of:  
  Ministry of Land Management, Agriculture and Cooperatives 
  State Planning Commission: 
  State Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
  Municipal government where VITA is active 
  Other major investment programmes of relevance 
Partner banks and financial institutions 
  At the municipality level, membership is expected to include 
  Local elected leaders 
  Technical staff of the municipality responsible for economy and agriculture 
  Representatives  of  all  producer  organization from  the municipality  supported 
by VITA  
  Representative  of  other investment  projects  and  programmes  working  in the 
municipality on related issues 
  Representatives  of  State  MOLMAC, 
including 
local  service  centres 
(AKCs//VHLSSC) 
Private  sectors  buyers  and  services  providers  working  with  producers  in  the 
municipality 
  The Coordination Forum should meet twice per year. 
  The purposes of the CF is to: 
  Review progress in programme activities in the previous period 
issues 
Identify  emerging  opportunities  and 
development objectives in the state/municipality 
in  achieving  programme 
  Share  information  on  potentially  complementary  investment  plans  and 
activities of the local authorities and others 
  Agree priority actions to be taken during the following period. 
59 
5  Planning, Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge 
Management 
A) 
A) 
B) 
C) 
Contents 
Part A. Planning..................................................................................................................................... 61 
Part B. Monitoring and Evaluation ............................................................................................................ 63 
1) Key definitions and M&E system overview ............................................................................................ 63 
Key terms and definitions ................................................................................................................. 63 
Purpose of the M&E system ............................................................................................................. 65 
Overview of the M&E system ........................................................................................................... 65 
a)  Monitoring of implementation performance and outreach .................................................................. 66 
b)  Measuring outcomes and impact ...................................................................................................... 66 
c)  Risks’ monitoring.............................................................................................................................. 67 
d)  Performance targets and results’ indicators ...................................................................................... 68 
The IFAD ORMS .............................................................................................................................. 68 
e) 
Key M&E actors ............................................................................................................................... 68 
f) 
2) Detailed M&E tools and processes ....................................................................................................... 70 
Tools and processes for the monitoring of execution ........................................................................ 70 
a)  Data collection tools ......................................................................................................................... 70 
i) Producers’ groups’ records .............................................................................................................. 70 
ii) Service providers’ and implementation partners’ records and reports ................................................ 70 
iii)  Business Skills facilitators and Socio-economic Mobilizers' records .............................................. 70 
iv)  ADBL MIS and loan applications .................................................................................................. 71 
v) Contractors’ reports ......................................................................................................................... 71 
b)  Performance evaluation ................................................................................................................... 71 
c)  Data verification ............................................................................................................................... 72 
Tools and processes for the measurement of outcomes and impact ................................................. 72 
a)  Data collection tools ......................................................................................................................... 72 
i) Farmers’ diaries ............................................................................................................................... 74 
ii) Baseline surveys .............................................................................................................................. 74 
iii)  Mid-term and completion surveys ................................................................................................. 76 
iv)  Annual cluster tracking surveys .................................................................................................... 77 
v) Other thematic surveys .................................................................................................................... 77 
b)  Performance evaluation ................................................................................................................... 78 
3) Information Management and Reporting ............................................................................................... 79 
Detailed data requirements .............................................................................................................. 79 
Management Information System (MIS) ........................................................................................... 82 
Reporting ......................................................................................................................................... 83 
Part C. Knowledge Management and Communication ................................................................................ 85 
Annex 1 – VITA Detailed Logframe ........................................................................................................ 123 
Annex 2 -  VITA Theory of Change ........................................................................................................ 130 
Annex 3 - Monitoring and Evaluation Matrix ............................................................................................ 130 
Annex 4 – AWPB Template - Narrative part (Part 1) ................................................................................. 131 
Annex 5 - PTBA Template – Part 2 ........................................................................................................ 133 
Annex 6– AWPB Implementation Monitoring Template ............................................................................. 134 
Annex 7 – Output Monitoring Tables ...................................................................................................... 135 
Training Monitoring Table ................................................................................................................ 135 
SDF and other Grant Windows – Monitoring Tables ............................................................................ 136 
A) 
B) 
C) 
B) 
60 
Infrastructure Construction Monitoring Tables .................................................................................... 137 
Outreach Monitoring Table ............................................................................................................... 138 
Annex 8 – Quarterly Progress Report Outline .......................................................................................... 139 
Annex 9 – Annual Progress Report Outline ............................................................................................. 140 
Annex 10 – Guidelines for ORMS Indicators Reporting ............................................................................ 142 
Annex 11 – Project Completion Review Guidelines and Report Outline ...................................................... 144 
A) PROJECT COMPLETION REVIEW GUIDELINES .............................................................................................. 144 
B) ANNOTATED OUTLINE FOR PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS ....................................................................... 151 
Annex 12– Draft TOR for the Baseline Survey ......................................................................................... 156 
Annex 13 – Conducting Key Informant Interviews .................................................................................... 159 
Annex 14 – Conducting Focus Group Discussions ................................................................................... 163 
Annex 15 – Data Collection Forms – Draft Templates .............................................................................. 168 
Training Participants’ list .................................................................................................................. 168 
B2B Meetings’ Minutes .................................................................................................................... 169 
Multi-Stakeholders’ Cluster Meeting - Minutes .................................................................................... 170 
Cluster Profile Template .................................................................................................................. 172 
Farmers’ Group Profile Template ...................................................................................................... 174 
Dairy Farmers Diaries – Tentative template ....................................................................................... 179 
Annex 16– M&E Specialist and KM Expert (Draft) .................................................................................... 180 
Annex 17 - ESMP Matrix....................................................................................................................... 181 
5.1   Part A. Planning 
  A rigorous planning process that clearly identifies the concrete outputs (or physical 
targets) to be produced in the next 12 months in pursuit of overall project objectives, 
the activities to be implemented in order to deliver these outputs and the financial 
resources  (or  financial  targets)  required,  will  be  the  starting  point  for  the  sound 
management and monitoring of project execution. To this end, the PMU will use the 
AWPB  template  (see  Annex  1)  that  was  designed  as  a  tool  for  results-based 
management. 
  While  the  first  AWPB  (which  shall  include  an  18-month  procurement  plan)  will  be 
prepared by the PMU at the start of project implementation, the subsequent AWPB 
shall  be  prepared  each  year  towards  the  end  of  the  on-going  fiscal  year  for 
submission to IFAD 60 days before the end of the fiscal year. Once developed, the 
AWPB shall be approved by the Project Steering Committee and shall receive the “no 
objection” from IFAD before the end of the fiscal year. It may be revised in the course 
of the year upon receiving another “no objection” from IFAD.  
  The  key  reference  for  the  preparation  of  the  first  AWPB  will  be:  (i)  the  project 
Logframe,  which  summarizes  and  quantifies  the  key  results  to  be  achieved  before 
project completion; and (ii) the Cost Tables included in the Project Design Document 
(PDD),  which  provide  an  indicative  project  budget  brake  down  by  years  and 
components  and  for  each  activity  with  quantity  and  unit  cost.  Both  documents, 
however,  do  not  constitute  a  rigid  blueprint.  As  implementation  progresses,  these 
expenditure  estimates  become  increasingly  obsolete,  in  particular  unit  costs,  and 
some planned activities may need to be changed, or new ones added. The original 
project Log-frame and Cost Tables may therefore need to be revised at mid-term, 
upon the recommendations of the Mid-Term Review and upon IFAD’s approval. 
  After the first year, the preparation of subsequent AWPBs shall follow an iterative, 
two-pronged process, as follows: 
  Component  1,  3  and  Programme  Management:  The  PMU  will  adopt  a  rolling 
planning process for the planning of C1 and 3 activities, with annual activities being 
identified based on the content of newly developed or revised VC Action Plans. The 
61 
VC Action Plans of a duration of 3 years shall thus include a multiyear breakdown of 
key  activities  and  investments  that  will  need  to  be  financed  from  VITA  budget. 
Towards  the  end  of  a  given fiscal  year, the  content  of  new  and updated  VC  Action 
Plans will be analysed and consolidated by the PMU, the result being a draft AWPB 
for  C1  and  C3.  This  draft  AWPB  will  be  reviewed  and  discussed  during  provincial-
level  planning  workshops,  with  the  consultation  of  key  local  implementers  and 
stakeholders  (municipality  staff,  private  sector  partners,  etc.)  before  initial 
validation. The content of this draft AWPB will mostly concern targets for the number 
of  farmers  and  farmers’  groups  to  be  supported;  infrastructure  to  be  constructed; 
capacity building activities for beneficiaries, Bank and PMU staff; other hard and soft 
activities  to  be  financed  from  the  various  project  funds;  human  resources 
requirements and other inputs required for the PMU, etc. 
  Component 2: For Component 2, planning will follow the standard ADBL planning 
process,  with  tentative  lending  targets  for  the  IFAD  financing  window  being 
specifically defined at the local branch level by the branch Planning Team, based on 
VC needs and projections under Component 1 and alongside the other branch targets 
(i.e.  for  ADBL  own  resources  and  standard  business).  These  tentative  targets  for 
VITA loan windows will be reviewed as per ADBL normal process, first by the Regional 
Planning Team and ultimately by the Planning Division, before final approval by ADBL 
Board of Directors by end June each year. These approved targets will then be the 
basis for developing the draft AWPB for C2, which will mostly concern targets related 
to the number of branch clients and the volume of VITA funds to be on-lent to these 
clients. 
  The two draft AWPB will be consolidated for the preparation of the final draft AWPB 
covering  all  Components  and  PMU  costs  and  using  the  template  in  Annex  5.  The 
document shall clearly, identify, for each Component: 
− 
− 
− 
− 
− 
the detailed outputs and related physical targets to be achieved in all localities, 
the  key  activities,  sub-activities  and  inputs  required  in  order  to  deliver  planned 
outputs, 
the timetable for implementation of key activities, 
the name of the staff or partners responsible for each activity and sub-activity, 
the  financial  resources  (or  financial  targets)  required  for  implementing  activities 
and acquiring planned inputs. 
   The  version  forwarded  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  IFAD  for  approval 
should  include  a  narrative  part,  in  addition  to  the  Excel  tables,  describing  the 
implementation  context,  key  results  achieved  to  date  and  rationale  for  proposed 
activities and implementing arrangements (see Annex 4). 
  The process for developing and AWPB is described in the next chart. 
62 
AWPB PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS 
IFAD’s no objection to final AWBP 
By mid July 
IFAD’s review of draft AWBP 
Draft AWPB approved by PSC and submitted to IFAD for no objection 
By mid May  
i.e. 60 days before 
year end 
Project Steering Committee meeting 
By mid May 
May 
Preparation of draft, consolidated AWPB by PMU and submission to PSC for approval 
May 
Preparation of consolidated draft AWPB for C1 and C3 by PMU 
Preparation of draft AWPB for C2 by PMU 
May 
Validated province-wise AWPB targets for C1 and C3 
Approved targets for C2 
ADBL Board of Directors 
meeting 
By end April 
Consolidation of branch targets 
by ADBL Planning Division 
Definition of branch-
level targets by ADBL 
branch staff 
March 
April 
Provincial planning 
workshop  
Provincial planning 
workshop  
(…) 
March 
Preliminary identification by PMU of activities, targets and budgets based on 
updated VC Action Plans 
Updated VC Action Plan 
(detailed interventions) 
Updated VC Action Plan 
(detailed interventions) 
Cluster-level MSP 
Cluster-level MSP 
Value Chain Action Plan 
(5-year) 
Value Chain Action Plan 
(5-year) 
Provincial-level MSP 
Provincial-level MSP 
(…) 
(…) 
(…) 
(…) 
5.2  Monitoring and Evaluation 
5.2.1  Key definitions and M&E system overview 
Key terms and definitions 
Accountability: Obligation to demonstrate that work has been conducted and resources spent in 
compliance with agreed rules and standards or to report fairly and accurately on performance results 
vis à vis mandated roles and/or plans. 
Activity: Action taken, or work performed, through which inputs such as funds, technical assistance 
and other types of resources, are mobilized to produce specific outputs. 
Assumptions: Hypotheses about external factors that may influence the progress or success of a 
development intervention. 
63 
Attribution: The ascription of a causal link between observed changes (or changes expected to be 
observed) and a specific intervention. 
Baseline  study:  Quantitative  survey  or  analysis  describing  the  situation  prior  to  a  development 
intervention, against which progress can be measured at project completion. 
Beneficiaries:  The  individuals,  groups,  or  organizations  that  benefit  from  the  development 
intervention. Direct beneficiaries are usually those specifically targeted and reached by the project, 
but they may also include some individuals not specifically targeted but still benefiting directly from 
project interventions (e.g. the households in locations not targeted by the project, but who will benefit 
from a road newly constructed by the project for other beneficiaries). Indirect beneficiaries are those 
who are not targeted by the project but may indirectly benefit from its implementation (for example 
the shopkeepers in targeted locations who will increase their sales and revenues because project 
beneficiaries have increased their incomes).  
Efficiency: Extent to which resources (funds, expertise, time, etc.) are converted into results in an 
efficient way. 
Effectiveness:  Extent  to  which  the  objectives  of  an  intervention/project  have  been/are  being 
achieved, as measured by concrete development results. 
Evaluation:  Process  of  reflection  and  analysis  in  order  to  assess  if  the  human,  technical,  legal, 
administrative  and  financial  resources  mobilized  by  a  development  project  have  produced  the 
desired  results  and  achieved  agreed  objectives.  The  assessment  usually  focuses  on  determining 
the  relevance,  efficiency, effectiveness  and  sustainability  of  project  interventions  and  aims  at  the 
generation of lessons learned. 
Impacts:  Long-term  effects  or  changes,  positive  and  negative,  intended  or  not,  produced  by  a 
development intervention, directly or indirectly. 
Indicator: Quantitative or qualitative factor or variable that provides a simple and reliable means to 
measure the outcomes of an intervention or to monitor implementation performance and success. 
Lessons  learned:  Generalizations  based  on  experience  and  learning  that  can  be  applied  in  the 
design  of  new  projects  with  similar  objectives  or  circumstances,  or  to  improve  the  approaches 
followed  by  an  on-going  project.  Frequently,  lessons  learnt  relate  to  design  or  implementation 
features  that  have  ensured  success,  or  explain  failure,  and  to  the  factors  that  have  influenced 
performance or results.  
Logical  Framework  Matrix  (Logframe):  Matrix  developed  during  the  design  of  a  development 
project in order to succinctly present: (i) the expected project results (impact, outcomes, outputs), (ii) 
performance indicators used to measure if expected results were reached; (iii) sources of information 
or data collection methods for performance indicators; and (iv) external factors (risks) that may affect 
the  success  of  interventions.  It  is  a  results-based  management  tool  that  is  the  foundation  of  the 
project M&E system and serves as an accountability framework. 
Monitoring:  The  continuous  process  of  collecting  and  processing  information  that  relates  to 
implementation processes. This is an internal function that supports project management and aims 
at the continuous assessment of implementation performance and results through the systematic 
collection and analysis of data.  
Outputs: The capital goods and services resulting from a development intervention and delivered 
to targeted beneficiaries.  
Outreach: An activity of providing services to any populations who might not otherwise have access 
to  those  services;  or  the  number  of  project  beneficiaries  effectively  reached  by  a  development 
project.  
Outcomes:  Immediate  effects  or  results  of  a  development  intervention  in  terms  of  short-term 
changes induced in beneficiaries’ behaviors (e.g. improved capacities, adoption of new practices) or 
in the opportunities available to them (e.g. improved access to water). 
Performance Indicator: Indicator relevant to measure performance in attaining planned targets or 
results. 
Performance monitoring: The continuous collection and analysis of information and data aiming at 
the assessment of implementation progress and the measurement of results achieved against set 
targets or agreed standards. 
64 
Results-based Management (RBM): Management approach primarily concerned with the regular 
measurement  of  performance  and  results  as  a  basis  for  informed  decision-making  and 
implementation guidance.  
Results: The outputs, outcomes or impacts (intended or unintended, positive and / or negative) of a 
development intervention. 
Results chain: Suite of causal relationships between activities and development results. The results’ 
chain starts with activities that will lead to the realization of outputs, these outputs themselves leading 
to a series of outcomes and impacts.   
Stakeholders: Agencies, organizations, groups or individuals who have a direct or indirect interest 
in the development intervention or its evaluation. 
Target group: The specific individuals or groups whom/which the project aims to support and for 
the benefit of whom/which the development intervention was designed. 
Theory of change: Comprehensive description and illustration of how and why a desired change is 
expected to happen in a particular context. It is essentially the logic behind an intervention, showing 
how  inputs  and  activities  are  linked  to  a  chain  of  intended,  observable  outcomes  towards  the 
achievement  of  longer-term  goals.  It  also  helps  identify  the  assumptions  that  underly  the  design 
hypothesis and logic. 
A)  Purpose of the M&E system 
  The  main  purpose  of the  M&E  system  is  to  provide the  PMU  and  key  stakeholders 
(IFAD,  ADBL  CEO,  MoF)  with  a  sound  basis  for  informed  management  decision-
making,  with  the  regular  collection  and  analysis  of  data  that  will  help  monitor 
implementation progress, identify potential bottlenecks and measure project results 
and impact. 
  More precisely, the M&E system aims to support project stakeholders in the tracking 
of progress achieved in the field and in understanding if implementation is going on 
as planned, or if corrective actions are required. An important function of the system 
is the provision of early warnings of implementation problems, so that these can be 
mitigated  in  a  timely  and  efficient  manner.  The  system  will  also  help  measure 
development  results  and  impact  on  targeted  beneficiaries,  and  to  ensure  that  the 
intended target groups are effectively reached. M&E activities and regular reporting 
will also enhance the transparency of implementation processes and provide a clear 
accountability framework for all implementation actors.  
  Ultimately, the system will also contribute to the generation of useful implementation 
lessons, by processing information on best practices - or failure - and transforming 
this  information  into  knowledge  material  that  can  be  disseminated  to  a  wider 
audience of policy makers and strategic development partners.  
B)  Overview of the M&E system 
  The M&E system will cover two distinct, yet inter-linked, aspects: (i) the monitoring 
of  project  implementation  performance  (or  the  execution  of  activities  described  in 
the  AWPB)  and  outreach  (or  effectiveness  of  targeting  strategy).;  and  (ii)  the 
measurement of project results (outputs, outcomes and impact). 
  In  the  initial  first  or  second  year  of  project  implementation,  M&E  activities  will 
naturally  focus  on  the  first  dimension,  as  outcomes  and  impact  will  not  be 
immediately  measurable.  The  quality  of  delivered  outputs  and  the  level  of 
beneficiaries’ satisfaction shall be a constant concern during this initial phase of M&E 
work. The measurement of early project results will become possible as soon as a 
large  enough  number  of  beneficiaries  have  been  reached  and  at  least  one  full 
agricultural season has been completed for each beneficiary.  
  During project implementation, the AWPB developed each year for the programming 
of  activities  will  be  the  main  reference  for  the  monitoring  of  implementation 
performance,  while  the  project  Logframe  and  its  performance  targets  will  be  the 
main  reference  for  the  measurement  of  outcomes  and  impact.  An  overview  of the 
M&E system is provided in the next chapters. 
65 
a)  Monitoring of implementation performance and outreach 
   Monitoring  of  implementation  performance.  The  monitoring  of  project 
execution will focus on assessing the extent to which the various activities planned 
in  the  AWPB  are  being  conducted  on  time  and  with  the  expected  scale  and  are 
delivering the expected outputs. To this end, activity and output data will be collected 
regularly  by  the  various  M&E  actors  and  will  be  analysed  by  comparing  achieved 
physical targets with planned targets. Reasons for discrepancies or delays should be 
reflected upon and necessary corrective measures taken so that, at the end of each 
year, all physical targets are successfully met. The focus on assessing the quality of 
implementation processes should be a constant, important concern. 
  More  precisely,  the  monitoring  of  implementation  progress  will  focus  on  the 
following: 
−  Tracking  the  actual implementation pace  and  physical  delivery  rate,  by  comparing  delivered 
outputs against planned targets. 
−  Assessing quality of implementation processes and outputs. 
−  Ensuring that the intended target groups (women, youth, dalit/janajati) have been reached. 
−  Comparing actual disbursements against budget estimates. 
−  Assessing if implementation progress is within schedule and according to the agreed calendar. 
  The collection of the required M&E data and information will be done using the tools, 
and according to the processes, described in Chapter 2. The data collected will also 
be used for the preparation of various progress reports described in Chapter 3. The 
proper functioning of the entire system will largely depend on the rigor and discipline 
with which all M&E stakeholders and implementation partners will collect and submit 
the expected data at agreed-upon intervals. 
  Outreach monitoring. For each key output, as and when they will be delivered, the 
M&E  system  shall  track  the  number  of  direct  beneficiaries.  In  so  doing,  the  M&E 
system  will  help  monitor  the  extent  to  which  intended  beneficiaries,  in  particular 
young smallholder farmers, poor women and marginalized groups, are actually being 
reached,  helping  thus  track  targeting  performance.  This  means  that,  each  time  a 
specific project output is delivered, the specific implementer shall collect information 
on  the  number  of  beneficiaries,  their  gender,  their  age  and  if  they  belong  to  the 
janajati  community.  The  table  below  summarizes  the  key  outreach  data  that  will 
need to be monitored by the PMU (more details are provide in Appendix 6). 
Table X : Outreach targets 
Number of beneficiaries 
Number of women 
Number of youth 
Number of janajatis (indigenous people) 
Number of households 
Measuring outcomes and impact 
Year 1 
15,000 
7,000 
5,250 
Year 3 
70,000 
35,000 
24,500 
To be monitored  To be monitored  To be monitored 
64,400 
Year 6 
100,000 
50,000 
35,000 
13,800 
92,000 
  The M&E system should also enable the systematic and objective assessment of the 
immediate  effects  (outcomes)  and  longer-term  impact  of  project  interventions  on 
targeted beneficiary households, in order to determine if VITA has achieved – or is 
achieving - its objectives. The aim is also to assess the extent to which the activities 
planned  at  the  time  of  project  design  remain  relevant  to  the  needs  of  targeted 
beneficiaries in an environment that may evolve. 
  The key reference for the assessment of project results will be the Logframe outcome 
and impact indicators and related targets. The objective will be to verify, at regular 
intervals,  that  the  outputs  delivered  under  all  Components  are  leading  to  the 
expected  results  in  terms  of  increased  production  and  marketing  of  selected 
commodities  and  increased  farming  incomes.  In  essence,  M&E  activities  will  help 
monitor the implicit theory of change underlying project design and document project 
results (see Annex 2).  
66 
  In  order  to  measure  outcomes  and  impact,  two  types  of  tools  will  be  used  by the 
PMU: self-assessments and independent assessments. The detailed tools to be used 
for the collection of reliable information and data on project results (or outcomes and 
impact) are presented in the M&E Matrix (see Annex 2) and will involve the following: 
  Independent  assessments.  Three  major  quantitative  surveys  using  a 
representative sample of project beneficiaries will be conducted at project start (to 
collect baseline data), mid-term and completion (in order to measure changes since 
project  start).  The  baseline,  mid-term  and  final  surveys  will  be  conducted  by  an 
external  consultant  that  will  be  selected  through  a  competitive  bidding  process.  If 
the  same  consultant  is  to  be  contracted  for  the  three  surveys,  the  contract  shall 
include a clause stating that decision to continue the contract for subsequent survey 
will  be  based  on  the  satisfactory  performance  of  the  consultant  with  the  previous 
survey.  The  questionnaire  to  be  developed  shall  ensure,  among  others,  that  all 
Logframe  indicators  will  be  informed.  The  same  questionnaire  will  be  used  at 
baseline, mid-term and completion. It shall comprise three different parts: Module 
A:  IFAD  Empowerment  survey  questionnaire;  Module  B:  PPI  questionnaire;  and 
Module C: Additional questionnaire. (See Chapter 2.B for details). Some qualitative 
data will also be collected during these quantitative surveys through key informants’ 
interviews in order to provide additional insights useful to interpret the results of the 
quantitative survey (see Annex 16 and 17 for sample interview guides).  
  Self-assessments  and  other  surveys.  In  order  to  collect  essential  data  on 
farmers’  incomes,  production,  profits,  and  poverty  status,  the  PMU  will  use  the 
following tools. 
−  Longitudinal studies on incomes and production. Key production, income and profit data 
will be regularly collected from all supported farmers (i.e. at the end of each agricultural season 
of  the  concerned  commodity)  by  Basic  Skills  Facilitators  (BSF),  using  the  information 
maintained  by  beneficiary  farmers  in  their  farmers’  diaries  (see  chapter 2.B).Once  collected, 
these  data  will be analyzed  in order  to  understand major  trends  by  value  chain,  commodity, 
cluster and corridor in terms of increase in production, incomes and profits, among others, for 
supported  farmers.  For  each  farmer,  the  first  data  thus  collected  will  serve  as  baseline. 
Overtime, the longitudinal data recorded in the MIS will enable the PMU to track and quantify 
the changes in beneficiaries’ farming incomes and profits, as well as a means to identify highly 
successful farmers and least successful farmers for the preparation of case studies. At mid-
term and completion, these data will also be used to cross-reference the data collected through 
the independent quantitative surveys. 
−  Longitudinal studies on poverty status. Using the PPI methodology (see Chapter 2.B), the 
BSF  will  also  collect  data  that  will  allow  the  characterization  of  the  poverty  status  of  each 
beneficiary. In other words, BSF will administer a PPI questionnaire each time a new farmer is 
selected  (in  order  to  collect  baseline  data),  this  exercise  being  repeated  at  mid-term  and 
completion. Data thus collected from all project beneficiaries will be used measure changes, 
overtime, in the poverty status of project beneficiaries and it will be useful to cross-reference 
the results of the quantitative survey. 
−  Annual Cluster Tracking Surveys (ACTS). Each year, the PMU will organize ACTS in order 
to  collect  the  key  qualitative  and  quantitative  information  necessary  to  understand  project 
impact  on  production,  farm  incomes  and  profits,  and  more  generally  on  the  performance  of 
each supported value chain and cluster.  
  These tools and others, are further described in Chapter 2B. 
Risks’ monitoring 
  Several  assumptions  were  made  while designing  the  project  and  key  assumptions 
are identified in the Logframe. These are the critical success factors in the external 
project environment that, if not realized, may compromise project success. They will 
thus need to be monitored as part of a risk management strategy and will be included 
in the risk management matrix to be developed upon project start. 
  In addition, the PMU will need to monitor the key social and environmental risks that 
have been identified at design stage in the ESMP matrix (See Appendix 18), such as 
the following: 
67 
−  Environmental risks: Potential threat to forest and biodiversity resources including: 
Encroachment or expansion of agriculture in forest area; Excessive harvesting of 
forest  products  and  open  grazing;  Increasing  water  pollution;  Improper  waste 
management;  Land  and  soil  degradation;  Threat  from  introduction  of  exotic 
varieties and breeds. 
−  Social  risks:  Potential  increase  on the workload  on  women  (especially  from  road 
maintenance activities) ;  Within high risk communities negative social dynamics 
from  greater  social  and  economic  empowerment  of  women;  Investment  failing 
(Depletion of HH assets and livelihoods' base to the point where they can no longer 
recover; Indebtness by loan beneficiaries unable to repay their loans). 
−  Climate change: Flood and landslide; Drought; water shortage; Change in disease 
timing and outbreaks; Occurrence of windstorms; Heat stress. 
   For  each  key  risk,  the  ESMP  matrix  identifies  at  least  one  key  indicator.  Such 
indicators  were  included  in  the  regular  M&E  Matrix  (See  Annex  3)  and  will  be 
periodically measured and analysed. 
Performance targets and results’ indicators 
  The detailed project Logframe (see Annex 1) will serve as the main reference for the 
monitoring  and  measurement  of  project  results,  while  the  summary  Logframe 
included in the PDD will remain the key reference for IFAD supervision missions. The 
Logframe is also the reference against which service providers’ performance will be 
assessed. The service providers’ contracts will therefore need to include in annex a 
clear results’ framework (or “mini” Component Logframe), that will clearly spell out 
and quantified all expected outputs and intended outcomes as well as the agreed-
upon AWPB24. 
  M&E  activities  will  aim  at  collecting  the  primary  data  that  will  help  measure  all 
Logframe  indicators.  The  type  of  primary  data  required,  and  the  methods  and 
frequency of data collection, are summarized in the M&E matrix presented in Annex 
3.  While output indicators will be measured in a continuous basis through routine 
M&E activities, outcome indicators will be measured annually after the 2nd year of 
implementation start. As for impact indicators, they will be measured at mid-term 
and completion, and compared with baseline data. 
  Quantitative targets have been assigned to key impact and outcome-level indicators. 
These targets will be the reference against which project overall performance will be 
assessed at completion. Key impact-level indicators are summarized in the Logframe.  
The IFAD ORMS 
  Since 2005, IFAD has adopted an Operational Results Management System (ORMS) 
that  aims  to  aggregate  the  results  achieved  across  projects  and  countries  and  to 
report them to IFAD’s constituency. Measurement and reporting concerns only two 
levels  of  results:  outputs  and  outcomes.  The  system  defines  a  list  of  standard 
indicators25  which  need  to  be  included  in  projects’  Logframes  and  M&E  systems, 
when  relevant,  and  against  which  annual  targets  and  achievements  need  to  be 
reported annually by all on-going projects. 
  Relevant ORMS indicators were included in VITA’s summary and detailed Logframes 
and are summarized in Annex 9. Each year, the PMU will be responsible to prepare 
and submit to IFAD updated ORMS data (annual targets and actual achievements; 
overall targets and cumulative achievements to date) using the template provided in 
Annex 11. In Year 1 and Year 2, reporting will be limited to output indicators, while 
starting Year 2 or Year 3, ORMS outcome indicators will also be reported upon. 
Key M&E actors 
  The following actors will play a major role in M&E activities: 
24 The contract will include a results’ framework for SP deliverables, and, on this basis, an AWPB will be prepared every year by the 
SPs. The final, agreed-upon AWPB will be annexed to the contract and will become binding. 
25 See IFAD website for ORMS guidelines and indicators’ definition: https://webapps.ifad.org/members/ec/96/docs/EC-
2017-96-W-P-7.pdf. 
68 
−  Individual farmers: Farmers  will  be  trained  to  maintain  Farmers’  Diaries,  with  the 
twin  objective  of  building  their  business  management  capacities  and  recording 
information  that  will  help  monitor  project  outcomes  and  impact  (e.g.  data  on 
production, sales, incomes, profits). 
−  Farmers’ groups: Through their records (membership records, meeting attendance 
sheets,  collective  sales’  records,  animal  insurance  records,  etc.),  supported  farmers’ 
groups  will  collect  key  data  that  will  also  be  used  to  monitor  project  outreach  and 
groups’ institutional maturity. 
−  Business Skills Facilitators (BSF): BSF will play an essential role in the collection 
of primary data from farmers’ diaries or during the conduct of various surveys. To this 
end, BSF will receive specific training and will be equipped with electronic tablets so 
that captured data is immediately uploaded into the MIS. They will be paid on a task-
wise basis to collect and enter the required data. 
−  Heifer  and  local  NGO  Partners:  As  a  key  project  partner  responsible  for 
implementation of Component 1.1 and 1.3, Heifer will be responsible for the collection, 
consolidation  and  submission  of  agreed-upon  activity,  output  and  outreach  data.  To 
this  end,  Heifer  will  use  its  own  staff,  M&E  processes  and  tools,  including  quality 
assurance for the data collected by partner NGOs. The standard outcome and output 
indicators used by Heifer at a corporate level have been included to the extent possible 
in the detailed VITA Logframe in order to minimize data collection and reporting efforts 
for the partner. 
−  Other  Service  Providers:  Selected  service  providers  (e.g.  Trainers)  and  project 
implementers will have the direct responsibility of collecting, compiling and recording 
data on activities and outreach, and of preparing periodic activity reports. 
−  Contractors:    The  private  compagnies  selected  under  Component  3  for  the 
construction or rehabilitation of strategic market-access infrastructure will be to record 
and  compile  data  on  activities  and  work  progress,  and  to  submit  periodic  activity 
reports. 
−  ADBL Branch staff: Branch Loan Officers will play a prominent role for the monitoring 
of Component 2, being responsible for the loan application process. They will receive 
specific training to ensure that loan applications of VITA clients are properly filled so 
that the profile of these clients can be adequately monitored.  
−  ADBL Central Business Monitoring Cell: The Cell will play a leading role in preparing 
period activity reports for Component 2. 
−  PMU M&E Specialist. The M&E Specialist will be ultimately responsible of the quality 
and efficiency of the project M&E system, ensuring that it delivers reliable and timely 
information  on  implementation  performance,  results  and  impact. The  M&E  Specialist 
will also be responsible to verify the reliability of the data provided from the various 
actors through periodic field visits and random verification. 
−  Programme  Management  Unit  (PMU).  While  the  Programme  Coordinator  will  be 
responsible  to  use  M&E  findings  to  take  informed  management  decisions  and  steer 
project implementation, the PMU technical staff will be required to keep proper records 
for the monitoring of all the activities under their respective responsibility. For these 
activities, they will also be responsible to ensure that implementation pace is according 
to  schedule  and  outputs  timely  delivered.  They  will  be  responsible  for  verifying  the 
data submitted by the various service providers, before this data is entered in the MIS 
or submitted to the M&E Specialist for consolidation. 
−  PMU Infrastructure Specialist: The PMU Infrastructure Specialist will be responsible 
for  maintaining  proper  records  related  to  infrastructure  works  (contracts,  activity 
the  performance  of  each  service 
reports,  etc.) 
provider/contractors, their compliance with contracts’ provisions (quality norms, bills 
of quantities, etc.) and with agreed calendar of activities. He/she will be responsible 
that  will  help  monitor 
69 
for  verifying  the  data  submitted  by  contractors  through  their  activity  reports  before 
this data is entered in the MIS. 
−  PMU  Knowledge  Management  Expert:  The  KM  Expert  will  actively  support  the 
transformation of M&E findings into practical knowledge, while supporting the design 
of  qualitative  surveys  or  case  studies  to  document  lessons  learned  or  in  order  to 
understand key success factors or reasons for failure of certain approaches. 
−  PMU Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist: The Specialist will support the 
M&E Specialist in the design and conduct of specific studies aimed at an in-depth at 
assessing  the manner  in  which  project activities may  have  contributed  to  the socio-
economic  empowerment  of  women  and  the  youth.  Also,  he/she  will  play  a  role  in 
ensuring that the intended target groups are being effectively reached by the project 
in the manner intended, through the regular analysis of outreach data. 
5.3  Detailed M&E tools and processes 
5.3.1  Tools and processes for the monitoring of execution 
  While the data required for the proper monitoring of project execution is presented 
in  Chapter  3,  the  next  paragraphs  present  the  key  data  collection  tools  and 
processes. 
Data collection tools 
Producers’ groups’ records 
  Farmers’ Groups will play an active role in the collection of primary data on project 
activities  and  outputs.  Thus,  supported  Farmers’  Groups  or  cooperatives  will  be 
requested  to  maintain  a  number  of  registries/books  in  which  they  will  record 
important  information  related  to  the  group  itself  (membership,  frequency  of 
meetings, etc.) and the type of services or capacity building support received from 
the project or other service providers. For farmers’ groups able to provide services 
to their members (e.g. extension, bulk marketing, input supply), specific registries 
will  also  be  kept  in  order  to  record  key  data  (e.g.  number  of  members  receiving 
services, volume of production storied and sold, etc.). Some of the information thus 
recorded by Farmers’ Groups will be periodically collected by the BSF and uploaded 
in the PMU MIS. Some templates are provided in Annex 7 and 19, while the complete 
set  shall  be  developed  during  the  first  three  months  of  implementation,  once  all 
commodities have been selected. 
Service providers’ and implementation partners’ records and reports 
  Each time a given service provider will implement a given intervention (e.g. capacity 
building  support,  training)  or  deliver  a  specific  output  (e.g.  a  study),  the  service 
provider or partner will be required to appropriately record key information (e.g. list 
of trainees, quantity of inputs delivered). At agreed upon intervals, this information 
will be consolidated and presented in activity reports, to be submitted to the PMU. 
Such  M&E  and  reporting  requirements  shall  be  clearly  identified  in  the  service 
providers’  contracts  or  implementation  partners’  memorandum  of  understanding, 
together with the list of key deliverables and timetable for implementation. Activity 
reports containing consolidated data on activities, outputs and outreach will be sent 
to the PMU M&E Specialist for final consolidation and analysis. 
  Some templates of data collection tools are provided in Annex 7 and 19, while the 
complete set shall be developed during the first three months of implementation. 
Business Skills facilitators and Socio-economic Mobilizers' records  
  Each time Socio-economic mobilizers (SEM) and BSF will implement a given activity, 
they will be required to record key information (e.g. the number of groups mobilized, 
number  of  farmers  trained,  beneficiaries’  profile,  number  of  farmers  or  groups 
mentored).  To  this  end,  they  will  use  the  following  templates  (i)  Cluster  meeting 
minutes,  including  list  of  participants;  (ii)  BSF  training  report,  including  list  of 
trainees; (iii) B2B meetings minutes, including list of participants) (See also Annex 
70 
7 and 19). Once recorded, this information will be uploaded by the BSF into the PMU 
MIS via electronic tablets. 
 ADBL MIS and loan applications 
  All data required for the monitoring of Component 2 will be tracked by the ADBL MIS, 
using the standard tools and processes of ADBL, with all primary data collected by 
local branch staff from clients’ loan applications and clients’ records. In order to track 
VITA  beneficiaries  specifically,  a  few  adaptations  to  ADBL  central  database  (also 
known as “core banking system”) will be required (see chapter 3.B). The standard 
ADBL  reporting  process  will  also  be  followed  for  Component  2,  with  the  Central 
Business Monitoring Cell of ADBL playing a leading role in the preparation of monthly, 
quarterly and annual activity reports. 
  The  standard  loan  application  template  used  by  ADBL  branches  will  require  a  few 
adaptations (which will also be reflected in ADBL core banking system), in order to 
allow for the monitoring of the IFAD loan funds to be on lent to VITA target groups. 
Mostly, the loan applications template will require the following new fields: (i) name, 
sex  and  age  of  intended  loan  user26;  (ii)  VITA  beneficiary  number27;  (iii)  VITA 
commodity code28; (iv) Intended purpose of loan29. 
Contractors’ reports 
  All the construction compagnies contracted to build or rehabilitate markets, roads or 
irrigation  schemes  under  Component  3  will  be  required  to  prepare  weekly  and 
monthly  activity  reports  and  submit them  to  the  PMU Engineer,  who  will have  the 
primary  responsibility  of  works’  monitoring  and  supervision.    Importantly,  all 
engineering  plans  or  drawings  shall  clearly  estimate  the  capacity  of  such 
infrastructure (in terms of number of expected users). All monitoring and reporting 
requirements shall be clearly stipulated in contractors’ contracts, including standard 
reporting templates. Every month, the PMU Infrastructure Specialist will consolidate 
the  detailed  data  extracted  from  contractors’  activity  reports  and  submit  it  to  the 
PMU  M&E  Specialist,  using  some  of the  templates  presented in  Annex  7. The PMU 
Infrastructure  Specialist  will  have  the  primary  responsibility  to  verify  and  validate 
the information provided by contractors, through regular field inspection visits (upon 
which a supervision and inspection report shall be prepared). 
Performance evaluation 
  On  the  basis  of  the  monthly  MIS  reports,  and  the  consolidation  of  the  quarterly 
reports  prepared  by  the  various  service  providers  and  project  implementers,  the 
assessment  of  project  implementation  performance  will  be  done  on  a  weekly, 
monthly, quarterly and annual basis, using the following processes: 
−  Weekly PMU meetings: Every week and under the leadership of the PMU Director, selected 
PMU staff will meet to discuss the main activities and tasks carried out during the past 2 weeks 
and the main activities to be undertaken until the end of the month.  
−  Monthly  coordination  meetings:  At the  end  of each  month,  a  coordination meeting  will be 
organized with the participation of all PMU staff and selected implementation partners (as and 
when required, e.g. ADBL staff from other Departments or local branch staff). These meetings 
will provide an opportunity to discuss monthly progress against physical and financial targets, 
26 The rationale is as follows: when a woman needs a loan, she usually needs to use her husband’s name in  the loan 
application as only men usually have land titles and can therefore avail the necessary collateral. Unless the name and 
sex of the intended or actual loan beneficiary is recorded in the loan application, together with the name of the person 
whose collateral is being used, VITA M&E system will not be able to track the actual number of women accessing a loan. 
27 This is the unique beneficiary code provided to Component 1 beneficiaries. Unless this code is being captured in the 
loan application, the M&E system will not be able to easily track the number of Component 1 beneficiaries also accessing 
a financial product or service under Component 2. 
28 This additional field will allow ADBL MIS to produce specific reports for each commodity supported by the project. 
29  Although  this  field  may  already  exist  in  ADBL  loan  applications,  it  would  be  useful  if  a  standard  list/menu  of  “loan 
purposes” could be developed by VITA PMU, in order to ensure consistency in the way ADBL Branch Officer will record 
it in the core banking system (for example: land acquisition, land improvement, livestock investments, agricultural inputs 
purchase, housing improvement, agricultural equipment purchase, SME development, processing equipment purchase, 
transportation means, etc.) 
71 
challenges  and  difficulties  encountered  as  well  as  mitigating  measures  envisaged.  Meeting 
minutes will be prepared. 
−  Annual provincial performance review workshops. At the end of each year, a workshop will 
be  organized  in  each  state  by  the  PMU  with  the  participation  of  all  PMU  staff,  key  service 
providers, project implementers and local branch staff (e.g. local Supply Chain Coordinators) 
and  other  key  stakeholders.  The  purpose  will  be  to  review  past  year  experience,  compare 
achievements with physical and financial targets and reflect on performance, challenges and 
solutions. The results of outcome surveys, when available, shall be presented, and targeting 
performance, outreach and gender issues will also be discussed. During these workshops, next 
year targets will also be discussed and decided (see chapter “Planning”). 
Data verification 
the  construction  compagnies  contracted 
  The primary responsibility for verifying that the data provided by service providers, 
implementation  partners  and 
for 
infrastructure development will lie with each PMU technical/sector Specialists (e.g. 
Infrastructure Specialist, Provincial Coordinators, Social Inclusion Specialist) before 
their consolidation and submission to the M&E Specialist or entry into the PMU MIS.  
  The  PMU  M&E  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  periodically  verifying  that  the 
information  provided  by  the  various  project  implementers,  service  providers, 
concerned PMU staff and BSF regarding activities, outputs and outreach, as entered 
in  the  MIS,  is  correct  and  truthful.  To  this  end,  unannounced  field  visits  will  be 
organized at least once every 2 months. On these occasions, the M&E Specialist will 
randomly compare MIS data with the primary data recorded in beneficiaries’ records 
or will verify that the reported activities have taken place in the manner described in 
the various progress reports. Observations, interviews with project beneficiaries and 
focus  groups  discussions  will  be  other methods used  by  the  M&E  Specialist  during 
these  field  visits  in  order  to  verify  that  undertaken  activities  are  relevant  to 
beneficiaries’ needs and are producing the expected results. Such field visits may be 
jointly undertaken with other PMU technical staff (e.g. Infrastructure Specialist), who 
will  verify  that  the  activities  under  their  responsibilities  are  technically  sound,  the 
extension  methods  appropriate  or  that  infrastructure  works  are  according  to 
technical  specifications.  When  possible,  the  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  should  also 
join  these field visits to  examine  targeting  issues.  At  the end  of  these  field  visits, 
observations,  remarks  and  recommendations  will  be  recorded  in  a mission  report, 
which will be discussed during monthly coordination meetings. 
5.3.2  Tools and processes for the measurement of outcomes and impact 
IFAD Core Indicators in VITA 
  Since  2017,  IFAD  has  adopted  a  Core  Indicators  (CIs)  framework    to  make  its 
corporate  results  reporting  more  strategic,  robust,  simpler  and  effectively 
mainstreamed  in  project  M&E  systems.  All  investment  project  can  have  a  mix  of 
project-specific indicators and CIs.  
  The CIs consist of 1 outreach, 22 outcome and 20 output indicators for programme 
to  choose  from.  These  are  mapped  to  the  strategic  objectives  (SOs)  and  areas  of 
thematic focus of IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025; they are also aligned with 
the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  defined  in  the  2030  Agenda.  A  core 
aspect of the CIs is that they are easily integrated into project logframes and can be 
aggregated  across  projects  and  countries  to  facilitate  corporate  reporting.  CIs  are 
mandatory  whenever  relevant  to  the  project  Theory  of  Change  (ToC),  and  can  be 
complemented by project-specific indicators (PSIs). For VITA, the CIs included in the 
logrframe are clearly marked as “CIs” with the corresponding CI number.  
  VITA is expected to report on a total of 30 CIS, of which 17 are in the main logframe 
with quantitative targets and an additional 13 will be reported on but are not in the 
main logframe and will not have ex-ante quantitative targets set. 
  For  measurement  and  reporting  on  the  Core  Outcome  Indicators  (COI)  within  its 
logframe,  VITA  will  follow  the  approved  IFAD  COI  Guidelines  in  terms  of  the 
instruments and methodologies used for data collection and analysis.  
72 
  VITA logframe includes a total of 17 CIs: 
  1 Outreach core indicators 
  8 Outcome core indicators 
  8 Output core indicators 
  Of which mandatory and/or mainstreaming indicators are a total of 7. This are shown 
in bold in the table below.   
VITA Core Indicators in Logrframe 
Outreach 
1 Number of persons receiving services promoted or supported by the programme - of whom: 
60% women, 30% youth, 25% dalit/janajati;  
1.a. Corresponding number of distinct households 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households’ members. 
Outcome 
CI IE.2.1: Percentage of women smallholder producer demonstrating an improvement in 
empowerment (IFAD empowerment indicator) 
CI 1.2.8: Percentage of women reporting Minimum Dietary Diversity 
CI 3.2.2: Percentage of small-scale producers adopting environmentally sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies and practices. 
CI SF.2.1: (Number) Percentage of households satisfied with project-supported services 
CI SF.2.2: (Number) Percentage of households reporting they can influence decision-making of 
local authorities and project-supported service providers 
CI 2.2.6 Number of farmers reporting improved physical access to markets, processing or storage 
facilities in locations where such infrastructure was delivered.    
CI 1.2.6 Percentage of partner financial institutions (PFIs) with a portfolio-at-risk ≥30 days below 
5% . 
CI Policy Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for 
approval, ratification or amendment 
Outputs 
CI 1.1.8 Persons provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
CI 1.1.5: Number of small-scale producers accessing financial services supported by the 
programme. Of whom: women = 50%, youth = 35% 
CI 2.1.6 Number of market infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated.  
CI 1.1.2 Hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated  
CI 2.1.4: Number of small-scale producers who are members of a group  
CI 1.1.7 Number of small-scale producers trained in financial literacy. 
CI 2.1.2 Number of persons trained in business skills.  
CI Policy: Percentage of established multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs) that are functional and 
self-sustaining .  
IFAD CIs for reporting only  
  In addition to the CIs in the main logframe, VITA will be able to routinely report on 
around 13 additional CIs – as listed below. VITA will report on these to the extent 
possible within the available time and budgets of the M&E activities.  
  Quantitative targets will not be set in the main logframe for these indicators for one 
or more of the following reasons: 
insufficient room in the logframe given limit on number of indicators 
  methodological difficulties to define relevant quantitative target 
73 
risk  that  setting  a  quantitative  target  may  negatively  affecting  programme 
management  and impacts e.g.  programme  mobilizes  large  numbers  of  small 
producer groups to meet target but making group too small to be sustainable. 
VITA Core Indicators for reporting only 
Outcome 
1.2.2  (Number)  Percentage  of  persons/households  reporting  adoption  of 
new/improved inputs, technologies or practices 
1.2.4.  (Number)  Percentage  of  persons/households  reporting  an  increase  in 
production 
1.2.5. Percentage of persons/households reporting using rural financial services 
2.2.1 Number of new jobs created in agricultural / farm enterprises 
2.2.3.  (Number)  Percentage  of  rural  producers’  organizations  engaged  in  formal 
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private entities 
2.2.4.  (Number)  Percentage  of  supported  rural  producers’  organization  members 
reporting new or improved services provided by their organization 
2.2.5. (Number) Percentage of rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase 
in sales 
Outputs 
1.1.3  Number  of  rural  producers  accessing  production  inputs  and/or  technological 
packages 
1.1.4 Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies 
1.1.6  Number  of  financial  service  providers  supported  in  delivering  outreach 
strategies, financial products and services to rural area 
2.1.3 Number of rural producers’ organizations supported 
2.1.5 Number of kilometres of roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded 
Policy 3: Number of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
Data collection tools 
  The  following  sections  describes  the  specific  tools  that  will  be  used  for  the 
measurement of outcomes and impact. 
Farmers’ diaries 
  For all beneficiary farmers, the PMU will measure farming incomes, production levels 
and sales (from selected commodities) on an annual basis, once farmers have started 
the production of one of the supported commodities. It is thus proposed to build on 
the opportunity offered by the fact that, under Component 1, beneficiary farmers will 
be  required  to  maintain  a  diary  to  record  expenditures,  production,  sales  or  net 
profit, among others, in order to strengthen or develop their business skills. To this 
effect,  the  PMU  will  design,  print  and  distribute  these  diaries  to  each  beneficiary 
farmer and all will be trained on their proper use. 
  The primary data recorded by farmers themselves will be collected at the end of each 
agricultural  season  and/or  during  cluster  meetings  by  the  BSF,  using  electronic 
tablets. The detailed data to be recorded in farmers’ diaries will vary slightly for each 
commodity and the diaries’ content will be fine-tuned and field-tested by the PMU 
technical  Specialists  and  the  M&E  Specialist  during  the  first  6  months  of 
implementation,  once  all  commodities have  been  identified.  The  key  data  that  will 
be  required  is  presented  in  Chapter 3.A.,  while  some examples  of farmers’  diaries 
are provided in Annex 19.  
Baseline surveys 
  The conduct of a baseline survey is a critical exercise whose objective is to describe 
and  document  the  socio-economic  and  livelihoods  conditions  of  VITA  beneficiaries 
prior  to  the  start  of  project  interventions.  This  information  will,  at  mid-term  and 
completion, become the reference against which to measure changes, and therefore 
appreciate project outcomes and impact, or lack thereof. 
74 
  As  soon  as  a  large  number  enough  of  beneficiaries  in  all  states  will  have  been 
selected under Component 1 (e.g. at least some 5,000 persons), a baseline survey 
will  be  undertaken  by  an  independent  consulting  firm  selected  through  a  call  for 
proposals.  A  representative  sample  will  be  selected  from  this  initial  set  of 
beneficiaries, taking into account the need for the sample to include the adequate 
proportion of male, female, youth and janajatis from the various states. For ethical30 
and  methodological31  reasons,  no  control  group  will  be  used.  The  sampling 
methodology suggested in Annex 12 shall be fine-tuned by the consulting firm and 
fully described in a methodological note at the onset of the survey. 
  The  baseline  survey  will  use  a  questionnaire  comprised  of  three  distinct  parts  or 
modules (some of which will require sophisticated skills for the analysis), as follows:  
−  Module A – IFAD empowerment indicator survey: Inspired by the simplified 
Pro-WEAI, this is a new survey-based index for measuring empowerment, capacity 
to act and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector.  An approved version of the 
questionnaire will be used by VITA to measure the level of empowerment versus 
the IFAD empowerment index (see logframe target).  
VITA  will  adopt  the  approved  survey  instruments  for  measuring  the  IFAD 
empowerment indicator, in line with the requirement for measuring Core Outcome 
Indicators.  
At  the  time  of  VITA  design,  it  is  understood  that  this  will  be  adapted  from  the 
simplified  pro-WEAI.  The  simplified  pro-WEAI  was  developed  jointly  by  the 
International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute (IFPRI)  and  other  partners.  The  tool 
helps  assess  women’s  empowerment  in  a  project  setting,  diagnose  areas  of 
women’s disempowerment and monitor project outcomes.  
A  new  version  of  the  questionnaire  and  empowerment  index  tools  is  being 
developed by IFAD. This new version should be available at the programme start 
for use by the selected consulting firm. If required, IFAD Headquarters’ technical 
support may be provided to the PMU (e.g. to calculate the composite indicator).  
The questionnaire used by VITA will also include the relevant modules to measure 
the Minimum Dietary Diversity – Women (MDD-W) score. This will be based on the 
approved tools in line with the IFAD Core Indicator guidelines.  
−  Module  B  -  PPI  questionnaire:  The  Poverty  Probability  Index  (PPI)  is  a  tool 
developed by the Grameen Foundation and the Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)32 
to  measure  targeting  effectiveness  (i.e.  the  proportion  of  beneficiaries  who  live 
below the poverty line) and track beneficiaries’ poverty levels overtime. The Module 
will  use  a  standard  questionnaire  of  10  questions  about  a  household’s 
characteristics  and  asset  ownership. Using  a  standard  methodology,  answers will 
be scored to compute the likelihood that the household is living below the poverty 
line. The PPI is country-specific and a version was developed for Nepal; it can be 
downloaded from the PPI Website33. 
−  Module C: Additional questionnaire. The third module will be a questionnaire of 
about 20 questions that will help measure all the impact-level and outcome-level 
indicators identified in the detailed logframe presented in Annex 1 on domains and 
issues  not  covered  by  Module  A  and  B.  The  key  variables  to  be  measured  are 
tentatively described in Annex 12. 
30 It could be considered to be unethical to ask non-beneficiary households to waste their time answering survey questions 
solely for research purposes, i.e. to compare their situation to the conditions of households who have received project 
support. 
31 In the Nepal context, the search for the perfect control group may simply be too time-consuming and costly, and the 
risks of selecting an imperfect one quite high. 
32 Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) and Ford Foundation. Their goal was to create an easy-to-use poverty measurement 
tool for microfinance institutions, understanding that these institutions nee 
33 https://www.povertyindex.org/country/nepal 
75 
  Collection  of  additional  baseline  data.  Because  the  first  project  beneficiaries 
selected  during  year  1  are  likely  to  be  “first  movers”,  thereby  less  risk-adverse 
farmers who are likely to be slightly better-off than the average poor farmers, the 
baseline data collected through the Year 1 baseline survey may not be representative 
of the entire group of project beneficiaries. For this reason, additional baseline data 
will  also  be  collected  on  a  continuous  basis  by  the  BSF,  as  and  when  a  new  VITA 
beneficiary will be officially selected. The project will thus follow a system of "rolling 
baseline" which will help obtain solid baseline data from the entire group of project 
beneficiaries. This will be done by asking BSF to collect, upon the selection of each 
beneficiary, essential data on: (i) current production, income, sales and farm profit 
(using farmers’ diaries); (ii) poverty profile (using the PPI questionnaire); and (iii) 
Other  baseline  data  using  Module  C.  It  will  be  important  that  this  information  is 
collected right upon beneficiary’s selection, that is before the start of any intervention 
targeted at this beneficiary. 
  Finally, additional baseline data on beneficiaries selected in Year 3, will be collected 
at the same time as the conduct of the mid-term survey. To this end, the sample of 
the  mid-term  survey  will  include  a  number  of  new  beneficiaries  (i.e.  beneficiaries 
selected in year 3 and not having yet benefited from any project intervention). The 
rationale is that the beneficiaries who will only have joined project implementation 
in  Year  3  are  likely  to  be  poorer  than  the  “early  movers”,  and  the  baseline  data 
collected by the independent source should also concern this group.   
Mid-term and completion surveys 
  The mid-term and final surveys will also be conducted by an external consultant that 
may be the same as for the baseline survey, depending on the quality of the baseline 
survey  report34.  A  representative  sample  will  be  selected  from  the  entire  group  of 
project  beneficiaries,  taking  into  account  the  need  for  the  sample  to  include  the 
adequate  proportion  of  :  (i)  male,  female,  youth  and  janajatis  from  the  various 
states; (ii) beneficiaries joining project implementation in Year 1, Year 2 and Year 3; 
(iii) beneficiaries benefiting from all project interventions (C1+C2) or only from C2 
(microfinance  only).  The  sampling  methodology  provided  in  Annex  12,  to  be fine-
tuned by the consulting firm, will be broadly followed to select the survey sample. 
Again, no control group will be used for ethical35 and methodological36 reasons. 
  In the localities selected for the surveys, the survey supervisors will also be charged 
to  collect  some  qualitative  data  through  key  informants’  interviews  in  order  to 
provide additional insights useful to interpret the results of the quantitative survey 
(see Annex 12 for details).  
  The  results  of  the  quantitative  mid-term  and  completion  surveys  shall  be  used  to 
cross-reference the data collected by the PMU through its M&E system to inform key 
logframe indicators.  
  The  following  table  summarizes  the  process  for  the  conduct  of  the  baseline,  mid-
term and completion surveys. 
34 If the same consultant is to be contracted for the three surveys, the contract shall include a clause stating that decision 
to continue the contract for subsequent survey will be based on the satisfactory performance of the consultant with the 
previous survey 
35 It could be considered to be unethical to ask non-beneficiary households to waste their time answering survey questions 
solely for research purposes, i.e. to compare their situation to the conditions of households who have received project 
support. 
36 In the Nepal context, the search for the perfect control group may simply be too time-consuming and costly, and the 
risks of selecting an imperfect one quite high. 
76 
Proposed process for baseline, mid-term and completion surveys 
1) Baseline data  
A) Baseline survey  
Module A – IFAD empowerment questionnaire 
Module B - PPI questionnaire 
Module C - Additional questionnaire 
B) Rolling baseline data collected by BSFs  
Module B - PPI questionnaire 
Module C - Additional questionnaire/farmers' 
diaries 
2) Impact data 
A) Mid-term survey 
Module A - IFAD empowerment questionnaire 
Module B - PPI questionnaire 
Module C - Additional questionnaire 
B) Final survey (sample) 
Module A -  IFAD empowerment questionnaire 
Module B - PPI questionnaire 
Module C - Additional questionnaire 
C) Impact data collected by BSFs 
Module B - PPI questionnaire 
Module C -  Additional questionnaire/farmers' 
diaries 
Annual cluster tracking surveys 
Sample 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Responsibility 
Y1 beneficiaries 
Independent firm 
N/A (ALL beneficiaries) 
Y1&2 beneficiaries (for impact 
data) and Y3 beneficiaries (for 
baseline data) 
Y1 ,2 and 3 beneficiaries in 
appropriate proportion  
N/A (ALL beneficiaries)  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
BSFs 
Independent firm 
Independent firm 
  Starting  from  Year  2,  an  Annual  Cluster  Tracking  Survey  (ACTS)  will  be  organized 
and managed by the PMU. The overall objective of the survey will be to assess and 
evaluate on a regular basis the development, functionality and performance of each 
cluster  and  corridor  and  to  assess  the  level  of  satisfaction  of  the  various  clusters’ 
actors, including farmers, with project implementation. 
  This  survey  will  combine  data  from:  (i)  individual  farm  households  collected  via 
tablet-based  MIS  by  the  BSF  from  all  C1  beneficiaries;  (ii)  a  Trader  and  service 
provider  tracking  survey  in  each  cluster;  (iii)  secondary  data  (e.g.  municipal 
agricultural production data, area cultivated), when available.  
  The  detailed  content  of  the  Trader  and  service  provider  tracking  survey  will  be 
developed  during  the  first  year  of  implementation  by  the  M&E  Specialist,  in  close 
cooperation with the PMU technical Specialists. The purpose of this survey will be to: 
(i) monitor the number and types of traders, service providers and other actors being 
actively involved in project activities and the multi-stakeholders’ platform in order to 
understand if, in each cluster, the appropriate dynamic is taking place; (ii) to quantify 
the  number  of  formal  and  informal  contracts  or  agreements  that  have  been 
established between farmers and traders/service providers in the current year.  
  The annual cluster surveys will also represent an opportunity to collect the secondary 
data from municipal or provincial authorities that will be required for the monitoring 
of the socio-environmental risks identified in the ESMP and for informing some of the 
indicators of the ESMP matrix. 
  The  full  methodology  of  the  ACTS  will  be  developed  and  field-tested  by  the  M&E 
Specialist during the first year of implementation, in close collaboration with the PMU 
technical Specialists. 
Other thematic surveys 
  As and when needed, thematic or qualitative surveys will also be carried out by the 
PMU  in  order  to  deepen  the  understanding  on  certain  aspects  or  results  (e.g.  the 
77 
results  of  training  or  capacity  building  activities;  the  functionality  of  Producers’ 
Groups; women or youth socio-economic empowerment). Their design may be jointly 
decided by the M&E Specialist, the KM Expert and the Gender Specialist, depending 
on the topic. The results of these surveys shall be a useful basis for the preparation 
of knowledge material and some of the topics shall be identified in the KM Strategy37. 
Performance evaluation 
  Two key processes will be used for the evaluation of project results and impact: self-
assessments led by the PMU M&E Specialist and two independent assessments led 
by IFAD. 
  Self-assessments: The data collected through farmers’ diaries will be continuously 
used  to  analyse  trends  and  value  chains’  performance.  The  MIS  will  generate 
performance dashboards at commodity, corridor, cluster and farmers’ groups’ levels 
in order to identify the corridors, clusters or farmers’ groups in need for additional 
support, or the most successful groups and farmers who could become case studies. 
The data will also be used by PMU Specialists in order to understand which are the 
most profitable commodities for poor and marginal farmers. In the course of project 
implementation,  a  specific  methodology  will  also  be  developed  to  assess  the 
institutional maturity of the farmers’ groups mentored by the project.  
  The findings of the various surveys will be used by the M&E Specialist and the entire 
PMU technical Specialists to reflect on overall project implementation, analyse trends 
and the likelihood to meet project objectives, in particular women and youth socio-
economic empowerment.  
  Throughout  project  implementation,  self-assessment  exercises  will  also  be 
conducted when required (e.g. thematic workshops) in order to reflect on key lessons 
learned and the determinants for project success or failure. Such lessons learned will 
be properly documented for wider knowledge dissemination (see Part C. Knowledge 
management).   
  IFAD mid-term and completion reviews: At mid-term and completion, IFAD will 
field  a  mid-term  review  and  a  project  completion  review  mission,  the  purpose  of 
which  will  be  to  assess  project  relevance,  effectiveness  and  efficiency,  as  well  as 
likelihood of sustainability of project results. These two missions will greatly rely on 
the results of the mid-term and completion impact surveys, respectively, and it will 
be  important  that  the  survey  reports  are  available  prior  to  the  missions’  start.  In 
preparation  for  the  completion  review  mission,  the  PMU  will  also  be  requested  to 
prepare its own Project Completion Report, using the outline provided in Annex 12 
(See also Part 3.C). 
37For example: “women-friendly IGA”; “how to reach out to poor women in traditional societies”; “effective service provision among 
nomadic pastoralists”; “microfinance for the ultra-poor”; “women socio and economic empowerment”. 
78 
5.4  Information Management and Reporting 
5.4.1  Detailed data requirements 
  The  following  chapters  present  the  detailed  data  requirements  for  the  proper 
monitoring of project execution and the measurement of outcomes and impact (i.e. 
the information that will need to be tracked by the M&E system and recorded by the 
PMU MIS). The M&E Plan presented in Annex 3 further describes the detailed tools 
and  responsibilities  for  data  collection,  consolidation  and  use,  as  well  as  the 
frequency for data collection. 
For the monitoring of project execution 
Data required for the monitoring of project execution 
Activities 
Data required (to be recorded in MIS) 
Data collection 
tool 
Responsibility  
− Number of provincial and cluster-level MSP meetings held annually, by cluster 
− Number and profile of MSP meetings’ participants (occupation, provenance, 
age, sex), by cluster 
− Number of Value Chain Action Plans prepared, revised, financed and 
completed 
− Number of B2B/B2S interactions/meetings held and number of farmers and 
traders/SP involved 
− Number of trading plans or agreements concluded, by cluster 
− Number of farmers and farmers’ groups with an agreed trading plan or 
agreement, by cluster 
− Number of farmers' groups mobilized 
− Number of farmers who are members of groups mobilized 
− Number of trainees and trainees’ profile (age, sex, poverty status, janajati)  
− Training topic and duration 
− Number of farmers provided with a farmers' diary and maintaining it 
− Number of farmers trained in production or post-harvest techniques 
− Number of grants’ proposals received, by types of recipient and purpose 
− Number and value of grants approved and disbursed, by types of recipient and 
purpose 
− Number of grants disbursed according to original schedule 
− Amount of USD withdrawn from the SDF 
− Number of funding proposals received, appraised and approved 
− Number of and type of public goods financed and delivered 
− Number of farmers directly benefiting from public goods investments 
− Number of traders, input suppliers or processors benefiting from public goods 
investments 
− Number of training events organized 
− Number of trainees and trainees’ profile (age, sex, employing institution)  
− Training topic and duration 
− Number of exposure visits 
− Number of persons participating in exposure visits 
− Number of farmers accessing financial services from the project windows: 
− (a) Number of persons accessing a loan from the Medium-Term Credit 
Window 
− (b) Number of persons accessing a loan from the Short-Term Credit Window 
− Amount of funds on-lent by ADBL from the Medium-Term Credit Window  
− Amount of funds on-lent by ADBL from the Medium-Term Credit Window 
− Amount of funds withdrawn from the FMGF 
− Number of persons benefiting from the FMGF 
− Amount of funds withdrawn from the CEPD Facility 
− Number of persons receiving capacity building support 
− Number of policy studies or initiatives financed 
Brokering and 
cluster 
facilitation 
Farmers’ training  
Sector 
Development 
Facility 
Capacity 
building for PMU 
and Bank staff 
Loan window 
First Movers 
Guarantee Fund  
Capacity 
Enhancement 
and Policy 
Development 
Facility  
Cluster meeting 
minutes 
PMU VC 
Specialist 
B2B meetings 
minutes or MoU 
BSF (using 
tablets) 
BSF and 
service 
providers’ 
training records 
BSF (using 
tablets) and 
service 
providers 
(through 
reports) 
SDF Manager 
records 
SDF Manager 
Trainers’ 
records 
− ADBL loan 
applications 
− ADBL clients’ 
records 
ADBL MIS 
CEPDF 
Manager 
records 
Trainers, 
Consultants, 
Service 
providers 
ADBL branch 
staff 
ADBL branch 
staff 
CEPDF 
Manager 
79 
Activities 
Data required (to be recorded in MIS) 
Data required for the monitoring of project execution 
Infrastructure 
− Quantities, material, labor, costs, works calendar (as per design and as 
deployed) 
− Infrastructure characteristics (e.g. length of roads; water reservoirs capacity) 
For each infrastructure scheme: 
− Date of scheme approval 
− Date of contract award 
− Feasibility study completion date (planned/realized) 
− Works’ start and completion dates (planned/realized) 
− Works’ execution rate at agreed intervals 
− Completion date of key construction steps (planned/realized) 
− Dates of pre-reception and final reception (planned/realized) 
− Number of minor and major reservations of works’ quality raised and cleared. 
− Dates of supervision visits by Municipal and PMU Infrastructure Specialist  
− Date of post-reception and final inspection visits by PMU infrastructure 
Specialist 
− Number of expected infrastructure users, by infrastructure  
− Number of infrastructure users also supported under Component 1 
Data collection 
tool 
Contractors’ 
reports 
Responsibility  
Contractors 
− Contractors’ 
reports 
− PMU 
supervision 
and inspection 
reports 
− Contractors 
− PMU 
Infrastructure 
Specialist 
PMU 
supervision and 
inspection 
reports 
Infrastructure 
feasibility 
studies 
PMU 
Infrastructure 
Specialist 
PMU 
Infrastructure 
Specialist 
For the measurement of outcomes and impact 
  As  mentioned  earlier  and  in  order  to  measure  and  monitor  early  outcomes,  all 
farmers supported under Component 1 will receive a diary in which they will record 
all  the  necessary  information  for  sound  farm  management,  such  as  the  one 
presented  in  the  next  table.  At  the  end  of  each  agricultural  season  (for  fruits, 
vegetables and potato seeds) or twice a year for livestock owners, the BSF will upload 
this information in the PMU MIS using electronic tablets. This will allow the PMU to 
assess farm-level profitability, by cluster, corridor and commodity. 
Data required for the measurement of farm profitability 
Commodity 
Data to be recorded in farmers’ diaries 
Bananas, 
citrus, 
coffee 
Vegetables, 
cereals 
Seed 
potatoes 
Goat, 
chicken 
(a) Costs: Initial land investment costs; Seedling costs; 
Fertilizers/chemical costs; Water charges; Labour costs; Other costs; (b) 
Production: Size of area planted (in ha); Quantity produced (in kg or 
tons) per season; (c) Sales: Quantity sold per season; Average price; 
Total income from sales; (d) Net profit from fruit production. 
a) Costs: Initial land investment costs; Sees’ costs; Fertilizers/chemical 
costs; Water charges; Labour costs; Other costs; (b) Production: Size of 
area planted (in ha); Quantity produced (in kg or tons) per season; (c) 
Sales: Quantity sold per season; Average price; Total income from sales; 
(d) Net profit from fruit production. 
(a) Costs: Initial land investment costs; Seeds’ costs; Fertilizers/chemical 
costs; Water charges; Labour costs; Other costs; (b) Production: Size of 
planted area (in ha); Quantity of potatoes produced (in kg or tons); 
Quantity of seeds potatoes; (c) Sales: Quantity sold as seed potatoes 
and average price; Quantity of potatoes sold and average price; Total 
income from seeds potatoes and potatoes; (d) Net profit: Total net 
annual income from seed potatoes. 
(a) Costs: Cost of new animal purchased; Feed costs; Veterinary fees; 
Vaccines and medicine; Barn/chicken farm infrastructure and equipment; 
Initial investments; Other costs; (b) Production: Number of productive 
animals; Average number of liters of milk/number of eggs produced 
annually; Number of new born animals; (c) Sales: Number of liters of 
Data to be recorded in central 
MIS annually 
For each farmer: 
− Area of land utilized  
− Total production costs 
− Total production volume  
− Total production volume sold 
− Total value of production sold 
− Total gross income and net profit 
For each farmer: 
− Area of land utilized  
− Total production costs 
− Total production volume  
− Total production volume sold 
− Total value of production sold 
80 
Commodity 
Data to be recorded in farmers’ diaries 
milk/animals (or number of eggs) sold and average price; (d) Net profit: 
Total net income from sale of milk and live animals. 
(a) Costs: Cost of new animal purchased; Feed costs; Veterinary fees; 
Vaccines and medicine; Dairy equipment purchase; Other costs; (b) 
Production: Number of productive cows; Average number of litres of milk 
produced annually; Number of kg of cheese produced annually; (c) 
Sales: Number of kg of cheese sold and average price; (d) Net profit: 
Total net income from sale of cheese. 
(a) Costs: Type, number and cost of new animal purchased; Investment 
costs (e.g. stable, water point); Feed costs; Veterinary fees; Vaccines 
and medicine; Dairy equipment purchase; Other costs; (b) Production: 
Number of new animals born, by type (c) Sales: Number of live animals 
sold, by type; Average price by type and age. 
Dairy  
Meat  
Data to be recorded in central 
MIS annually 
− Total gross income and net profit 
For each farmer: 
− Area of land utilized  
− Total production costs 
− Total production volume  
− Total production volume sold 
− Total value of production sold 
− Total gross income and net profit 
  So  that  both the  MTR  and  PCR  processes  can  be informed  by  reliable  quantitative 
data  on  outcomes  and  early  impact,  the  following  additional  outcome  and  impact 
data will also be required (see details in the Annex 3). 
Data required for the measurement of project outcomes and impact 
Aspects to be measured 
Tool 
Universe 
-   Beneficiaries’ poverty status 
PPI survey (by BSFs) 
Entire  universe  of 
beneficiaries 
-  Change in net farm income and change in return from 
labor for farmers 
-  Change in return from labor for farmers 
-  Change in aggregate value of production sold be farmers  
-  Change in total private investments in priority clusters 
and supply chains 
-  Change in women empowerment as per their IFAD 
empowerment score 
-  Change in assets’ ownership 
-  Change in nutrition security 
-  Access to technical services and satisfaction with these 
services 
-  Access to agricultural inputs and satisfaction with quality 
of inputs 
-  Adoption of improved climate-resilient techniques and 
practices 
-  Access by small farmers to credit and savings services, 
and use of credit and savings 
-  Access by small farmers to collateral free lending 
-  Change in physical access to markets  
-  Access to market information by small farmers 
-  Access to irrigation 
-  Change in income and use of income 
-  Change in expenditure patterns 
-  Change in migration patterns for men 
Frequency for data 
collection  
farmers’ 
Upon 
selection 
(rolling 
baseline)  mid-term, 
completion 
Baseline,  mid-term, 
completion 
After each agricultural 
season 
Baseline,  mid-term, 
completion 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey – Module B 
Farmers’ diaries 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey – Module B 
of 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
Entire  universe  of 
beneficiaries 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
of 
Annual Cluster Surveys 
All clusters 
module 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey  –  Module  A  (with 
nutrition 
if 
available)  
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey  –  Module  A  (if 
nutrition 
module 
available)  or  nutrition 
survey 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
of 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
of 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey – Module B 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
of 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
ADBL and partner FI MIS 
All C2 beneficiaries 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey – Module C 
Baseline/MT/completion 
survey – Module C 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
Representative 
sample 
beneficiaries 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
Baseline, mid-term, 
completion 
of 
of 
81 
5.4.2  Management Information System (MIS)  
  Component 1 and 3. In order to  properly manage, process, archive and use the 
data  on  activities,  outputs,  outreach  and  results  generated  by  M&E  activities,  the 
PMU will use and maintain its own MIS. This MIS will be developed soon after project 
start  by  an  external  service  provider  selected  through  tender,  or  by  ADBL  IT 
Department  if  enough  capacities  can  be  internally  mobilized  for  the  necessary 
amount of time.  
  The PMU MIS shall be configured to meet the specific information requirements of 
the M&E system and to generate a set of pre-defined consolidated tables or reports 
that  should  allow  the  proper  monitoring  of  AWPB  execution  and  overall 
implementation progress. The MIS will be web-based, with most of the data being 
entered remotely by BSF via electronic tablets. This MIS will be also be fed with the 
information  submitted  by  all  service  providers  and  project  implementers,  through 
their activity reports. 
  Essentially, the PMU MIS shall allow the following: 
−  The tracking and recording of all activities and expenditure categories defined in the detailed 
AWPB and all physical targets. 
−  The  tracking  of  outreach  (number  of  beneficiaries  and  their  sex,  age,  poverty  status  and  if 
janajatis). 
−  The  tracking  of  all  activities  benefiting  each  individual  beneficiary  and  each  farmers’  group 
under Component 1. 
−  The  tracking  of  farm-level  data  production,  sales  and  profit  data  for  all  Component  1 
beneficiaries. 
−  The tracking of outreach and beneficiaries’ profile. 
−  Data disaggregation by state, commodity, corridor, cluster. 
−  The monitoring all Logframe detailed output-level indicators and targets. 
−  The generation of performance tables/dashboards and standard reports (see Annex 6). 
  So that the support provided to individual farmers may be adequately recorded in 
the MIS, each beneficiary will receive a unique ID number (or “Beneficiary Number”). 
The same shall apply for the farmers’ groups supported: each one shall be provided 
with a unique Group ID number. This unique beneficiary and group ID numbers will 
have to be collected by BSFs and other project implementers each time they deliver 
a  certain  service  to  this  beneficiary  or  group.  Similarly,  each  cluster  formed  and 
supported will receive a unique cluster number (to which will be associated a specific 
state, commodity and corridor).   
  In  the  MIS,  the  following  profile  information  will  be  associated  with  each  unit  ID 
number: 
−  Beneficiary ID number: The associated beneficiary profile shall provide information on sex, age, 
and if janajati.  
−  Cluster Number: The associated cluster profile shall provide information on state, commodity, 
associated corridor, and group ID numbers of associated groups. The  
−  Group  ID  number:  The  associated  group  profile  shall  provide  information  on:  (A)  group 
membership (contacts/location, number of members, date of creation, date of last Management 
Committee elections, number and sex of elected Management Committee); and (B) Information 
on concerned/associated commodity, corridor and cluster.  
  Overall, a possible coding system for the Cluster ID number and Group ID number 
is suggested below, with a chart showing the various levels/hierarchy: 
82 
  In  order  to  facilitate  data  analysis,  it  is  tentatively  proposed  that  the  unique 
Beneficiary Number shall combine the farmer’s Cluster Number with his/her national 
Identity Card Number and the first 4 letters of family name, as follows38:  
/     NNNN 
/   (Name) 
/ 
/  (National Identity Card 
  C0-00 
  (Cluster 
000000000 
/  G0-00 
/ 
(Group #) 
#) 
#) 
  Such coding system will allow the MIS to produce trends and tables disaggregated 
by state, commodity, corridor, cluster and farmers’ groups.  
  The  detailed  technical  specifications  for  the  MIS  will  be  defined  by  the  concerned 
PMU staff and the M&E Specialist, with support from ADBL IT Department, shortly 
after project start. 
  Component 2. All data necessary for Component 2 monitoring will be tracked and 
recorded by the ADBL core banking system and MIS. A few adaptations will however 
be  necessary.  Thus,  ADBL  core  banking  system  and  MIS  should  be  adapted  as 
follows: 
−  To track the use of IFAD funds from the various loan windows that the project will 
avail  to  ADBL  for  on-lending.  To  this  end,  the  loan  application  template  should 
include a field to tag “IFAD funds”, so that VITA beneficiaries can be distinguished 
from other ADBL clients. A similar adaptation will be required in ADBL core banking 
system,  so  that  ADBL  MIS  may  produce  reports  on  the  number  of  ADBL  clients 
accessing a loan from VITA loan windows. 
−  To record the following additional information from loan applicants: (i) Name, sex 
and  age  of  intended/actual  loan  user39;  (ii)  VITA  beneficiary  number;  (iii) 
Commodity name; (iv) Intended purpose of loan40. 
  For  the  funds  that  the  project  may avail  to  other  partner  FI,  the  PMU  will  request 
partner FI to introduce similar adaptations to their own systems and MIS. At the bare 
minimum,  their  systems  will  need  to  be  adapted  to  allow  for  the  tagging  of  IFAD 
funds. 
5.4.3  Reporting 
  The M&E Specialist will be responsible for the preparation of monthly, quarterly, 6-
monthly and annual progress reports (see Annex 8 to 10 for report outlines). The 6-
monthly and annual progress reports will be sent to IFAD for information and shall 
be  important  documents  to  inform  the  work  of  IFAD  supervision  missions.  The 
mandatory annual progress report shall be prepared towards the end of the year and 
submitted to IFAD, if possible, together with the draft AWPB of the subsequent year. 
38 For example, the beneficiary number of a farmer named Bashurak belonging to Cluster A12.06 and Farmer Group 
0011 and with a citizenship number of FG114582AW would be: A12.06/0011/FG114582AW/BASH. Because this farmer 
belongs to Cluster A12.06 and a cluster profile is available for all clusters, the PMU will know that he/she belongs to a 
certain province and corridor and is involved in a certain commodity. 
39 The rationale is as follows: when a woman needs a loan, she usually needs to use her husband’s name in the loan 
application as only men usually have land titles and can therefore avail the necessary collateral. Unless the name and 
sex of the intended or actual loan beneficiary is recorded in the loan application, together with the name of the person 
whose collateral is being used, VITA M&E system will not be able to track the actual number of women accessing a loan. 
40 A standard menu should be developed in the core banking system, in order to ensure consistency, for example: land 
acquisition,  land  improvement,  livestock  investments,  agricultural  inputs  purchase,  housing  improvement,  agricultural 
equipment purchase, SME development, processing equipment purchase, transportation means, etc. 
83 
  Each year, the M&E Specialist will also be responsible for the preparation of ORMS 
tables (see Annex 11 for template and guidance). 
  Towards the end of the project implementation period, the PMU will also be required 
to  prepare  an  Project  Completion  Review  report,  as  an  input  to  the  PCR  review 
mission that will be organized by IFAD. 
84 
5.5  Knowledge Management and Communication 
   By the end of the second quarter of implementation, the Knowledge Management 
Expert (under  Heifer)  shall  develop  a  comprehensive  Knowledge  Management and 
Communication Strategy. This document will identify the detailed tools and processes 
to be used for efficient knowledge management, as well as a detailed action plan and 
timetable. This strategy will be developed along the lines described in the following 
section. 
  Knowledge  management  activities  in  VITA  will  have  a  triple  objective:  (i)  the 
sustainable  anchoring  of  technical  and  managerial  knowledge  among  supported 
farmers and their groups (e.g. through the production of teaching materials); (ii) the 
generation of knowledge from project experience in various domains, based on the 
information collected through M&E activities and specific thematic studies; (iii) the 
sharing  of  this  knowledge  with  interested  parties,  such  as  IFAD  and  ADBL 
management,  other  donors interested in  rural  finance  or  value  chain  development 
and  policy  makers,  using  various  media  (publications,  website,  brainstorming 
workshops,  participation 
film  production 
videos).Ultimately, it  is hoped  that  knowledge management  activities  will  feed  the 
policy  dialogue  between  IFAD  and  the  Government  on  successful  rural  poverty 
approaches,  and  that  the  new  rural  finance  products  and  services  developed  and 
tested under Component 2 will be upscaled by ADBL and partner FIs. 
in  Communities  of  Practice, 
  Various tools and processes will be followed for knowledge management and sharing, 
including: 
−  Capitalization of experience: Through the regular analysis of results in the field, the 
collection  of  testimonies,  interviews  with  beneficiaries  and  resource  persons  and 
other qualitative studies or quantitative surveys, M&E activities should culminate in 
the identification and documentation of good practices and relevant lessons learned 
from project implementation. Ultimately, these processes of learning and capitalizing 
on  experience  will  help  capture  and  formalize  tacit  knowledge,  so  that  it  can  be 
documented and shared. Such knowledge should eventually provide a basis for policy 
dialogue. 
The key subjects or themes concerned with the capitalization of the experience, as 
a basis for informed policy dialogue, could be the following: women and youth socio-
economic  empowerment;  inclusive  value  chain  development;  corridor  approach  to 
local  economic  development;  public/private  partnerships;  inclusive  rural  finance 
products and services; innovative agricultural lending, etc. 
−  Case studies: Specific case studies will be undertaken when the project will need to 
properly document some specific implementation aspects, results or lessons learned, 
or to illustrate cases of successful farmers or farmers’ groups. The purpose will be to 
deepen the understanding and knowledge on key success factors, or the reasons for 
the possible failure of some approaches. These case studies may, or not, include the 
conduct of a thematic/quantitative survey, or will be mainly based on interviews and 
field observations. 
−  Innovative  rural  finance  products  and  services:  The various  rural  finance  products 
and  services  (in  particular  collateral-free  lending  products)  that  will  be  tested  by 
ADBL and partner FIs will be carefully documented. 
−  Knowledge fairs and events: these events will be periodically organized at provincial 
and national level to share innovations, promote local products, stimulate exchanges 
between producers and new buyers or share knowledge between corridors. 
−  Exchanges and study trips: Selected producers, value chain actors and ADBL branch 
staff  will  participate  in  exchange  visits  and  study  tours  in  order  to  acquire  new 
knowledge,  agricultural  practices  or  ways  of  working  from  their  peers,  which  will 
facilitate learning and the adoption of best practices. 
85 
−  Production and dissemination of teaching materials: appropriate supports (posters, 
technical  booklets,  videos,  etc.)  intended  for  producers  or  members  of  farmers’ 
groups will be developed and widely disseminated in order to ensure the sustainable 
anchoring  of  improved  production  techniques  or  management  skills  and  to 
perpetuate the messages of the various awareness campaigns. 
−  Establishment of an electronic library. In order to safeguard the institutional memory 
and the accessibility of information, all the documents, studies and reports produced 
by the PMU, as well as all the documents developed for knowledge management or 
sharing purposes (videos, material ) will be carefully archived in a central electronic 
library. 
  For  communication  activities,  the  Knowledge  Management  Expert  will  be 
supported  by  ADBL  Communication  Department,  which  will  avail  the  services  of  a 
part-time  Communication  Expert.  Appropriate  media  (web  articles,  written  press 
articles,  videos,  etc.)  will  be  used in  order  to  disseminate  relevant information  on 
project  activities,  results  and  approaches,  and  the various knowledge  products,  to 
specifically targeted audience or the general public. ADBL Website may also be used 
to post articles, videos and other communication material. 
  The following table presents a tentative action plan for knowledge management and 
communication activities during the first year of implementation. 
Responsible staff 
Time frame 
KM Activity 
Knowledge needs 
and gaps 
stakeholder 
analysis 
KM and 
Communication 
strategy 
Link KM & M&E 
Tentative KM activities and plan 
Type/Description 
Stakeholders’ consultation and analysis to be carried out to 
determine existing levels of knowledge among the different 
stakeholders  (rapid review of knowledge and  information 
flows,  current  good  practices)  and  to 
identify  their 
information  and  knowledge  needs  and  gaps  at  (and 
between) all levels. 
Based  on  stakeholders’  analysis  and  consultation 
outcomes,  develop  a 
full  KM  and  communication 
framework  and  strategy  as  well  as  an  annual  KM  and 
communication plan. 
PMU KM Expert 
PMU KM Expert, ADBL 
Communication 
Department 
Build  effective  learning  processes  into  the  project  M&E 
system and introduce any relevant additional KM indicators 
in the M&E system. 
PMU KM Expert and 
M&E Specialist 
Use simple documentation tools and methods, such as: print, 
photography, audio and video.  
Documentation 
Document case studies (success and failures). 
Support  collection  and  initial  analysis  of  data  to  generate 
relevant knowledge. 
Use the documented best practices to communicate results 
in different settings, such as workshops, ADBL or IFAD 
website, print publications, learning exchanges, newspapers, 
media, etc., and adapt them to the targeted end users.  
Facilitate the dissemination of project results in different fora.  
Provide relevant communication toolkits and backstopping to 
the relevant project staff/partners. 
Communication 
and sharing 
KM Expert, with 
support from ADBL 
Communication 
Department, M&E 
Specialist and selected 
PMU staff (Social 
Inclusion Expert; 
Nutrition Specialist)  
KM Expert, with 
support from ADBL 
Communication 
Department M&E 
Specialist and selected 
PMU staff (Social 
Inclusion Expert; 
Nutrition Specialist) 
86 
First three 
months of 
implementation  
Within first six 
months of 
implementation  
When M&E 
system is 
being 
operationalized 
Year 2 to year 
6. 
Within Year I 
and Year II of 
implementation 
Knowledge-
based decision-
making and 
policy dialogue  
Facilitate the reporting and presentation of lessons learned 
and good practices for use in policy advocacy and policy 
dialogue. 
KM Expert and selected 
PMU staff 
Year 3 to 6. 
87 
6  Financial management and accounting 
Summary 
  Financial  Management:  The  PMU  will  report  to  the  Project  Director  and  
accountable to the PSC for the overall financial management, preparation of AWPB, 
procurement plan, M&E and MIS, withdrawal applications and financial reports, and 
compliance requirement of internal and external audit. The concerned departments, 
provincial  and  branch  offices  of  the  ADBL  and  Heifer  will  be  responsible  and 
accountable for the implementation of project activities of their sector, planning of 
their annual work plan, preparation of budget and safeguard of project assets and 
resources  and  preparation  and  submission  of  financial  reports.  The  initial financial 
management risk assessment of ADBL project is assessed as substantial due to first 
IFAD project, lack of experience in preparing AWPB, implementation of IFAD funded 
project,  accounting  and  reporting  requirement  of  IFAD,  working  with  the  local 
government and beneficiaries on grant basis, newly established PMU for the project, 
and  separate  funds  flow.  The  Heifer  has  experience  in  implementing  the  IFAD 
Improved  Seed  for  Farmers  Programme  (ISFP)  funded  project.  However,  the  risk 
would reduce to moderate with the implementation of mitigating measures. 
  Finance  unit  organization:  The  PMU  shall  have  one  Programme  Chief  Finance 
Officer (FO), deputed by the ADBL, and one Account Assistant (AA) recruited for the 
project, one Account Officer and one Account Assistant in the provincial and A, B & 
C  class  branch  offices  and  Account  Assistant  in  D  class  branch  offices  will  be 
designated from the existing account staff for maintaining accounts and preparing 
reports of the project. The job description of the FO and AA is given in the PIM.  
  Budgeting: The province and branch offices shall prepare their budget and submit 
the  AWPB  finalized  in  the  workshop  held  in  provincial  level  to  PMU.  The  PMU  will 
review the AWPB received from province and branch offices and consolidate with its 
budget  and  submit  to  Program  and  Budget  Section  of  Planning  and  Research 
Department  which,  in  consultation  with  PMU,  will  finalize  annual  work  plan  and 
budget (AWPB) of the project including co-financing by the Heifer and counterpart 
funds of the Federal, State and Local Government, ADBL and beneficiaries and loan 
to  be  received  from  bank  and  financial  institutions  based  on  the  implementation 
schedule of the project activities, cost table, subsidiary loan and financing agreement 
and prevailing market price for submission to the ADBL Board and Project Steering 
Committee.  The ADBL will provide funds including the corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) fund. After PSC approval, the AWPB will be submitted to IFAD for no objection 
before  15  May  of  each  year  and  MoF  for  entering  in  the  line  Ministry  Budget 
Information  System  (LMBIS)  for  budget  provision  in  the  federal  budget  to  be 
presented by the Finance Minister on 29 May (Jestha 15) of each year by creating a 
separate budget line for the loan to be provided to ADBL for project implementation. 
The MoF will provide loan for the lending activities signing subsidiary loan agreement 
with ADBL. The MoF will release budget to the ADBL after approval of the budget by 
Parliament.  The  PMU  will  allocate  and  release  annual  budget  to  the  province  and 
branch offices specifying the activities. The PMU will monitor physical and financial 
performance on a quarterly basis. The budget allocated to the province and branch 
offices can be revised by the ADBL not exceeding the approved annual budget. 
  Disbursement  arrangements  and  flow  of  funds:  The  ADBL,  on  receipt  of 
authorized signatories from the MoF, shall open a designated bank account in USD 
at Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) for the loan to be provided by government in which IFAD 
will disburse initial advance on compliance with the loan covenant precedent to first 
withdrawal application as specified in finance agreement the letter to the borrower 
(LtB)  and  thereafter  reimburse  eligible  expenditures  on  submission  of  withdrawal 
application. The government and ADBL will not pre-finance the project expenditures 
to be funded from IFAD source. The ADBL will open separate project bank account 
88 
in which the advance amount of USD 10 million or as specified in the letter to the 
borrower  will  be  transferred  from  designated  account  on  imprest  system.  The 
amounts  received  from  ADBL  from  corporate  social  responsibility  fund  for  non-
lending project activities will also be deposited in the project bank account. The ADBL 
will make payments from the project bank account for incremental operating cost, 
capacity  building  expenses,  other  project  related  expenses  and  infrastructure 
construction  expenses  to  the  respective  payees.  The  payment  to  the  local 
government  will  be  made  as  per  memorandum  of understanding  entered  between 
the  ADBL  and  local  government.  The  ADBL  will  provide  wholesale  loan  to  other 
partner financial institutions and ADBL for loan provided to the borrowers based on 
the statements of loan from the project bank account following the credit policy of 
the  ADBL  and  approval  of  the  Credit  Committee  wherever  required.  The  Credit 
Department and Credit Committee of the ADBL will be responsible for loan approval, 
monitoring and recovery and compliance with the ADBL's own credit policies and also 
the directives of the Nepal Rastra Bank. The ADBL will request next advance when 
75% of the previous advance amount has been spent but not exceeding threshold of 
advance. The Heifer will incur expenses for the activities as specified in the districts 
not  directly  covered  by  own funded  activities  and  request  for  reimbursement. The 
PMU  will  reimburse  the  expenses  requested  for  reimbursement  based  on  the 
statement  of  expenses  to  Heifer.  The  PMU  will  be  directly  responsible  for  the 
management, maintenance and reconciliation of the DA and project bank accounts.  
  The  local  government  or  other  implementing  agencies  will  open  separate  bank 
account for construction of market and other infrastructure in which the counterpart 
fund  and  project  loan/grant  will  be  deposited.  The  local  government  or  other 
implementing  agencies  and  sub-project  implementers  will  incur  expenses  and 
request  for  reimbursement  of  instalment  of  loan/grant  as  agreed  in  the 
memorandum  of  understanding.  The 
(private 
sector/beneficiaries) will deposit their contribution in the separate bank account of 
the implementers in which ADBL and other partner financial institutions will disburse 
the loan to the borrowers for approved sub-project activities.  
implementers 
sub-project 
  The  PMU  will  prepare  withdrawal  applications  for  advance  amount  and  eligible 
expenditures already paid and submit to IFAD along with the supporting documents 
required  for  IFAD  disbursements.  The  IFAD  will  disburse  the  advance  and  eligible 
expenditures to the designated bank account maintained by the ADBL.  
  Retroactive Financing: A sum of USD 500,000 has been provisioned for retroactive 
financing  for  the  expenses  to  be  incurred  between  01  February  2020  or  the  date 
specified in the Letter to the Borrower and the date of Financing Agreement signature 
("Entry into Force") to facilitate smooth start-up. Retroactive financing shall be used 
for the expenditures incurred for: (i) recruitment of project staff and training of staff; 
(ii)  purchase  of  furniture  and  office  equipment  for  PMU;  (iii)  conducting  baseline 
surveys  and  customization  of existing MIS  software;  (iv)  preparation  of  guidelines 
and  any  other  activities  to  be  conducted  before  start  of  the  project.  These 
expenditures  would  be  reimbursed  on  submission  of  a  separate  withdrawal 
application when the conditions precedent to first withdrawal application stipulated 
in the financing agreement have been met. 
  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting: The PMU, 
province  and  branch  offices  of  the  will  maintain  separate  accounts  of  the  project 
following double entry accrual basis of accounting system using existing core banking 
and  accounting  software.  The  existing  chart  of  accounts  will  be  modified  to  avoid 
systematic  weakness  before  the  start  of  the  project  for  accounting  expenses  by 
categories,  components,  sub-components,  activities,  commodity,  funding  sources, 
geographical  region  to  monitor  expenses  and  meet  accounting  and  reporting 
requirement of IFAD. The Heifer will also maintain accounts for the expenses incurred 
for the project. The contribution made by the provincial government, municipalities 
and  beneficiaries  shall  be  recorded  to  expenditures  based  on  statement  of 
89 
expenditures. In-kind contributions will be quantified based on fair market value and 
accounted to expenses and income disclosing in the notes to accounts.  
  The province and branch offices and Heifer will submit monthly financial statements 
to  the  PMU  within  first  week  from  the  end  of  the  month.  The  PMU  will  prepare 
consolidated  monthly  financial  statements  and  submit  to  the  VITA  Programme 
Coordinator  (PMU Director).  PMU  will  prepare  quarterly interim  financial  reports  in 
the prescribed format within 45 days of the end of each quarter and annual Project 
financial statements in the prescribed format within four months of the end of each 
financial year for submission to IFAD.  
  Internal  Audit: The  Internal  Audit  Department  of  the  ADBL  will  conduct  internal 
audit  of  the  project  in  accordance  with  the  Standards  on  Internal  Audit  (SIA)  on 
quarterly basis. The draft internal audit reports are to be submitted to the respective 
cost centres copied to the PMU Director. The final internal audit report after receipt 
of  response  on  the  draft  internal  audit  report  will  be  submitted  to  the  Audit 
Committee of the ADBL. The Audit Committee will review the internal audit report 
and  recommends  for  the  remedial  action  to  resolve  the  observations  and  avoid 
recurrence.  The  internal  audit  report  along  with  the  actions  taken  to  resolve  audit 
observations  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Board,  Audit  Committee,  VITA  Programme 
Director (ADBL CEO) and PMU Directo. IFAD shall have access to all Internal Audit 
Reports and actions taken to resolve audit observations.  
  External  Financial  Audit:  The  ADBL  shall  hire  a  chartered  accountant  firm 
appointed  to  conduct  audit  of  the  ADBL  on  recommendation  of  the  Office  of  the 
Auditor  General  to  carry  out  the  audit  of  the  project  in  accordance  with  Nepal 
Standards  of  Auditing  and  IFAD’s  General  Conditions  and  the  IFAD  Handbook  for 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed projects, which, inter alia, requires 
public disclosure. The audit report shall be submitted to the PMU Director and Board 
for review the audit report and audit observations reported in the management letter. 
The  audited  project  financial  statements  including  the  designated  account  and 
management letter along with management response have to be submitted to the 
IFAD  within  six  months  of  the  end  of  each  financial  year  during  the  project 
implementation  period  and  by  the  financing  closing  date  for  the  last  year  of  the 
project to comply with the deadline for submission of the audit report. The Heifer will 
also submit the audit report of the project expenditures within six months of the end 
of each fiscal year.  
  Investigative  Authority:  Under  IFAD's  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and 
Corruption41,  the  independent  and  competent  authority  responsible  for  receiving, 
reviewing  and  investigating  allegations  of  fraud  and  corruption  will  be  the 
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority, who will take action as per 
provisions of the Federal Law. 
41 https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40189695 
90 
6.1  Introduction and financing 
  This chapter explains about the financial management of the project. It lays down 
the process of planning and budgeting, the accounting system, financial procedures 
for approval and system of recording transactions, system of funds flow to the project 
and  within  the  project,  the  disbursement  systems,  submission  of  withdrawal 
application  for  reimbursement  of  funds,  preparing  and  reporting  of  the  financial 
statements, internal audit and the statutory audit requirements.  
  Country Inherent Risk: The overall country inherent financial management (FM) 
risk  is  assessed  as  substantial  based  on  the  2018  with  Transparency  International 
Corruption  Perception  Index  score  of  3.2.  The  latest  PEFA  report  published  in May 
2015  disclosed  that  the  commitment  to  change  and  reform  to  PFM  systems  and 
process by the Government of Nepal has produced results. Among 28 performance 
indicators  (PI),  16  indicators  improved,  10  indicators  remained  unchanged,  and  2 
indicators  deteriorated.  However,  compared  to  2008  with  improved  systems,  data 
availability has assisted to fine-tune the assessment and downgrade the rating of an 
indicator to reflect the current system. PEFA indicates weakness for Nepal in budget 
execution, audit, accounting and reporting.  
  Financial  Management:    The  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  will  report  to  the 
PMU  Director  and  accountable  to  the  PSC  for  the  overall  financial  management, 
preparation of AWPB, procurement plan, M&E and MIS, withdrawal applications and 
financial  reports,  and  compliance  requirement  of  internal  and  external  audit.  The 
concerned departments, provincial and branch offices of the ADBL and Heifer will be 
responsible  and  accountable  for  the  implementation  of  project  activities  of  their 
sector, planning of their annual work plan, preparation of budget and safeguard of 
project assets and resources and preparation and submission of the financial reports. 
The  initial  financial  management  risk  assessment  of  ADBL  project  is  assessed  as 
substantial  due  to  first  IFAD  project,  lack  of  experience  in  preparing  AWPB, 
implementation  of  IFAD  funded  project,  accounting  and  reporting  requirement  of 
IFAD,  working  with  the  local  government  and  beneficiaries  on  grant  basis,  newly 
established PMU for the project, and separate funds flow. The Heifer has experience 
in  implementing  the  IFAD  Improved  Seed  for  Farmers  Programme  (ISFP)  funded 
project.  However,  the  risk  would  reduce  to  moderate  with  the  implementation  of 
mitigating measures 
  Retroactive Financing: In accordance with Section 4.07 of the General Conditions 
(GC),  expenditures  shall  be  eligible  for  financing  if  they  are  incurred  during  the 
Implementation  Period.  With  the  approval  of  the  Executive  Board,  project 
expenditures may be incurred before entry into force, known as retroactive financing. 
At  the  request  of  the GON,  a  sum  equivalent  to  USD  0.5 million is  provisioned  as 
retro-active financing for meeting the following specific expenditures that are related 
to the project: (i) recruitment of project staff and training of staff; (ii) purchase of 
furniture  and  office  equipment  for  PMU;  (iii)  conducting  baseline  surveys  and 
customization of existing MIS software; (iv) preparation of guidelines and any other 
activities  to  be  conducted  before  start  of  the  project.  Expenditures  for  retroactive 
financing, to be pre-financed by the ADBL or Government of Nepal (GoN), should be 
preauthorized  by  IFAD  and  will  only  be  eligible  from  1  February  2020  or  the  date 
specified in the Letter to the Borrower.  
  The  expenditures  need  to  be  specifically  identified  as  retroactive  financing  in  the 
project  Work  Plan  and  Budget,  including  the  related  Procurement  Plan  that  will 
provide a detailed description of planned activities, related methods of procurement, 
quantities,  estimated  costs  and  the  expected  dates  of  finalization  of  Procurement 
activities. Both the specific AWPB and Procurement Plan are subject to prior review 
by  IFAD.  Upon  entry  into  force  and  fulfilment  of  disbursement  conditions,  eligible 
expenditures  are  reimbursed  into the  ADBL  bank  account  or  Government  treasury 
depending on who has pre-financed such expenditures. Retroactive expenditures are 
pre-financed  by  the  prospective  Borrower  at  its  own  risk.  If  the  financing  is  not 
approved, or does not enter into force, expenditures will not be reimbursed. These 
91 
expenditures  would  be  reimbursed  on  submission  of  a  separate  withdrawal 
application when the conditions precedent to first withdrawal application stipulated 
in  the  financing  agreement  have  been  met.  Expenditures  eligible  for  retroactive 
financing  should  be  included  in  the  first  financial  statements  of  the  project  and 
audited,  with  appropriate  separate  disclosure  of  the  amount  in  the  Notes  to  the 
Accounts. 
  Taxes and duties to be paid on expenses incurred for the programme will be funded 
from  the  counterpart  funds  provided  by  the  state  and  local  government  for  the 
infrastructure  construction  expenses  and  by  ADBL  for  the  inclusive  supply  chain 
development of component 1, capacity enhancement and policy development facility 
of component 2 and project management expenses. In case of private investment 
financing, the private sector and beneficiaries will cover the taxes and duties from 
their  equity,  cash  contribution  and  bank  loan  while  Heifer  will  provide  funds  for 
expenses  inclusive  of  taxes  and  duties.  Because  of  above  funding  modality,  the 
federal government will not provide counterpart funds for this programme. 
  Start-up Advance: An advance for approved start-up activities is encouraged, such 
as staff salary, training of key staff, office equipment and the initial operating costs, 
shall  be  provided  on  request  in  the  period  between  project  entering  into  force 
(financing  agreement  signed  and  meeting  the  conditions  precedent  to  first 
withdrawal).  The  activities  plan  for  such  advance  should  be  approved  in  advance. 
This will provide liquidity if required until the conditions precedent to first withdrawal 
have been met. 
  Conditions precedent to First Withdrawal: No withdrawal can be made in respect 
of expenditures until:  
  PMU has been duly established and finance staff recruited and trained; 
  PIM has been approved by the PSC and IFAD; 
  Accounting  software  should  have  been  customized  for  accounting  project 
expenditures  as  per  revised  chart  of  accounts  and  generating  required 
information and reports; 
  GoN  shall  have  duly  authorized  ADBL  to  open  and  operate  the  Designated 
Account for IFAD loan; 
  The Project shall have duly opened the project accounts;  
The  first  AWPB,  including  the  procurement  plan  for  the  initial  18  months  of 
Project implementation, shall have been submitted to, and approved by IFAD;  
  Subsidiary  loan  agreement  and  memorandum  of  understanding  are  entered 
between the ADBL and the government; and 
  Lending procedure should have been approved by the Board of the respective 
participating financial institutions. 
6.2  Disbursement and Fund Flow Mechanism 
  Financing:  The  project  expenditures  will  be  financed  from  IFAD  Loan,  GoN 
contribution, Heifer co-financing, State and local government, ADBL corporate social 
responsibility  (CRS)  fund,  banks,  private  sector,  and  beneficiaries’  contribution. 
Government contribution will be for taxes, salaries and allowances of project staff, 
operating  costs,  training,  consultancies,  workshop  and  office  equipments  required 
for  activities  of  the  components  as  specified  in  the  project  cost  table.  Heifer  will 
contribute the expenses incurred for the activities of mentoring and mobilization of 
products/producers organizations, business skills to farmers, producers' organization 
service  market  strengthening,  capacity  building,  brokering  and  cluster  facilitation 
and project management of component 1. The commercial banks participating in this 
project  will  provide  loans  to  the  various  cooperatives,  producers  groups,  farmer 
producer  organizations  and  farmers.  The  state  and  local  government  will  provide 
funds for construction of civil works infrastructure to be used by the local market, 
producers  and  farmers.  The  CSR  funds  of  ADBL  will  be  used  for  mentoring  and 
mobilization  of  products/producers  organizations,  business  skills  to  farmers  of 
92 
component  1.  The  ADBL  will  also  provide  funds  for  training,  workshops,  office 
equipment  and  salary  and  allowances  of  the  staff  deputed  by  ADBL.  The  private 
sector and beneficiaries contribution will be in cash or in-kind for labour and goods 
for the private investment activities. The funding source of the particular activity of 
the component should be referred to the project cost table and approved AWPB for 
accounting the expenses. 
  Bank  accounts:  The  IFAD  loan  account  will  be  designated  in  USD.  GoN  shall 
authorize  the  ADBL  to  open  a  Designated  Account  at  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  (NRB)  in 
USD.  The  ADBL,  on  receipt  of  authorized  signatories  from  the  MoF,  shall  open  a 
designated  bank  account  in  USD  at  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  (NRB)  for  the  loan  to  be 
provided  by  government  in  which  IFAD  will  disburse initial  advance  as  specified  in 
the  letter  to  the  borrower  and  thereafter  reimburse  eligible  expenditures  on 
submission of withdrawal application. The government and ADBL will not pre-finance 
the project expenditures to be funded from IFAD source.  
  The ADBL will open separate project bank account in which the advance amount of 
USD 10 million or as specified in the letter to the borrower will be transferred from 
designated  account  on  imprest  system.  The  amounts  received  from  ADBL  from 
corporate  social  responsibility  fund  for  non-lending  project  activities  will  also  be 
deposited in the project bank account.  
  The  local  government  or  other  implementing  agencies  will  open  separate  bank 
account for construction of market and other infrastructure in which the counterpart 
fund  and  project  loan/grant  will  be  deposited.  The  local  government  or  other 
implementing agencies and sub-project implementers (state and local government, 
cooperatives,  producers  groups  and  other  beneficiaries)  will  incur  expenses  and 
request  for  reimbursement  of  instalment  of  loan/grant  as  agreed  in  the 
memorandum  of  understanding.  The  sub-project  implementers  will  deposit  their 
contribution in the separate bank account of the implementers in which ADBL and 
other  partner  financial  institutions  will  disburse  the  loan  to  the  borrowers  for 
approved sub-project activities.  
   Flow of Funds: The ADBL, on receipt of authorized signatories from the MoF, shall 
open a designated bank account in USD at Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) for the loan to 
be provided by government in which IFAD will disburse initial advance as specified 
in  the  letter  to  the  borrower  and  thereafter  reimburse  eligible  expenditures  on 
submission of withdrawal application. The government and ADBL will not pre-finance 
the  programme  expenditures  to  be  funded  from  IFAD  source.  The  ADBL  will  open 
separate programme bank account in which the advance amount of USD 10 million 
or  as  specified  in  the  letter  to  the  borrower  will  be  transferred  from  designated 
account  on  imprest  system.  The  amounts  received  from  the  ADBL  from  corporate 
social responsibility fund for non-lending programme activities will also be deposited 
in the programme bank account. The ADBL will make payments from the programme 
bank  account  for  incremental  operating  cost,  capacity  building  expenses,  other 
programme  related  expenses  and  infrastructure  construction  expenses  to  the 
respective  payees.  The  payment  to  the  local  government  will  be  made  as  per 
memorandum  of understanding  entered  between  the  ADBL  and local  government. 
The ADBL will provide wholesale loan to other partner financial institutions and ADBL 
for  loan  provided  to  the  borrowers  based  on  the  statements  of  loan  from  the 
programme  bank  account.  The  ADBL  will  request  next  advance  when  75%  of  the 
previous advance amount has been spent but not exceeding threshold of advance. 
The Heifer will incur expenses for the activities as specified in the districts not directly 
covered  by  own  funded  activities  and  request  for  reimbursement.  The  PMU  will 
submit WA to IFAD for direct reimbursement of the expenses based on the statement 
of  expenses  to  Heifer.  The  PMU  will  be  directly  responsible  for  the  management, 
maintenance and reconciliation of the DA and programme bank accounts.  
  The PMU will prepare withdrawal applications for advance amount as specified in the 
Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  eligible  expenditures  already  paid  and  submit  to  IFAD 
along with the supporting documents required for IFAD disbursements. The IFAD will 
93 
disburse  the  advance  and  eligible  expenditures  to  the  designated  bank  account 
maintained by the ADBL. The IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook and the Letter to 
the Borrower will detail the disbursement arrangements. 
  The following diagram visualises the fund flow arrangements: 
94 
Figure 5: Funds Flow Process 
  Disbursements:  The  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  for  Directly  Supervised 
Projects42 (LDH) in conjunction with the Financing Agreement and the Letter to the 
Borrower (LtB) set out the disbursement procedures. The funds from IFAD loan will 
be disbursed using one of the following three methods:  
42https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39633845/Loan+Disbursement+Handbook+%28for+projects+approved+under+GC
s+effective_e.pdf/af446750-29c5-49e2-a514-85132173fbf8 
95 
  The  designated  account  is  replenished  through  the  submission  of  a  Withdrawal 
Application (WA) to IFAD. The Form 100 summary of the WA, Form 101 and/or Form 
102/A will be prepared by PMU and submitted to IFAD through the IFAD Client Portal 
(ICP). The list of the expenditures being claimed is to be submitted in the specified 
format with WA. The amount to be replenished is to be requested in the currency of 
denomination  of  the  designated  account  as  described  in  the  LtB.  A  WA  should  be 
submitted at least every 90 days, or in the case where an advance from IFAD has 
been provided then when 30% of it has been utilised (even if this is earlier than the 
90 day normal requirement). 
  PMU will also submit a Designated Account Reconciliation Statement Form 104 with 
each WA for replenishment to the designated account for the same reporting period 
in which the eligible expenditures are being claimed. This form shall be accompanied 
by bank statement of the designated account ensuring that the closing bank balance 
for the bank account corresponds to the balance at the end of the same reporting 
period  as  indicated  in  the  WA  period.  Sample  templates  for  the  reconciliations,  as 
applicable,  are  provided  in  Appendix  FM-1  -  Designated  Account  Reconciliation 
Statement. 
  A Checklist Form 105 is used to assist with the compilation of the WA. It is in the 
LDH and a sample is provided in Appendix FM-2.  
  Procedure I - Advance withdrawals or replenishments to a bank account(s) 
designated to receive loan resources: The design foresees the requirement of a 
designated  account  for  the  project,  as  the  GoN  is  not  pre-financing  the  project 
expenses  to  be  borne  from  IFAD  source.  The  GoN  and  ADBL  will  only  finance  the 
expenses to be borne by them. Hence, this disbursement procedure is required to 
provide funds for implementation of the project. 
  This procedure is a mechanism to provide an advance to the government from the 
IFAD  loan  account  using  an  imprest  mechanism  to  replenish  eligible  expenditures 
incurred  for  the  project  as  specified  in  the  financing  agreement  and  LtB.  This 
modality is used to provide an advance from the IFAD loan account not exceeding a 
ceiling amount and in the currency as specified in the LtB and/or replenish funds for 
eligible expenditures not exceeding the limit of advance to a bank account designated 
by  the  government.  The  mechanism  helps  the  government  in  financing  eligible 
expenditures defined in the financing agreement. During the project implementation, 
the  designated  account  is  replenished  when  satisfactory  evidence  of  expenditure 
incurred is received. The designated account will be maintained in a freely convertible 
currency agreed by the government and IFAD and specified in the LtB.  
  Expenditures above the "Statement of Expenditure" (SoE) threshold stipulated in the 
Letter  to  the  Borrower  shall  be  documented  on  a  Form  101  and  the  photocopy  of 
supporting evidence as stipulated in section 3.1(d) of the LDH needs to be submitted 
to IFAD retaining all supporting documents at the project. Expenditures below the 
threshold  should  be  listed  on  a  Form  102  mentioning  full  description  of  payment, 
name  of  payee,  contractor,  supplier  or  service  provider,  reference  to  the  relevant 
AWPB and budget line/item, contract or invoice number, payment voucher number, 
contract  amount  and  currency,  invoice  amount  and  currency,  date  of  payment, 
payment reference, exchange rate, withdrawal application amount, country of origin 
and  other  details  following  information  in  the  SOE  form.  The  statement  of 
expenditures  will  be  reviewed  substantively  on  a  sample  basis  during  supervision 
and  implementation  support missions. All  original  documentation  is  to  be  retained 
by the project and securely located to enable inspection by IFAD representatives and 
auditors for a period of at least 10 years after the project completion date (PCD), in 
accordance with article VIII of the General Conditions.  
  Towards  project  completion,  IFAD  initiates  procedures  to  ensure  recovery  of 
advances by project closure. Recovery of the advance shall start either six months 
before completion date or when the undisbursed balance of the financing (including 
outstanding special commitments) is equal to twice the amount of the advance. The 
96 
project shall submit advance recovery plan to the IFAD with an information of WA 
No., date and amount of authorized initial advance in NPR, USD & SDR if IFAD loan 
is in SDR, estimated amounts in NPR & USD of each WA No., date and period of WA, 
amounts in USD and proposed percentage of each WA and cumulative amounts to 
be recovered and cumulative unjustified balance. 
  The  gradual  recovery  of  the  advance  is  achieved  by  applying  part  of  the  amount 
documented  in  each  replenishment  application  to  reduce the  outstanding  advance 
either on receipt of advance recovery plan or even before receipt of advance recovery 
plan  if  the  advance  outstanding  is  estimated  to  be  more  than  estimated  eligible 
expenditures  for  the  remaining  project  period.  Gradual  recovery  offers  the  most 
effective means of ensuring that some funds in designated account remain available 
to finance eligible expenditures to be incurred in the remaining project period. For 
example,  recovery  may  be  made  on  a  2  to  1  ratio;  that  is,  for  each  US$3  of 
documented  eligible  expenditure,  IFAD  replenishes  the  imprest  account  of  the 
borrower  with  US$2  and  applies  documentation  for  US$1  towards  the  recovery  of 
the  outstanding  advance,  thus  ultimately  ensuring  that  full  documentation  is 
gradually  submitted  to  cover  the  entire  advance.  If  some  further  withdrawals  are 
projected to be made from other than the designated account, the recovery ratio for 
subsequent  applications  is  appropriately  increased  to  ensure  that  recovery  is 
completed in good time before the financing is fully disbursed or before the financing 
closing date. A recovery plan is provided in Appendix FM-3. 
  Procedure II - Direct Payment. Direct payments are not foreseen for this project 
but  are  explained  here  in  the  unlikely  case  that  the  need  should  arise  during  the 
project life. Under this procedure, the project requests IFAD to pay suppliers/service 
providers  directly  from  the  loan  account  indicating  in  the  WA  the  date  on  which 
payment becomes due to the supplier/service providers. The procedure is similar to 
Procedure I described above but the payment is made directly to the supplier/service 
providers as advised and instructed by the PMU. This procedure is generally suitable 
for  payment  of large  civil  works  progress  and  retention  payments,  and  consultant 
fees (when these are of substantial magnitude). The threshold of direct payment is 
specified in the LTB. 
  Under the direct payment procedure, payment is requested by completing separate 
Form 100 - Application for Withdrawal for each supplier and currency in which the 
payment  is  requested.  The  WA  for  direct  payment  should  be  received  by  IFAD  at 
least two weeks before the payment to the supplier/service providers becomes due. 
The  WA  should  be  submitted  along  with  the  corresponding  Application  Summary 
Sheet(s)  Form(s)  101  for  direct  payment,  together  with  complete  supporting 
documentation as per the instructions provided in section 2.1 of the LDH.  
  Procedure III - Reimbursement. The method is used to claim reimbursement of 
eligible expenditures pre-financed by the ADBL to the ADBL bank account submitting 
separate Application for Withdrawal – Form 100, Application Summary Sheets Form 
101 & Statement of Expenditure Form 102 as in case of Procedure I above. This type 
of disbursement will only be used for payment to ADBL bank account from IFAD loan 
account if the expenses to be borne from IFAD source have been spent by the ADBL. 
There may not be case of reimbursement as an advance will be provided by the IFAD 
for project expenses. WA for reimbursement is to be submitted to the IFAD within 
ninety calendar days from the dates of payments or the period as specified in the 
LtB. 
  This procedure is followed when expenditures have already been incurred, that is, 
the supplier of goods, works, consulting or other services and incremental operating 
costs have already been paid by the ADBL from its own funds. Reimbursement will 
be made to the ADBL in the currency of payment made for eligible expenditures. The 
amount reimbursed in the requested currency will be calculated in USD and currency 
of financing agreement by the IFAD, using the IMF rate of exchange on the date of 
payment by the IFAD Treasury. The reimbursement procedure has the same Forms 
(100, 101 and 102) and documentary evidence requirements as described above. 
97 
  Project completion: Withdrawal Applications may be continued to be submitted up 
to  the  Loan  Closing  date  i.e.  six  months  after  the  project  completion  date. 
Submission  of  the  Project  Completion  Report  making  reference  to  financial 
management and the final audit report are requirements in order to close the loan 
account.  Only  payments  made,  or  payments  due  for  goods  delivered,  works 
completed  and  services  rendered,  prior  to  the  project  completion  date,  qualify  for 
disbursement. The only additional expenditures allowed are for winding up activities 
(salaries, audit fees, impact assessment study, project completion report and other 
activities  as  agreed  with  IFAD).  No  replenishment  will  be  made  after  the  project 
completion  date.  Expenses  are  eligible  only  if  services  have  been  rendered, 
construction of works have been completed and goods have been delivered by the 
completion date, except that costs for winding up activities are eligible until closing 
date. No disbursements can be made after loan closing date. 
   Beneficiary  Contribution:  The  beneficiaries  will  provide  cash  or  in-kind 
contributions for labour and construction materials for construction or rehabilitation 
of market, processing, storage, and infrastructure related to irrigation and income 
generation  activities.  The  PMU  shall  develop  a  system  to  collect  information  of 
beneficiary  cash  and  in-kind  contribution  to  the  project  on  a  regular  and  ongoing 
basis. The labour contribution shall be calculated based on the prevailing wage rates 
and  cost  of  construction materials  of  the  respective  places while  cash  contribution 
shall  be  calculated  based  on  actual  contribution  made  for  construction  and  other 
input for the activities. The statement of expenditures showing labour contribution 
and percentage of beneficiaries' contribution of the total expenses incurred shall be 
used for collecting and accounting beneficiaries contribution. The contribution made 
in  cash  by  the  beneficiaries  and  participating  organizations  shall  be  recorded  to 
expenditures by the implementing agencies based on incurred expenditures. The in-
kind  contributions  for  goods  and  services  will  be  disclosed  in  the  income  and 
expenses statements and notes to accounts.  
6.3  Budgeting, processing of payments, accounting systems, 
policies, procedures and financial reporting 
  Finance  unit  organization:  The  PMU  shall  have  one  Programme  Chief  Finance 
Officer (FO), deputed by the ADBL, and one Account Assistant (AA) recruited for the 
project, one Account Officer and one Account Assistant in the provincial and A, B & 
C  class  branch  offices  and  Account  Assistant  in  D  class  branch  offices  will  be 
designated from the existing account staff for maintaining accounts and preparing 
reports  of  the  project.  The  job  description  of  the  Finance  Officer  and  Account 
Assistant shall be as specified in this PIM. Account Officer/Assistant of the province 
and  branch  offices  will  be  responsible  for  accounting  and  record  keeping  of  all 
financial  transactions,  and  preparation and  submission  of  financial  statements and 
statement of expenditures to PMU.  
  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  overall  financial  management,  preparation  and 
submission  of  consolidated  AWPB,  procurement  plan,  withdrawal  application  and 
monthly, quarterly and annual financial statements, internal and external audit and 
compliance with the terms of LtB, IFAD's general conditions, financing agreement, 
subsidiary  loan  agreement,  project  agreement  and  prevailing  policies,  procedures, 
rules and laws. PMU will report to the Project Director (ADBL CEO), GoN and IFAD. 
  Budget: The province and branch offices shall prepare their budget and submit the 
AWPB finalized in the workshop held in provincial level to PMU. The PMU will review 
the AWPB received from province and branch offices and consolidate with its budget 
and submit to Program and Budget Section of Planning and Research Department. 
The  Budget  Section,  in  consultation  with  PMU,  will  finalize  annual  work  plan  and 
budget (AWPB) of the project including co-financing by the Heifer and counterpart 
funds  of  the  Federal,  State  and  Local  Government,  ADBL,  private  sector  and 
beneficiaries and loans to be received from bank and financial institutions based on 
the implementation schedule of the project activities, cost table, subsidiary loan and 
98 
financing agreement and prevailing market price for submission to the ADBL Board 
and Project Steering Committee in the format given in Appendix FM-4. The ADBL will 
provide funds from the corporate social responsibility (CSR) fund and other budget 
for  expenses  to  be  borne  by  the  bank.  After  PSC  approval,  the  AWPB  will  be 
submitted to IFAD for no objection before 15 May of each year and MoF for entering 
in the line Ministry Budget Information System (LMBIS) for budget provision in the 
federal budget by creating a separate budget line for the loan to be provided to ADBL 
for  project  implementation.  The  MoF  will  provide  loan  signing  subsidiary  loan 
agreement with ADBL. The MoF will release budget to the ADBL after approval of the 
budget  by  Parliament.  The  PMU  will  allocate  and  release  annual  budget  to  the 
province and branch offices specifying the activities. The PMU will monitor physical 
and financial performance on a quarterly basis. The budget allocated to the province 
and branch offices can be revised by the ADBL not exceeding the approved annual 
budget. 
  If  the  AWPB  is  required  to  be  revised  within  the  approved  budget  allocation  to 
reallocate the budget among the activities or for new activities, a request for budget 
revision with justification should be submitted by the PMU to the PSC, GoN and IFAD 
for approval. After approval of the revised budget, the budget will be allocated among 
the PMU, province and branch offices office for implementation of revised activities.  
  The PMU will monitor the monthly budget execution in the format given in Appendix 
FM-5 and the statement of expenditures of the previous quarter and cash forecast 
of the next quarter which are given in Appendix FM-6 of financial reporting table.  
  Payment procedures: The expenditures are to be incurred for the project related 
activities as specified in the financing and subsidiary loan agreement, project design 
report, and cost table. The payments of such expenditures are to be made with due 
care  of  internal  check  and  internal  control  to  avoid  ineligible  expenditures  and 
unauthorized  payments  as  per  ADBL  payment  procedures.  There  should  be 
segregation  of  duties  in  processing  the  payments.  One  staff  should  check  all 
supporting  documents  related  to the  expenditures  and  prepare  voucher  and  these 
documents and voucher should be reviewed, recommended and approved by other 
staff. All the financial transactions are to be carried out only upon approval by the 
Project Coordinator at PMU and Office Chief of the province and branch offices. The 
finance staff should check the availability of budget and eligibility of expenditures for 
processing  the  payment  of  expenditures.  The  accountant  should  check  all  the 
supporting documents related to expenditures based on nature of expenditures and 
forward  to  the  Finance  Officer  except  D  class  branch  offices  for  review  the 
completeness of supporting documents, correctness of the amounts, and eligibility 
of expenditures and recommend for approval to the Project Coordinator in PMU and 
Office Chief of the province and branch offices. The procurement staff should check 
the related documents to ensure quality, specification and price of the goods supplied 
or services provided. If any discrepancy is identified, the payment should be withheld 
till required explanation/justification is provided for the requested payment. 
  The Finance Officer/Assistant should ensure that the following steps are performed: 
  A payment voucher should be prepared for each payment,  
  The availability of sufficient supporting documents to justify the expenditures, 
  The  supporting  documents  (original  copies  of  invoice,  receipt,  quotations, 
purchase  order,  goods  received  note,  inspection  report  of  the  technical 
committee  or  specialist,  contract,  travel  order,  travel  claim,  travel  report, 
participants attendance, distribution list, photographs, etc) should be checked 
to validate the amount and nature of expenditure, 
  Arithmetic correctness of expenditures, and 
  Cross  verification  of  all  supporting  documents  to  ensure  correctness  of  the 
amount of expenditures. 
99 
  Consultants'  Services:  The  payment  to  the  consultants  either  individual  or 
consulting  firm  shall  be made in  accordance  with  payment terms  and  other terms 
and conditions of the contract. The consultants may be hired either based on a lump 
sum contract or a time based contract. In case of a lump sum contract, payments 
will be made against the delivery of outputs/milestone as specified in the contracts 
while in case of time based contract, payments will be made against the submission 
of a time sheet and a summary of activities performed. The individual consultants 
will  be  hired  on  monthly  basis  or  on  the  basis  of  number  of  days  if  required  on 
intermittent basis and they will be paid against the submission of a time sheet and 
a report of activities performed. The report submitted by the consultants is required 
to  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  concerned  specialist  to  ensure  quality  of  the 
expected report and compliance with the terms and conditions of the contract in case 
of lump sum contract. The payment will be made only after approval of the report. 
  Training  and  capacity  building:  The  expenditures  incurred  for  training  and 
capacity  building  of  the  project  staff  and  beneficiaries  will  be  approved  only  on 
verification of all supporting documents related to such expenditures. The documents 
required  are  approval  of  the  cost  estimate  &  training  by  the  Project 
Director/Coordinator at PMU and Office Chief in province and branch offices and IFAD 
if required, invoices and receipts of the expenditures, invitations to the participants, 
participants’  attendance,  payees'  signatures  for  payment  of  allowances  to  the 
participants  and  trainers,  distribution  list  of  materials,  photographs  of  training, 
completion report, etc. 
    Incremental  operating  costs:  The  expenditures  will  be  incurred  for  the 
incremental  operating  expenses  as  provisioned  in  the  project  design  report,  cost 
table and AWPB and incurred for the project management. Such expenditures must 
be incurred for the project management during implementation of the project and 
eligible for funding. All the required supporting documents are to be submitted for 
processing payments and the concerned finance staff should check the sufficiency, 
correctness  and  eligibility  of  the  expenditures  and  availability  of  budget  before 
recommending  the  payment.  The  project  management  expenditures  should  be 
correctly classified to the respective component and category.  
   Travel  Expenditures:  Staff  of  the  project  has  to  travel  for  implementation  and 
monitoring of the project activities as well as for meeting, workshops, study tours 
and  staff  training.  The  staff  requiring  to  travel  must  obtain  prior  approval  of  the 
Project  Director/Coordinator/  Office  Chief  and  IFAD  if  it  is  required.  The  approved 
travel request, advance required and No Objection obtained from IFAD have to be 
submitted to the Finance Officer/Assistant for travel advance if required. The staffs 
have  to  submit  to  the  Finance  officer/Assistant  all  the  supporting  documents  and 
travel report within one week from the date of return from travel. The finance staff 
will  check  accuracy  and  completeness  of  travel  expenses  with  the  supporting 
documents and submit to the Project Director/Coordinator at PMU and Office Chief 
at province and branch offices for approval. Upon approval of the travel expense, the 
advance provided will be settled or amount due to the staff will be reimbursed. 
  Matching Grant: The grants will be provided to the sub-project implementers for 
construction or rehabilitation of market, processing, storage, farm access roads and 
infrastructure related to irrigation and income generation activities. The grants will 
be  provided  only  for  the  activities  provisioned  in  the  project  design  report  and 
approved in the AWPB. The first instalment of the grant will be paid on signing of the 
grant  agreement  with  the  sub-project  implementers  if  the  advance  payment  is 
provisioned  in  the  agreement.  The  sub-project  implementers  have  to  submit  the 
statement  of  expenditures  and  grant  utilization  certificate  in  the  format  given  in 
Appendix FM-7 with the supporting documents to request for the next instalment or 
reimbursement  of  expenses  incurred.  The  Finance  Officer/Assistant  will  check  the 
supporting documents and forward to the concerned technical officer who will check 
physical  progress  and  compliance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  grant 
agreement as per project grant guidelines and recommend for payment. The record 
100 
of grant provided by the project to the sub-project implementers will be maintained 
by  the  PMU,  province  and  branch  offices  of  ADBL  in  the  format  given  in  Appendix 
FM-8.  The  record  should  include  description  of  activity,  name  of  grantee,  grant 
agreement  date,  grant  completion  date,  total  amount  of  the  activity,  grantee 
contribution, project grant amount, instalments of grant payment, milestone to be 
achieved to be eligible for instalment payment, date and amount of each instalment 
payment,  completion  date,  and  remarks.  All  supporting  documents  related  to  the 
expenditures  should  be  marked  with  "PAID"  stamp  immediately  after  approval  of 
payment voucher to avoid double payment of same expenditures. 
  Loan  to  the  sub-project  implementers:  The  sub-project  implementers  are 
responsible to arrange loan from the commercial banks and financial institutions for 
the sub-project before requesting for matching fund/co-financing from the project. 
The  sub-project  implementers  have  to  submit  the  project  proposal  and  other 
documents required for obtaining loan as per procedures and terms and condition of 
the  concerned  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  commercial  banks 
and financial institutions will follow their loan approval and disbursement procedures 
and  disburse  loan  to  the  sub-project  implementers.  The  commercial  banks  and 
financial institutions have to submit the statement of loan disbursed and outstanding 
showing  at  least  the  information  mentioned  in  the  format  of  Appendix  -  9  for 
reimbursement  of  loan  to  the  PMU.  The  PMU  will  provide  loan  to  the  banks  and 
financial institutions after deducting loan if already provided from the amount of loan 
outstanding. 
  Accounting:  The  PMU,  province  and  branch  offices  of  the  will  maintain  separate 
accounts  of  the  project  following  double  entry  accrual  basis  of  accounting  system 
using existing core banking and accounting software. The existing chart of accounts 
will  be  modified  for  accounting  expenses  by  categories,  components,  sub-
components, activities, commodity, funding sources, geographical region to monitor 
expenses  and meet  accounting  and  reporting  requirement  of  IFAD.  The  Heifer will 
also  maintain  accounts for  the  expenses  incurred  for  the  project.  The  contribution 
made by the state and local government, sub-project implementers and beneficiaries 
shall be recorded to expenditures based on statement of expenditures.  
  The contribution made in cash by the sub-project implementers shall be recorded to 
expenditures based on incurred expenditures. In-kind contributions will be quantified 
based on fair market value and accounted to expenses and income disclosing in the 
notes to accounts. The advance provided to the project staff shall be accounted on 
receipt  of  SoEs  with  the  supporting  documents.  The  PMU  and  all  offices  of  ADBL 
implementing  the  project  activities,  Heifer  and  other  implementing  agencies  shall 
maintain all required records of financial transactions. All supporting documents shall 
be  retained  and  made  available 
for  verification  during  supervision  and 
implementation support mission and mid-term review mission of IFAD and audit. The 
accounts  and  records  are  to  be  maintained  consistently  to  reflect  the  operations, 
resources  and  expenditures  related to  the  project  until  the  financing  closing  date, 
and shall retain such accounts and records for at least ten (10) years after project 
closing date.  
  The accounts shall be maintained using ADBL core banking and accounting software 
at all project implementing offices. A uniform chart of accounts shall be developed 
having  the  features  as  given  in  Appendix  FM-10  indicating  project  name, 
implementing offices, district, assets/ Liabilities/Income/expenses, source of funds, 
component, sub-component, activities, category and expenditure heads. The ADBL 
staff authorized to modify chart of accounts will provide code to the chart of accounts 
and issue guidance to PMU, province and branch offices of ADBL to maintain accounts 
using  this  chart  of  accounts.  The  chart  of  accounts  will  help  to  identify  nature  of 
expenditures  incurred  by  each  office  in  each  district  for  each  activity  of  the 
component  and  category  so that  software  can  generate  consolidated  statement  of 
expenditures by component, category, financiers, expenditure heads, and financial 
statements.  The  core  banking  and  accounting  software  shall  have  features  of 
101 
maintaining  books  of  accounts  viz.  cash  book,  bank  book,  journal,  ledger,  trial 
balance, bank reconciliation statement, expenditure by components, categories, and 
financiers in each cost center and consolidation at PMU.  
  An advance will be given to the staff as per ADBL policy to maintain petty cash on 
imprest  system  for  incurring  petty  expenses.  The  staff  taking  advance  for  petty 
expenses  shall maintain  petty  cash  statement  for  control  of  advance  and  to avoid 
use for personal purpose. The formats of petty cash voucher, statement of petty cash 
and request form and petty cash reconciliation are given in Appendix FM-11.  
  The  PMU,  province  and  branch  offices  shall  also  maintain  the  following  registers/ 
records (i) register of contracts (ii) register of fixed assets (iii) register of advances 
(iv) register of contract monitoring forms (vi) vehicle record forms (vii) tax register 
(viii) salary statement (ix) cheque issued register (x) stock book (xi) tour register 
etc. PMU, province and branch offices shall take back up of the data daily and stored 
off site as per Information Technology policy of the ADBL.  
  The PMU, province and branch offices of ADBL will provide the details of expenditure 
incurred for salaries and allowances of the staff working for the project and any other 
expenditures  incurred  for  the  project  for  accounting  and  reporting  of  ADBL 
counterpart fund in total expenditure of the project. 
  Asset Management: The detail record of fixed assets purchased from the project 
funds shall be maintained at the PMU and province and branch offices of ADBL in the 
fixed  assets  register  provided  in  Appendix  FM-12.  The  fixed  assets  register  shall 
include the description of fixed assets, identification number, manufacture serial No., 
supplier, date of purchase, invoice No. & date, source of funding, cost, date of receipt, 
the location, user if the asset is allocated to any staff, verification date, signature of 
verifier, date and amount of transfer or disposal, and remarks if any. The sub-project 
implementers  shall  also  maintain  register  of  fixed  assets  purchased  from  project 
funds and the register shall be submitted to the concerned branch offices within 15 
days of the year-end. All fixed assets shall be physically verified at least once in a 
year and the proof of physical verification shall be recorded in the asset register. The 
team of physical verification shall prepare physical verification report reconciling with 
the fixed assets register and mentioning the condition of assets and any shortage. 
The statement of fixed assets together and the physical verification reports shall be 
submitted to PMU together with the financial statements. All assets procured by the 
project shall be adequately insured. 
  The sub-project implementers will own the equipment procured from IFAD fund and 
use  for  the  intended  purpose  of  the  sub-project.  The  concerned  sub-project 
implementers will maintain fixed assets register of such equipment.  
  Internal  controls:  The  internal  control  system  relating  to  financial  procedures, 
accounting,  procurement,  record  maintenance,  preparation  of  financial  statements 
and reporting will be based on internal control system prescribed in this PIM and the 
existing  internal  control  system  of  the  ADBL  where  applicable.  There  shall  be 
segregation  of  duties  for  accounting,  payment,  bank  reconciliation,  procurement, 
inventory  management  and  approval  of  financial  transactions  at  all  levels  of 
implementation.  Finance  Officer/Assistant  shall  be  responsible  for  the  effective 
implementation of the overall internal control system. The PMU, province and branch 
offices  using  project  vehicles  shall  maintain  vehicle  record  form  for  recording 
movement  of  vehicle  in  the  vehicle  log  and  vehicle  history  with  regard  to  repair 
showing information given in the format of Appendix FM-13. 
  Reporting: The PMU will provide support to the province and branch offices of ADBL 
in preparing the financial statements in the beginning of the project. The province 
and branch offices and Heifer will submit to the PMU monthly financial statements 
showing  monthly  and  cumulative  expenditures  by  components,  categories,  and 
financiers,  comparative  statement  of  actual  and  budgeted  expenditure,  bank 
reconciliation  statement  of  the  project  account,  actual  and  percentage  of  each 
component and financiers, appraisal, disbursement and percent of each financiers, 
102 
financial performance by component and financiers, and disbursement status of IFAD 
loan against allocation should also be reported in the formats given in Appendix FM-
14. These financial statements should be signed by the finance staff and office chief 
of the province/branch offices. The province and branch offices and Heifer will submit 
monthly financial statements to the PMU within first week from the end of the month. 
PMU  shall  consolidate  the  monthly  financial  statements  received  from  province  & 
branch  offices  and  Heifer  with  its  financial  statements  and  submit  to  the  PMU 
Director.  
  The  PMU  shall  prepare  quarterly  interim  financial  reports  in  the  format  given 
Appendix  FM-15  within  45  days  of  the  end  of  each  quarter  and  annual  Project 
financial  statements  in  the  format  given  in  Appendix  FM-16  based  on  the  IFAD 
Handbook,  on  accrual  basis  of  accounting,  within  four  months  of  the  end  of  each 
financial year for submission to IFAD and also the auditor for audit. The PMU shall 
also prepare the quarterly progress report in the format prescribed by the GoN for 
submission to the GoN. The PMU can submit online through ICP the quarterly IFR, 
other  reports  and  budget  execution  data  and  use  various  functionality  of  ICP  to 
extract and view disbursement and other financial information. 
  The financial statements of the project for each fiscal year should consist of: 
  Statement of financial position; 
  Statement of Operating Performance (by category); 
  Statement of Operating Performance (by component); 
  Statement of Cash flows; 
  A statement of comparison of budget and actual expenditures (by category); 
  A statement of comparison of budget and actual expenditures (by component); 
  Designated Account Statement 
  Designated account Reconciliation Statement 
  SOEs by withdrawal application and category of expenditures; and 
  Notes to the project financial statements with respect to accounting standards, 
basis  of  accounting,  foreign  currency  transactions,  budget,  government 
counterpart  funds,  other  donor  funds,  other  receipts,  yearly  procurement; 
statement of fixed assets, cumulative status of funds by category, reconciliation 
between the amounts shown as received by the project (GON) and those shown 
as being disbursed by IFAD. 
6.4  Audit procedures and arrangements  
  The ADBL shall hire a chartered accountant firm appointed to conduct audit of the 
ADBL on recommendation of the Office of the Auditor General to carry out the audit 
of  the  project  in  accordance  with  Nepal  Standards  of  Auditing,  IFAD’s  General 
Conditions  and  the  IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  of  IFAD-
financed projects43 ("the Handbook", in order to meet the deadline for submission of 
the  audit  reports  (within  six  months  of  the  closing  of  fiscal  year).  The  Handbook, 
inter alia, requires public disclosure of the audited financial statements.  
  The  audit  report  submitted  by  the  project  shall  contain  a  clear  expression  of  the 
auditor’s opinion on the project's financial statements. It should include a financial 
statement’s  audit,  a  compliance  audit  and  should  include  a  Management  Letter.  It 
should  also  include  a  section  on  the  project’s  compliance  to  loan  covenants 
particularly  those  dealing  with  the  financial  matters.  The  auditor  shall  review  the 
financial  statement,  designated  account  and  SOEs  and  give  an  opinion  on  the 
financial statements. The auditor will also conduct audit of the matching grant award 
process to ensure compliance with grant guidelines. 
43 https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39641638 
103 
    The standard ToR for the auditors is provided in Appendix FM-17. The auditor shall 
be  appointed  before  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  during  the  project  implementation 
period and before financing closing date for the last year of the project in accordance 
with the IFAD approved Audit Terms of Reference. The ToR should be sent to IFAD 
for  review  and  "No-objection".  The  PMU  shall  start  procurement  process  after 
obtaining approved ToR from IFAD using the agreed ToR subject to IFAD prior review 
and  inform  IFAD  the  name  of  the  proposed  auditor  and  the  procurement  process 
followed  for  the  selection.  The  PMU  shall  appoint  the  auditor  on  receipt  of  "No-
objection" from the IFAD. The auditors so appointed shall issue a formal engagement 
letter confirming their acceptance of the appointment and outlining the methodology, 
scope and responsibilities under the audit. The representatives of the PMU will sign 
and  return  a  copy  of  the  engagement  letter  to  the  auditor.  A  sample  audit 
engagement letter is given in Appendix FM-17 to this chapter. At least 30 days before 
the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  PMU  confirms  to  IFAD  that  an  auditor  has  been 
appointed.  
  In general, and in accordance with international best practice and as recommended 
by IESBA, contracted audit firms cannot provide consultancy services to the project 
or have done so in the previous two years. Hence, auditors should not be appointed 
as consultants hired for designing accounting and control systems because of conflict 
of interest as they require to comment on such work. 
  In making a proposal for appointment of a private auditor, the project should provide 
IFAD  with  relevant  supporting  documentation  and  should  address  the  following 
questions: 
  Does the firm adhere to internationally accepted auditing standards or national 
standards on auditing? The firm’s audit procedures and methods should ensure 
compliance with such standards. 
Is the firm independent of the project entity to be audited and of the people 
appointing the auditor? 
  What  is  the  legal  status  of  the  firm?  This  includes  such  aspects  as  sole 
proprietorship or partnership status. 
  Are any of the assigned audit staff employed by or closely linked to the project 
entity to be audited, or to any government body or public agency? 
  Can  the  auditor  confirm  that  there  is  no  conflict  of  interest  or  lack  of 
independence implicit in accepting the appointment? 
Is the auditor committed to providing qualified and experienced staff that can 
ensure timely submission of audit reports? In particular: 
  Do  the  assigned  staffs  belong  to  professional  audit  or  accounting  body,  the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Nepal? 
  The  auditors  shall  conduct  audit  of  the project  accounts,  designated  bank  account 
and  statement  of  expenditures  following  the  applicable  Standards  on  Auditing  as 
specified  in  the  ToR  acceptable  to  IFAD.  In  reviewing  the  project  accounts  and 
financial statements, the auditor will: 
  verify that acceptable accounting standards have been consistently applied and 
indicate  any  material  deviation from  these  standards,  and  the  effect  of  such 
deviation on the annual financial statements; 
  assess  the  adequacy  of  accounting  and  internal  control  systems  (procedures 
and  responsibilities) 
financial 
transactions  (commitment,  review,  approval,  payment  and  accounting)  and 
ensuring safe custody of project-financed assets, and document any instances 
where controls are lacking or need strengthening; 
for  monitoring  expenditures  and  other 
104 
  determine  whether  the  PMU,  province  and  branch  offices  of  ADBL  have 
maintained  adequate  documentation  for  all  transactions;  e.g.  procurement 
documents,  contracts,  suppliers.  invoices,  letters  of  credit  and  evidence  of 
payment,  and  ascertain  that  expenditures  were  properly  authorized  and  in 
compliance with legal requirements; 
review  whether  the  amounts  from  designated  account  have  been  withdrawn 
for the intended purpose of the project; 
  verify SOEs, accounting records and supporting documentation; 
establish  that  expenditures  claimed  for  reimbursement  under  this  procedure 
are  eligible  for  financing  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  financing 
agreement; 
  verify the numerical accuracy of financial statements and accounts; 
  verify  that  disbursement  requests  for  expenditures  submitted  to  IFAD  are 
eligible  for  financing  under  the  loan  agreement,  and  identify  clearly  any 
ineligible expenditures;  
verify the correctness of transactions;  
carry out a physical verification of any significant assets purchased and confirm 
their existence and use for project purposes; 
from  the  second  year  audit  onwards,  follow  up  and  on  the  remedial  actions 
taken by the PMU in response to previous audit findings and recommendations, 
and report on the status of implementation of recommendations issued in the 
previous years. 
  The auditor has to issue a management letter describing any weaknesses identified 
in  the  project  accounting  and  internal  control  systems  and  non-compliance  with 
financing and subsidiary loan agreement, memorandum of understanding, prevailing 
Laws, policies, directives and decisions of the management and the recommendation 
to resolve them or for improvement after discussion with the finance staff and the 
PMU Director and office chiefs of the concerned province and branch offices. The PMU 
has to submit the audit report and management letter to the PMU Director and the 
ADBL  Board  for  review  the  audit  report  and  audit  observations  reported  in  the 
management  letter  together  with  management  response.  The  management 
responses shall be provided to the auditor and IFAD for clarification and corrective 
actions  to  be  taken  to  avoid  such  audit  observations  within  one  month  of  receipt 
thereof. The auditors shall include the management responses in the final version of 
the management letter and submit along with the audit report.  
  The  audited  project  financial  statements  including  the  designated  account  and 
management letter along with management response have to be submitted to the 
IFAD  within  six  months  of  the  end  of  each  financial  year  during  the  project 
implementation  period  and  by  the  financing  closing  date  for  the  last  year  of  the 
project to comply with the deadline for submission of the audit report. In accordance 
with the IFAD Handbook, the audited financial statements and audit report will be 
disclosed  publicly.  The  Heifer  will  also  submit  the  audit  report  of  the  project 
expenditures within six months of the end of each fiscal year 
  The  PMU  shall  maintain  a  Log  of  Audit  Observations  reported  in  the  management 
letter by the auditor and also a Table of Summary Status of Audit Observations of 
each year separately and get the settlement of audit observations validated by the 
auditor during the subsequent fiscal year at the time of audit of next fiscal year or 
earlier.  The  format  of  Table  of  Summary  Status  of  Audit  Observations  and  Log  of 
Audit  Observations  is  given  in  Appendix  FM-17  to  this  chapter.  Log  of  Audit 
Observations  and  a  Table  of  Summary  Status  of  Audit  Observations  will  be  made 
available to the IFAD missions.  
   Internal Audit: The Internal Audit Department of the ADBL will conduct internal 
audit of the financial transactions of the project in accordance with the Standards on 
Internal  Audit  (SIA)  on  quarterly  basis  under  terms  of  reference  (ToR)  given  in  
105 
Appendix  FM-18  agreed  with  the  IFAD.  The  internal  auditor  (IA)  will  include  such 
tests  and  controls,  as  the  auditor  considers  necessary  under  the  circumstances. 
According to the SIA, internal audit is defined as "Internal audit is an independent 
management  function,  which  involves  a  continuous  and  critical  appraisal  of  the 
functioning of an entity with a view to suggest improvements thereto and add value 
to  and  strengthen  the  overall  governance  mechanism  of  the  entity,  including  the 
entity’s risk management and internal control system.”  
  The  IA  will  assess  the  effectiveness  of  operation  of  the  project’s  financial 
management system and review of internal control mechanisms. The IA will check 
the  maintenance  of  required  records  for  the  financial  transactions  of  the  project, 
eligibility  of  expenditure 
for  intended  purposes,  supporting  documents  to 
substantiate  the  nature  and  amounts  of  expenditures,  proper  authorizations, 
reliability of financial reports and timely reporting to PMU and IFAD, in compliance 
with  the  prevailing  Laws,  financial  rules  and  procedures,  subsidiary  loan  and 
financing  agreements,  letter  to  the  borrower,  IFAD's  general  conditions,  and 
procurement guidelines, and review the internal controls. 
  The  draft  internal  audit  reports  covering  deficiencies  and  validation  of  corrective 
actions  taken  by  the  management  for  audit  deficiencies  reported  in  the  previous 
internal  audit  reports  and  status  of  outstanding  audit  observations  are  to  be 
submitted  to  the  respective  cost  centres  copied  to  the  PMU  Director.  The  internal 
audit  report  will  help  the  management  to  identify  weaknesses  in  the  financial 
management  system  and  internal  control  system  and  take  corrective  actions  in  a 
timely manner. The management has to take immediate corrective measures to avoid 
reoccurrence  of  issues  and  strengthen  the  internal  control  system  and  revise  the 
financial procedures. The final internal audit report after receipt of response on the 
draft internal audit report will be submitted to the Audit Committee of the ADBL. The 
Audit  Committee  will  review  the  internal  audit  report  and  recommends  for  the 
remedial action to resolve the observations and avoid recurrence. The internal audit 
report along with the actions taken to resolve audit observations shall be submitted 
to  the  Board,  Audit  Committee  and  PMU  Director.  IFAD  shall  have  access  to  all 
internal audit reports and actions taken to resolve audit observations of the project 
  Ineligible  Expenses.  The  internal  and  external  auditors  are  required  to  identify 
clearly  any  ineligible  expenditures  incurred  against  these  agreements,  AWPB, 
procurement  plan  and  project  design  report  and  report  them  regardless  of  their 
materiality. If the ineligible expenditures already claimed in withdrawal applications 
and  reimbursed  are  subsequently  identified,  the  auditors  will  report  these 
expenditures separately which will be either adjusted from the next claim or refunded 
to IFAD. 
   Taxes: Section 11.01 of the General Conditions stipulates that the Loan and all Loan 
Service Payments shall be exempt from all Taxes, and all loan service payments shall 
be  made free  and  clear  of  taxes.  Taxes  on  signature,  delivery  or  registration  shall 
also be exempted. It is the policy of the Fund that Loan proceeds are not to be used 
to  pay  Taxes,  including  (but  not  limited  to)  any  taxes  levied  on  the  imports, 
procurement or supply of any good, civil work or services financed by the Loan but 
excluding  income  taxes  on  the  overall  income.  If  taxes  are  not  exempted  to  the 
project, they shall be paid from the government fund. If taxes are exempted by the 
Government, they will be recorded under the government counterpart contributions 
maintaining a separate record. 
  Materiality:  Misstatements,  including  omissions,  are  considered  to  be  material  if 
they, individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to influence the 
economic  decisions  of  users  taken  on  the  basis  of  the  financial  statements. 
Materiality depends on the nature or size of the item or nature of misstatement, or 
a combination of both which is judged in the light of surrounding circumstances and 
the  auditor’s  perception  of  the  financial  information  and  needs  of  users  of  the 
financial  statements.  In  the  public  sector,  materiality  includes  compliance  with 
policies,  legislative  concern  or  public  interest.  In  the  context  of  IFAD-financed 
106 
operation will include compliance with the Financing and Project Agreements and in 
particular the requirement that IFAD funds may only be used for the purpose stated 
therein. 
  Preventing Fraud and Corruption: The project will promote and comply with the 
highest  standards  of  probity  and  accountability  in  the  use  of  its  funds  and 
implementation  of  project  activities  as  planned  to  achieve  Project  objectives.  The 
project  will  take  appropriate  action  to  prevent,  mitigate  and  combat  Prohibited 
Practices  through  compliance  with  the  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and 
Corruption and prevailing Nepal Laws in its Activities and Operations. IFADs policy 
requires that the staff of IFAD and the project, beneficiaries of IFAD loans, as well as 
all  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants  under  IFAD-financed  contracts 
observe  the  highest  standard  of  ethics  and  integrity  during  the  procurement  and 
execution of such contracts. Mechanisms for whistle-blowers to access IFAD systems 
are 
link: 
http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm. 
following 
provided 
the 
at 
  Particular attention will be paid to: including clauses in procurement documents and 
contracts that would establish an obligation for bidders and contractors to disclose 
information;  encouraging  the  dissemination  of  government  confidential  reporting 
channels and whistle-blower protection measures; and procurement documents and 
contracts  would  inform  implementing  partners  of  IFAD’s  jurisdiction  to  conduct 
investigations and impose sanctions for prohibited practices. 
  Investigative  Authority:  Under  IFAD's  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and 
Corruption44,  the  independent  and  competent  authority  responsible  for  receiving, 
reviewing  and  investigating  allegations  of  fraud  and  corruption  will  be  the 
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority, who will take action as per 
provisions of the Federal Law. 
6.5  Appendices to this section  
  Financial management appendices are listed below: 
•  Appendix FM-1: Designated account reconciliation statement  
•  Appendix FM-2: Checklist for a Withdrawal Application  
•  Appendix FM-3: Recovery Plan  
•  Appendix FM-4: Annual Work Plan and Budget  
•  Appendix FM-5: Sample Monthly/Quarterly Budget Execution Report 
•  Appendix FM-6: Financial reporting Table  
•  Appendix FM-7: Grant Register 
•  Appendix FM-8: Fund Utilization Certificate (Beneficiary) 
•  Appendix FM-9: Statement of Loan 
•  Appendix FM-10: Indicative chart of accounts 
•  Appendix FM-11: Petty cash forms 
•  Appendix FM-12: Fixed Asset Register 
•  Appendix FM-13: Vehicle Record Forms 
•  Appendix FM-14: Expenditure record forms 
•  Appendix FM-15: Quarterly Interim Financial Reports 
•  Appendix FM-16: Project Financial Statements 
•  Appendix FM-17: Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project  
•  Appendix FM-18: Sample Terms of Reference of the Internal Auditor 
•  Appendix FM-19: Draft Terms of Reference for Finance Staff  
44https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40189695 
107 
7  Procurement  
7.1  Summary 
  Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under VITA financed from 
resources provided or administered by IFAD would be undertaken in accordance with 
the provision of the ADBL’s (as the Lead Programme Agency) Financial Administration 
Bylaws 2064 based on the Public Procurement Act (PPA) 2007 as amended from time 
to time to the extent they are consistent with the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement 
Guidelines  (December  2019)  and  Handbook  (dated  September 2010)  and  as 
amended from time to time.  
  National Competitive Bidding (NCB), National Shopping (NS) and Direct Contracting 
(DC). Goods and services (non- consulting) procured using NCB, NS and DC would 
follow  the  procedures  and  processes  defined  in  the  Programme  Implementation 
Manual (PIM) approved by the PSC and IFAD. The PIM shall also include details of 
the  selection  method  to  be  applied  in  the  case  of  consultancy  services,  such  as 
Quality  and  Cost  Based  Selection,  Fixed  Budget  Selection,  Least  Cost  Selection, 
Consultants  Qualification  Selection  and  Single  Source  Selection.  The  selection  of 
individual consultants and individual service providers would also be defined in the 
PIM. 
  National Competitive Bidding: The procedures to be followed for national competitive 
bidding  shall  include  the  clarifications  and  modifications  described  in  the  following 
paragraphs  required  for  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines.  
  Procurement  would  be  undertaken  as  per  the  consolidated  procurement  plan 
submitted by the PMU approved by the PSC and IFAD. The details of applicable post 
and prior review requirements and other risk mitigation measures is detailed under 
Appendix 8 of this Design Report.  
  As  the  responsibility  of  implementation  of  infrastructure  works  lies  with  the 
beneficiaries, the procurement design and supervision of infrastructures will be their 
responsibility. They may carry out these activities if they have technical capability or 
if  not,  they  need  to  outsources  it  to  consultants  (individuals/firms).  Monitoring  of 
implementation will be done by ADBL. 
 Training  and  capacity  development.  The  Program  also  aims  to  contribute  towards 
building  and  strengthening  ADBL/Municipality  capacity  building  and  has  allocated 
resources  as  part  of  its  institutional  support  to  ADBL  (Head  Office  and  Provincial 
Offices)/Municipalities.  
108 
7.2  Procurement and contracting of goods, civil work and services 
7.2.1  Procurement context and framework 
  The  government  reformed  the  legal  and  institutional  setup  of  public  procurement 
processes in 2007. These reforms included the adoption of a new Public Procurement 
Act (PPA) and associated regulations, the decentralization of procurement, and the 
creation  of  the  Public  Procurement  Monitoring  Office  (PPMO)  under  the  Prime 
Minister’s  Office.  The  PPA  follows  the  UNCITRAL  model.  Prior  to  this,  procurement 
was  regulated  under  the  Financial  Administration  Act  and  Regulations,  with  no 
designated  central  oversight  apart  from  the  general  control  role  played  by  the 
Financial  Comptroller  General’s  Office  (FCGO).  There has  been  one  amendment  in 
the  PPA  and  the  recently  the  associated  regulations  have  been  amended  (10th 
amendment). The PPA requires state owned enterprises (e.g., ADBL) to issue its own 
laws/by-laws  in  accordance  with  the  PPA.  ADBL  has  framed  its  own  Financial 
Administration Bylaws 2064 for procurement related activities and is based on the 
PPA/PPR. However, some of the recent changes in the PPR has not been incorporated 
in the Bylaws of ADBL.     
  The introduction of electronic bid submissions for government contracts has started 
to improve the integrity and value for money of public procurement. Since the PPA 
was passed in 2007, there have been improvements in the openness and fairness of 
the competitive bidding process, most notably through the introduction of e-bidding 
and a concomitant reduction in intimidation and violence. Prior to the introduction of 
e-bidding,  reports  were  common  of  rival  contractors  and  political  parties  hiring 
people to prevent bidders from entering government buildings to submit their bids. 
  A centralized e-GP portal for e-submission was launched by the PPMO on a pilot basis 
in  April 2016  in  five  major  departments  and  rolled  out  to  other  departments  from 
1 January 2017. The current e-GP system requires the bidder to enter the unit rates 
online as opposed to the uploading of the filled-in Bill of Quantities. The e-GP system 
has a banking interface for verification of securities. ADBL uses the centralized e-GP 
system of the PPMO for its procurement.   
  Technical procurement challenges also hamper efforts to improve value for money. 
First, procurement planning and bidding processes are often delayed, exacerbating 
the bunching of expenditures towards the end of the fiscal year. Second, local private 
sector firms complain that the provisions of the PPA are too onerous. Third, there is 
reported  to  be  insufficient  capacity  for  the  estimation  of  program  (e.g.  consulting 
costs). 
  Related  to  these  technical  factors,  the  law  and  regulations  intentionally  favour 
domestic  companies.  ADBL’s  Financial  Administration  Bylaws  2064  provides,  “In 
procuring goods by selecting any method as referred to in these bylaws, ADBL shall 
have  to  procure  Nepali  goods  even  if  the  price  of  the  goods  produced  in  Nepal  is 
higher by up to ten per cent than the foreign goods.” Similarly, the PPR requires that 
any civil works contract between NPR 20 million and NPR 1 billion be only procured 
from domestic bidders. In an international bid for a civil works, between NPR 1 billion 
to  NPR 5 billion,  a  foreign  bidder  can  only  bid  as  a  joint  venture  with  a  domestic 
bidder, unless the agreement with the development partner indicates otherwise. 
  The PPA and associated regulations amendment, inter alia, requires the use of two 
envelop procedures for civil works for estimates over NPR 20 million. It also removed 
the requirement of qualification criteria such as experience, turnover and cash flows 
for  a  contract up  to  NPR 20 million.  Previously the  amount  was  NPR 6 million. The 
change  in  the  provision  means  that  any  registered  bidder  will  be  eligible  to  get  a 
contract,  mainly  based  on  the  price  it  has  offered,  although  it  may  not  have  the 
capacity to do the work.  
  User committees are utilized for the implementation of small capital projects at the 
municipal  level,  but  weak  controls  and  political  influences  have  resulted  in  fund 
leakages and compromised project quality. To promote local resources, the PPR gave 
construction  authority  to  user  committees  (UCs)  for  up  to  NPR 6 million  which  in 
109 
March 2017 has been increased to NPR 10 million. The increased figure is reportedly 
a high threshold. Many local officials reported that UCs were awarded a contract for 
the  maximum  threshold  before  subcontracting  the  project  for  a  lower  amount. 
Furthermore, several UCs can be involved in the construction of one road, with each 
managing  the  construction  of  the  section  of  road  that  falls  within  its  community. 
Although  ADBL’s  Bylaws  provides  for  use  of  UCs,  it  does  not  provide  detailed 
procedures for awarding the contract. 
  Previously  the  regulation  barred  UC  to  use  heavy  machineries  such  as  a  loader, 
excavator,  roller,  dozer,  grader,  bitumen  distributor  and  bitumen  boiler  in  the 
construction work. The recent amendment allows the use of heavy machineries if its 
use was considered at the time of estimation. The UC are not allowed to subcontract 
the works and are to construct the work themselves, however, it has been found that 
these  provisions  have  been  violated.  The  recent  increase  in  the  UC  threshold  and 
allowing the use of machineries is being opposed by the Federation of Contractor’s 
Association Nepal (FCAN). 
  The  PPMO  was  established  in  2007  in  accordance  with  the  adoption  of  a  new 
procurement act and regulations. Its central oversight role is primarily facilitative. It 
is obliged to suggest further reforms in procurement policy and laws, issue technical 
guidelines and manuals and models for standard bidding documents, roll out training 
for  officials  at  public  entities  involved  in  procurement  and  collect  statistics  on 
procurement. Recent amendment in the procurement act has entrusted the PPMO to 
prepare  database  qualification  and  experience  of  bidders  and  consultants, 
accreditation of procurement specialists, recommend the public entity to rectify the 
defects  in  the  procurement  and  initiate  action  against  officials  involved  in  the 
procurement process, if the rules and regulation or the directives were not adhered 
to during procurement.  
  Recent  amendment  to  the  procurement  rules  has  added  the  responsibility  of 
establishing,  operating  and  managing  an  electronic  procurement  through  a  single 
portal  on  PPMO.  The  amendment  has  also  provided  for  two  envelop  bidding 
procedures.  Although  the  PPMO  has  a  central  procurement  portal,  it  has  not  been 
able to build capacity of the vast number of staff involved in the procurement unit 
and the bidder community on the use of the electronic (e-GP) system. 
  There  are  numerous  challenges  facing  public  procurement  in  Nepal,  including  low 
capacity  of  the  PPMO  and  most  procuring  entities,  and  a  weak  private  sector, 
aggravated  by  law  enforcement  issues.  The  function  of  public  procurement  at  the 
local  levels  (e.g.,  the  municipalities  under  the  Federal  system),  where  capacity  to 
implement procurement is almost non-existent, needs more attention.  
  The  Government  of  Nepal,  supported  by  different  development  partners’  active  in 
the  country,  is  implementing  several  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the 
PPMO, procuring entities, and oversight bodies, and to modernize the system through 
the  introduction  of  e-GP.  It  appears  however,  that  the  resources  needed  to 
successfully complete the ongoing and additional initiatives for improving different 
aspects of public procurement are limited. The Nepal Public Procurement Strategic 
Framework (NPPSF II) 2013-2016, prepared through wider consultation, has listed 
three  key  areas  of  intervention/actions  to  improve  the  performance  of  public 
procurement.  They  are:  (i) Standardization  of  Public  Procurement  Process  and 
Dissemination;  (ii) Capacity  Enhancement  of  Public  Procurement  System;  and 
(iii) Operationalization  and  Mainstreaming  of  e-GP.  The  capacity  constraints  of 
procurement entities have been largely responsible for executing timely procurement 
and  timely  award  of  contract.  The  transition  of  traditional  procurement  to  e-GP 
represents an important phase in the procurement reform process in Nepal. A review 
of the implementation progress reveals that the success of e-GP will greatly depend 
on: (i) the readiness and acceptability of the bidding communities, Procuring Entities 
(PEs) and oversight agencies; (ii) availability of support including logistics to switch 
over;  and  (iii) uninterrupted  IT  services  including  round  the  clock  access  to  the 
central  server  of  e-GP.  These  are  the  areas  where the  PPMO,  in  collaboration with 
110 
the key sector agencies, has to invest major efforts in terms of training, technical 
backstopping and infrastructure support. With these initiatives, it is imperative that 
the  performance  of  the  public  procurement  is  measured  and  disseminated  to  the 
stakeholders  with  a  set  of  key  measurable  performance  indicators  and  increasing 
accessibility to the data on public procurement through e-GP. 
  The role of the PPMO is limited in two ways that serve to reduce its effectiveness. 
First, as noted above, it does not have a legal mandate to ensure information related 
to  bidding  processes  is  made  public.  Second,  it  does  not  have  a  role  in  handling 
procurement  complaints.  Under  a  two-stage  review  process,  complaints  are 
submitted first to the chief of the concerned public entity and then, if necessary, to 
a  review  committee  formed  by  the  government.  The  committee  comprises  a 
judge/ex-judge/ex-Secretary,  an  engineer,  and  a  procurement  specialist  not 
currently employed by a public entity. One power assigned to the PPMO is blacklisting 
of contractors for a period of one to three years, based on misconduct in the bidding 
process or in project execution. 
Key lessons on procurement in IFAD Country Portfolio 
  Performance  reviews  of  IFAD  projects  in  Nepal  identify  weaknesses  in  project 
procurement  performance,  primarily  associated  with  non-compliances  and 
weaknesses  in  the  preparation  of  bid  documentation,  technical  specifications, 
evaluation  of  bids,  contract  management  and  performance  assessments.  These 
weaknesses  are  further  aggravated  due  to  the  lack  of  adequately  qualified  and 
trained  procurement  staff  in  the  programme  coordination  units  and  weakness  in 
procurement  record  keeping.  As  the  projects/programmes  are  mainly  rural 
development  in  nature,  being  implemented  in  remote  and  inaccessible  areas,  the 
size of the procurement is generally small/medium. 
  It has been found that turnover of experts proposed by the Consultant have been 
extensive. Proper monitoring and implementation of the contract and replacement is 
to be approved only as provided in the contract.  
  Generally,  design  and  supervision  aspects  in  the  projects  have  been  found  to  be 
lacking due to insufficient personnel being deployed. Provision should therefore be 
made in the Terms of Reference for adequate personnel and needs to be monitored 
properly. 
7.3  Procurement arrangements for VITA 
  Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under VITA financed from 
resources provided or administered by IFAD would be undertaken in accordance with 
the provision of the PPA 2007 and ADBL’s Financial Administration Bylaws 2064 as 
amended from time to time to the extent they are consistent with the provisions of 
IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  (dated  December  2019)  and  Handbook  (dated 
September 2010) and as amended from time to time.  
  Although ADBL has its own setup for procurement (Procurement, Store Management, 
Maintenance & AMC Section under Corporate Banking & GS), they do not have recent 
experience  working  with  donor  funded  project.  To  assist  in  mitigating  the  lack  of 
experience with donor funded procurement, the PMU would have a Senior Engineer 
with good knowledge of donor funded Procurement  who will also provide on the job 
training  for  the  staff involved  in  procurement management,  as  well  as to  assist  in 
finalizing the procurement plan.  
  There  is  inadequate  technical  expertise  for  the  design  and  supervision  of 
infrastructure works such as roads, small scale irrigation, market centres, etc with 
ADBL. Additional technical staff are required to design and supervise these works. 
As  the  responsibility  of  implementation  of  infrastructure  works  lies  with  the 
beneficiaries, the procurement design and supervision of infrastructures will be their 
responsibility. They may carry out these activities if they have technical capability or 
if  not,  they  need  to  outsources  it  to  consultants  (individuals/firms).  Monitoring  of 
implementation will be done by ADBL.   
111 
  National  Competitive  Bidding,  National  Shopping  and  Direct  Contracting:  Goods, 
Services (non-consulting) and civil works to be procured using NCB, Shopping and 
Direct  Contracting  would  follow  the  procedures  and  processes  defined  in  the  PIM 
approved by PSC and IFAD. The PIM shall also include details of selection methods 
to be applied in case of consultancy services such as Quality and Cost Based Selection 
(QCBS),  Fixed  Budget  Selection  (FBS),  Least  Cost  Selection  (LCS),  Consultants 
Qualification Selection (CQS) and Single Source Selection (SSS). The PIM would also 
outline  the  procedures  for  the  selection  of  individual  consultants  and  individual 
service providers.  
  National  Competitive  Bidding:  The  procedures  to  be  followed  for  national 
competitive bidding shall include the clarifications and modifications described in the 
following  paragraphs  required  for  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines.  
  Anti-Corruption.  Definitions  of  corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  coercive  and 
obstructive  practices  shall  reflect  the  latest  IFAD  Board-approved  Anti-
Corruption  Policy  definitions  of  these  terms  and  related  additional  provisions 
(such as conflict of interest, etc.); and IFAD's right to audit the contract and 
the accounts of the contracted parties. 
Inform  potential  bidders  and  contractors  of  the  present  Policy  and  of  IFAD’s 
confidential anticorruption hotline. 
  Sexual Harassment (SH), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA). IFAD requires 
Recipients  of  IFAD  funding  to  include,  in  all  contracts  with  project  staff, 
contractors,  suppliers  and  other  third  parties  to  be  funded  with  IFAD  funds 
provisions prohibiting acts of Sexual Harassment (SH), Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse (SEA), 
  Self-Certification.  Include  self-certification  forms  in  procurement  documents 
and  contracts  and  ensure  they  are  duly  completed.  Self-certification  shall 
certify that the bidder, its Joint Venture partners, its sub-contractors, its sub-
consultants and its key staff are not engaged in prohibited practices as defined 
by IFAD; not engaged in sexual harassment and/or sexual exploitation or abuse 
(SH/SEA) and not debarred by the World Bank. 
  Rejection  of  All  Bids  and  Rebidding.  Bids  shall  not  be  rejected  and  new  bids 
solicited without IFAD’s prior concurrence; 
  Member  Country  Restrictions.  No  restriction  applicable  to  IFAD  resources 
unless National Policies apply such restriction; 
  Qualification  Requirements.  A  successful  bidder  must  be  determined  by  an 
assessment  process  that  shall  include  the  application  of  qualification 
requirements to all bids; 
  Contract awards works, goods and services (non-consulting) shall be based on 
the lowest evaluated price of compliant bids from eligible and qualified bidders; 
and 
  A  single-stage  two-envelope  procurement  system  shall  not  be  allowed  for 
goods and services (non-consulting). 
  The  detailed  procedures  for  procurement  would  be  adapted  and  adopted  in 
accordance with the provisions PPA 2007 and ADBL’s Financial Administration Bylaws 
2064, consistent with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the Procurement Handbook 
with the following emphasis to mitigate risk ensuring compliance to the provisions of 
the Procurement Guidelines: 
  Registration of Bidders: Registration previous to bidding as a due diligence 
process for screening bidders legal and fiscal capacity. It is also usual to use 
registration  as  a  means  for  prequalification,  especially  for  civil  works  and  in 
some cases service providers. 
  Open  Bid  National  Competitive  Bidding:  The  Programme  would  impose 
through  the  PIM  the  use  of  well-formulated  bidding  documents  which  would 
112 
result  in  bid  submissions  that  are  free  from  qualifications.  The  PIM  would 
expand  and  articulate  the 
the 
implementation of VITA:  
following  rules  and  procedures 
for 
113 
114 
  National or Local Shopping.  Procurement procedures other than open competitive 
bidding must be restricted and contained within appropriate limits. Restricted bidding 
is appropriate for small value contracts, and situations in which there is only a very 
small number of potential candidates. Consequently, very specific thresholds should 
be defined below which this method of procurement could be applied. In addition, 
the following minimum requirements should apply: 
  Number of invitees & criteria for choosing: 
  Standard request for bids. Simplified document asking proposals by letter, by 
fax or using electronic means; 
115 
  Consultants and Service Provider Selection Process: The  PIM  shall  elaborate 
the  provision  as  prescribed  in  the  Procurement  Handbook  in  term  of  selection  of 
consultants in line with the Provisions of IFAD Procurement Guidelines.  In this case 
these minimum requirements should prevail: 
  Registration: The same conditions described for bidder for goods and works 
above should be complied with; 
  Advertising:  Borrowers  should  advertise  the  assignment  for  expression  of 
interest by firms. The advertisement should include:  
  Short-List:  Borrowers  should  use  a  short-list  of  3  to  6 firms  to  request 
proposals.  This  short-list  may  result  from  comparing  qualifications  and 
experience among firms that have expressed interest; 
  Standard RFP & Standard Contract: The standard RFP would be described 
and included in the PIM similar to that used for Selection of consultants;  
  Selection  Process:  Short-list;  QCBS  (other  methods  when  justified)  to  be 
elaborated in the PIM; 
  Award criteria: highest combined score (preferably using the following range 
between 70% to 90% for the technical score and 30% to 10% for the price); 
  All  procurement  for  goods,  works  and  services  financed  from  resources  funded  or 
administered  by  IFAD  require  bidding  documents  and  the  contracts  to  include  a 
provision requiring suppliers, contractors, consultants and other third parties ensure 
compliance with IFAD zero tolerance to anticorruption policy and prohibiting acts of 
Sexual Harassment (SH), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and to permit IFAD 
to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission 
and contract performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors,  
Procurement, Procurement Plan and Applicability 
  Procurement would be as per the Consolidated Procurement Plan submitted by ADBL 
PMU  and  approved  by  the  PSC  and  IFAD.  The  PMU  would  submit  an  18 month 
Procurement  Plan  immediately  after  the  Project  enters  into  force  and  in  the 
subsequent years submit an annual Procurement Plan.  
  As  provided  in  para  46  of  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines,  IFAD  review  of  and  no 
objection  to  the  consolidated  procurement  plan  is  compulsory  and  the  18 month 
procurement plans submitted by the Borrower/Recipient must include as a minimum:  
  a brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during that 
period; 
the estimate value of each activity; 
the method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity; and  
the method of review IFAD would undertake for each activity.  
  Any changes and amendments to the procurement plan shall be subject to IFAD’s No 
Objection 
116 
Procurement Methods Thresholds for PMU/Municipalities  
  Procurement  of  Goods,  Works  and  Services  (non-Consulting).  Methods  for 
procurement of goods/works as per thresholds is established as follows:   
  Consultancy  and  Services.  Consulting  service  would  include  project  management 
technical  assistance,  implementation  support  technical  assistance  for  different 
components, conducting studies, mobilisation/establishment of community groups, 
technical  training  and  strengthening  of  community  groups,  and  monitoring  and 
evaluation.  
  Selection  of  individual  consultants.  Individual  consultants  are  selected  on  the 
basis  of  their  qualifications for  the  assignment  of  at least  three  candidates  among 
those  who  have  expressed  interest  in  the  assignment  or  have  been  approached 
directly  by  the  PMU  or  Implementing  Agencies.  Individuals  employed  by  the  PMU, 
and  the  Implementing  Agencies/Partners  shall  meet  all  relevant  qualifications  and 
shall  be  fully  capable  of  carrying  out  the  assignment.  Capability  is  judged  on  the 
basis  of  academic  background,  experience  and,  as  appropriate,  knowledge  of  the 
local  conditions,  such  as  local  language,  culture,  administrative  system,  and 
government organization. 
  Individuals consultants or consultancy firm may be selected on a sole-source basis 
with due justification in exceptional cases such as: (i) tasks that are a continuation 
of  previous  work  that  the  consultant  has  carried  out  and  for  which the  consultant 
was  selected  competitively;  (ii) assignments  lasting  less  than  six  months; 
(iii) emergency  situations  resulting  from  natural  disasters;  and  (iv) when  the 
individual consultant is the only consultant qualified for the assignment. 
Review of Procurement Decisions by IFAD  
  IFAD would undertake to review the provisions for the procurement of good, works 
and services to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in conformity with 
its Procurement Guidelines. For the purposes of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines, the 
following procurement decisions shall be subject to prior review by the Fund for the 
award  of  any  contract  for  goods,  equipment,  materials,  works,  consultancy  and 
services under VITA. 
  Procurement of goods, materials and works:  
  Procurement of consultancy services and services: 
117 
  Before agreeing to any material modification or waiver of the terms and conditions 
of any contract, or granting an extension of the stipulated time for performance of 
such contract, or issuing any change order (except in cases of extreme urgency) that 
would increase the cost of the contract by more than 10% of the original price, the 
Borrower shall inform IFAD on the proposed modification. 
  Prior or Post Review. Except as IFAD may otherwise agree, the prior or post which 
applies to various procurement of good, works and consultant recruitments shall be 
defined as follows: 
Procurement Method  
Prior or 
Post 
Comments 
Procurement of Goods and Services (non-consulting)  
ICB  
NCB  
National Shopping (including Sealed Quotation as per PPR) 
Direct Works, Goods and Non-consulting 
Prior 
Prior  
Post 
Post 
All Contracts 
Except procurement valued 
below NPR 2,000,000 
All Contracts 
All contract valued below 
NPR 500,000 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms  
Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS); Fixed Budged 
Selection (FBS); Least Cost Selection (LCS); Selection Based of 
Consultants Qualification (CQS) 
Prior 
Except procurement valued 
below NPR 2,000,000 
Sole Source Selection (Single Source Selection) 
Prior 
All contract except as per 
provisions of the LTB 
Recruitment of Individual Consultants  
Individual Consultants (Single Source Selection) 
Individual Consultants (Competitive Selection Process) 
Prior 
Prior 
Except as per provisions of 
the LTB 
Except procurement valued 
below NPR 2,000,000 
  Co-financing proposals exceeding USD 50,000 should be referred to IFAD for prior 
review.   
  Any entrepreneur or User’s Group requesting for co-financing from VITA shall agree 
to: (i) constitute a procurement committee for procuring materials, labours etc. as 
provided by the procurement rules and regulations; (ii) make public the information 
on  expenses  periodically;  (iii) operate  and  maintain  the  facility  completed  under 
community participation; and (iv) allow to inspect their accounts and records and to 
have them audited by technical/financial auditors appointed by VITA. 
Works, Goods and Services to be procured 
  The IFAD highly concessional loan would fund most goods, works and services under 
the VITA. Table 1 below breaks down procurement under the Programme by type of 
expenditure (procurement account) and procurement method. 
118 
Table 1 - Procurement under the VITA, including contingencies (USD 000) 
[To be updated based on the final cost tables] 
  The annual breakdown of the total amounts spent under the different procurement 
accounts are projected as follows. 
Table 2: Procurement for first 18 months 
Refer to the Annex of main PDR 
119 
7.4  Procurement Methods 
I. Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method  
Description  
Applicability/Characteristics  
Advertising  
Remarks 
International Competitive 
Bidding 
(ICB) 
Procedure for procurement 
of goods and works on the 
international market with 
open competition 
•  High value procurement 
•  Interest for international business community 
•  Equal opportunity to bid 
•  General 
Procurement 
Notices (GPN) 
•  Open ITB or invitation to 
•  Margin  of  preference  for 
domestic goods and works 
may be applied 
prequalify 
•  UNDB/dgMarket 
•  International press 
Limited International 
Bidding (LIB)  
National Competitive 
Bidding (NCB)  
ICB by direct invitation 
(no open advertisement) 
Procedure for public 
procurement in Borrower 
Country 
International Shopping  
National Shopping  
Direct Contracting  
Comparison of price 
quotations from at least 3 
suppliers in 2 different 
countries 
Comparison of price 
quotations from at least 3 
suppliers 
No competition 
Single or sole-source 
selection  
•  Smaller value 
•  Limited number of suppliers 
•  Restricted ITB  
•  Domestic  preference  not 
applicable 
•  Small value contracts 
•  Geographically  scattered,  labor-intensive  or 
•  Local press 
•  Internet, 
GEPSON 
time spread works 
(Bolpatra.gov.np) 
•  IFAD 
to 
establish 
acceptability  of  national 
procedures 
•  Local prices below international market 
•  No  or  limited  interest  from  international 
business community 
•  ICB advantages outweighed by financial and 
administrative costs 
•  Small value procurement 
•  Off-the-shelf goods, standard specification 
•  commodities, simple civil works 
•  Foreign  suppliers  allowed 
to bid 
•  Application of qualification 
requirement 
•  Request for quotation 
(restricted) 
•  Purchase  order  or  brief 
contract 
•  Same as International Shopping 
•  Goods available locally from several sources 
•  Request for quotation 
(restricted) 
•  Purchase  order  or  brief 
contract 
at competitive prices 
•  Extension of existing contract 
•  Standardization for vehicles, equipment 
•  Proprietary  equipment  obtainable  from  one 
source only 
•  Condition of performance guarantee 
•  Emergency procurement 
•  No advertising 
Procurement from 
Commodity 
Markets 
Procurement of goods from 
commodity 
markets 
•  Grains,  animal 
feed,  cooking  oil, 
fuel, 
fertilizers, pesticides, metals 
•  Pre-qualified bidders 
•  Issuance  of  periodic 
•  Short bid validity 
•  Single  (market)  currency 
•  Multiple award for partial quantities to secure 
invitations 
for bid and payment 
supply and prices 
Work by Force Account  
Use of the Borrower’s own 
personnel and equipment to 
perform construction work 
•   Difficulty in defining work quantities 
•  Small, scattered works in remote locations 
•  Risk of unavoidable work interruptions 
•  No advertising 
•  No competition 
IFAD ensure that: 
120 
•  No disruption of on-going operations 
•  Emergency situations 
Procurement from UN 
Agencies  
Procurement of specific 
goods from specialized UN 
agencies 
Small quantities of off-the-shelf products  
•  No advertising 
•  No competition 
•  force  account  units  are 
properly staffed, equipped 
and organized 
•  costs are reasonable 
•  Use  of  UN  agency  rules 
and procedures 
•  Indication 
agreement 
in 
loan 
• 
• 
• 
Refer to the IFAD Procurement Guidelines for the following procurement methods: 
Procurement by agents and use of inspection agents 
Procurement by financial intermediaries or sub-loan beneficiaries  
Procurement with community participation  
II. Procurement of Consulting Services 
Method  
Description  
Applicability/Characteristics  
Advertising  
Remarks 
Quality and Cost Based 
Selection  
Competitive selection from short-
listed firms based on quality and 
cost of proposal 
Selection Under a Fixed 
Budget  
Competitive selection from short-
listed firms based on best 
technical proposal within budget 
•  Two-step 
evaluation: 
quality 
(technical  proposal)  and  cost 
(financial proposal) 
•  GPN (large contracts) 
•  Request for Proposal (RFP) 
•  Preferred selection method 
consulting 
for  most 
services 
•  Simple  and  precisely  defined 
•  Request for proposal  
•  Rejection  of  proposals 
assignment 
•  Consulting  firms  requested  to  bid 
within a fixed budget 
above fixed budget 
Least-Cost Selection  
Competitive selection from short-
listed firms based on lowest cost 
provided minimum quality score is 
achieved 
•   Standard, 
routine  assignments 
(e.g.  audits  or  design  of  simple 
works) 
•   Well-established  standards  and 
•  Request for proposal  
practices 
•  Small contract value 
•  Establishment 
a 
minimum score for quality 
•  Rejection  of  proposals 
of 
under minimum score 
Quality Based Selection  
Competitive selection from short-
listed firms based on quality only 
•   Complex/highly specialized 
assignments 
•  GPN (large contracts) 
•  Request for Proposal 
•  Only  technical  proposals 
may be invited 
•  High downstream impact 
•  No comparability of proposals 
Selection Based on 
Consultants’ 
Qualifications 
Selection from short-listed firms 
based on consultant’s experience 
and competence 
•  Very small assignments 
•  Cost  of  RFP  preparation  and 
evaluation not justified 
•  Request  for  expression  of 
•  Submission  of  combined 
interest 
technical-financial 
proposals 
Single Source Selection  
Selection of a firm without any 
competition 
Must be exceptional: 
•  Continuation of previous work 
•  Emergency situation 
•  No competition  
121 
•  Clear 
advantage 
over 
competition 
or 
impossibility  to  compete 
must be demonstrated 
•  Very small assignments 
•  Only 
one 
firm 
is 
Selection of Individual 
Consultants  
Individuals selected based on 
qualifications, references and 
other relevant criteria, with limited 
or no competition 
qualified/experienced 
•  Teams of personnel not required 
•  No  additional  professional  support 
required 
•  Main  requirement  is  experience 
individual 
and  qualification  of 
consultant 
Refer to the IFAD Procurement Guidelines for the following procurement methods: 
• 
• 
Procurement agents and inspection agents 
UN agencies, Civil Society Organizations, Auditors and Service Delivery Contractors 
Request for expression of interest 
or 
Direct contact 
•  Individuals  may 
be 
selected on a single source 
basis 
122 
8  Annexes 
8.1  Planning, M&E Annexes 
8.1.1  Annex 1 – VITA Detailed Logframe 
Note: The detailed logrframe is draft only. In the case of any variation in indicators or targets from the logframe in the Appendix 1 of the main PDR, the 
targets and definitions from the main PDR are to be used. 
Additional/updated IFAD Core Indicators for reporting only, i.e. not in the main PDR logframe, will be reconfirmed at programme start-up, based on the 
feasibility of reporting on such indicators to meet the IFAD CI measurement guidelines. 
Expected results 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
1.     
1.     
1.     
1     
1.a.  
1.b  
2 
2 
2 
 2 
3.     
Number of persons receiving services promoted or supported 
by the project, of whom: 
Number of women 
Number of youth 
Number of persons from disadvantaged groups (janajatis, 
Dalits) 
Corresponding number of distinct households 
Estimated corresponding total number of households’ 
members. 
Number of individual small-scale producers directly 
benefitting from programme services increasing their real net 
farm income (compared with baseline) by:  
   (a) >60% if receiving full programme services 
   (b) >40% if via partnership with SLVC2 
   (c) >40% if receiving ‘finance only’. 
Percentage of small-scale producers adopting 
environmentally sustainable and climate resilient 
technologies and practices. (CI 3.2.2) 
Goal: Improved 
livelihoods, climate 
resilience and nutrition of 
poor and vulnerable 
people  
Development Objective: 
Farm enterprises of poor 
and vulnerable rural 
YR1 
Targets 
MTR 
End 
15,000 
90,000 
120,000 
9,000 
54,000 
72,000 
4,000 
27,000 
40,000 
TBM 
13,800 
66,000 
TBM 
82,800 
397,000 
TBM 
110,400 
530,000 
Change in farm profitability    
Number of households adopting 
CSA    
0 
0  
0  
0 
15,000 
10,000 
6,000 
70,000 
20,000 
30,000 
40% 
50% 
45 All data for indicators related to individual beneficiaries to be disaggregated by poverty status (using PPI), age (<25 yrs, 25-40 yrs, >40 yrs), gender, social/ethnic group. Household level data will be 
disaggregated.by PPI status, ethnicity and gender of the household-head. 
123 
Expected results 
people are more resilient 
to climate change, 
increasingly profitable, 
strengthen their market 
linkages and use 
appropriate financial 
services. 
Outcome 1: Improved 
small-scale producers’ 
capacities to run 
profitable farm 
enterprises and establish 
linkages with suppliers 
and buyers. 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Number of beneficiaries' receiving full project services 
achieving return on labour of >125% of official minimum 
wage 
Percentage of households reporting they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and programme-supported service 
providers (CI SF.2.2) 
Percentage of women small-scale producer demonstrating 
improvement in empowerment (IFAD empowerment indicator46 - 
CI IE.2.1) 
Percentage of women reporting Minimum Dietary Diversity47 (CI 
1.2.8)  [targets to be re-confirmed after baseline] 
Percentage increase in the aggregate value of priority 
products sold by targeted small-scale producers in real terms 
Percentage of households satisfied with programme-supported 
services (CI SF.2.1) 
Percentage of small-scale producers in supported groups 
who have paid for or received embedded technical services 
from commercial service providers, agribusinesses or 
producer organization in last 12 months. [To be 
disaggregated by: a) crops, b) livestock & fish - Targets 
confirmed at baseline] 
Number of small-scale producers regularly keeping farm 
enterprise records. 
Percentage of established multi-stakeholder platforms 
(MSPs) and B2B meetings that are functional and self-
sustaining 
(CI. Policy Output) 
Households reporting improved access to land, forests, water 
or water bodies for production purposes (CI 1.2.1) 
A) Mentoring and mobilization fo producers' groups 
Socio Economic 
Mobilizers are recruited 
and trained 
Nb of Socio-Economic Mobilizers in place 
Nb of Socio-Economic Mobilizers /Coordinators trained 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
Percentage of households that 
achieved living income 
benchmark    
Household Dietary Diversity 
Score (HDDS) ...   
Value of commodities produced, 
marketed or processed   
(household and enterprise) 
YR1 
0 
TBC 
TBC 
TBC  
0 
70% 
Targets 
MTR 
End 
12,000 
56,000 
TBC after 
baseline 
TBC after 
baseline 
TBC after 
baseline 
TBC after 
baseline 
75% 
15% 
70% 
90% 
40% 
80% 
Percentage of beneficiaries 
acquiring business development 
services    
TBC 
TBC 
TBC 
12,000 
56,000 
72,000 
0 
TBC 
30 
30 
70% 
90% 
TBC after 
baseline 
TBC after 
baseline 
140 
140 
0 
140 
B) Business skills and financial education to farmers 
Etc… 
(Additional indicators to be discussed with Heifer and 
added at start-up) 
46 IFAD’s empowerment indicator is a simplified pro-WEAI with 10 of the 12 pro-WEAI dimensions 
47 Minimum Dietary Diversity – women. This is defined as percentage of women, 15-49 years of age, who consume at least 5 out of 10 food groups (MDD-W) 
124 
Expected results 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Rural producers' groups 
are mobilized 
14 
15 
15 
16 
Financial education and 
business literacy training 
facilitators trained 
through ToT 
Rural producers trained 
in business literacy and 
management (incl. 
GALS-lite, CC, youth and 
nutrition modules) 
Farmers trained in 
financial literacy 
Nutrition training – as 
part of business skills 
course 
Farmers provided with 
training materials 
Review and sharing 
workshops for training 
facilitators organized 
Agriculture Market 
Information systems 
established 
Policy-relevant 
knowledge products 
developed and 
disseminated 
Additional IFAD Core 
Outcome Indicators (for 
reporting only – if can be 
done within planned M&E 
and data collection tools) 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
YR1 
Targets 
MTR 
End 
Nb of farmers' groups mobilized/supported  (CI 2.1.3 , 
reporting only, no targets) 
Number of small-scale producers who are members of a group 
which actively participates in an MSP and B2B meetings.  
(CI 2.1.4) 
Nb of TOT events organized 
Nb of Business Skills Facilitators trained (initial training) 
Nb of Business Skills Facilitators (refresher training) 
Nb of farmers' groups whose members have received 
financial literacy and business skills training  (Reporting only 
– no targets) 
Nb of farmers provided with a farmers' diary 
Nb of farmers trained in business skills and management  
(CI 2.1.2) 
Nb of farmers trained in financial literacy (CI 1.1.7) 
Persons provided with targeted support to improve their 
nutrition (C I1.1.8) 
Nb of farmers receiving training materials 
Nb of workshops organized 
Nb of training facilitators attending 
Nb of AMI systems established 
Nb of knowledge products developed 
Nb of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
(CI Policy Output 3) 
Nb of internal sharing workshops organized 
Nb of external sharing workshop organized 
Nb of media trips organized 
Nb of persons/households reporting adoption of 
new/improved inputs, technologies or practices (CI 1.2.2) 
Nb of persons/households reporting an increase in 
production (CI 1.2.4) 
Number of new jobs created in agricultural / farm enterprises 
(CI 2.2.1) 
Number of rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal 
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private 
entities (CI 2.2.3) 
125 
15,000 
70,000 
90,000 
6 
? 
? 
24 
? 
? 
24 
? 
? 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
15,000 
15,000 
80,000 
80,000 
90,000 
90,000 
15,000 
60,000 
70,000 
15,000 
60,000 
70,000 
15,000 
80,000 
90,000 
0 
1 
0 
0 
13 
17 
1 
1 
3 
1 
6 
8 
0 
0 
0 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
2 
1 
1 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
6 
3 
2 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
No target, 
reporting only 
Expected results 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
YR1 
Targets 
MTR 
C) Brokering and cluster facilitation 
14 
14 
Provincial level MSPs 
meetings organized and 
facilitated 
Corridor-level MSOs 
meetings organized and 
facilitated 
B2B/B2S 
interactions/meetings 
take place at cluster level 
between a business 
partner (supplier/buyer) 
and a group of farmers 
Rural producers trained 
in production and post-
harvest handling 
Rural producers 
accessing inputs or 
technologies 
Nb of supported rural producers’ organization members 
reporting new or improved services provided by their 
organization (CI 2.2.4.) 
Number of MSPs meetings organized 
Nb of farmers' groups actively participating in MSP meetings 
Nb of farmers in groups actively participating in MSP 
meetings 
Nb of suppliers, traders and other actors participating in MSP 
meetings 
Number of MSPs meetings organized 
Nb of farmers' groups actively participating in MSP meetings 
Nb of farmers in groups actively participating in MSP 
meetings 
Nb of suppliers, traders and other actors participating in MSP 
meetings 
Nb of B2B/B2S interactions taking place 
Nb of groups participating in B2B/B2S interactions 
Nb of trading plans or agreements concluded 
Nb of farmers groups with an agreed trading plan or 
agreement 
Nb of farmers benefiting from an agreed trading plan or 
agreement 
Nb of suppliers, traders and other actors who have 
concluded a trading plan or agreement with one or more 
farmer groups 
Nb of training events organized 
Nb of persons trained in production practices and/or 
technologies by programme supported service providers 
(CI1.1.4 ) 
Nb of groups whose members have received post-harvest 
handling 
Nb of farmers trained in post-harvest handling 
Nb of groups whose members have received post-harvest 
handling  
Nb of rural producers accessing production inputs and/or 
technological packages from programme supported service 
providers and suppliers (CI 1.1.3) 
Nb of exposure visits organized 
Nb of persons participating in exposure visits 
126 
End 
95 
TBM 
20 
To be 
monitored 
(TBM) 
64 
TBM 
Business relationship with VCAs 
No of groups participating in 
collective marketing 
No. of benficiaires enagage in 
collective marketing 
15,000 
54,000 
70,000 
TBM 
45 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
180 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
90 
TBM 
303 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
1212 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
606 
TBM 
340 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
1401 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
680 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
0 
TBM 
27 
TBM 
41 
TBM 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
Nb of clusters whose actors have participated in an exposure 
visits 
Expected results 
Producers, traders and 
processors benefit from 
exposure visits 
Capacity development 
training events organized 
for project staff 
Bank staff trained on 
cluster-based supply 
chain development and 
climate smart agricultural 
financing 
Bank staff and 
stakeholders benefit from 
national or international 
exposure visits 
A Sector Development 
Facility is established to 
finance soft or hard 
public goods investments 
Outcome 2: 
Transformational 
increase in investment 
in the smallholder 
agricultural sector in 
supported project 
states. 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Nb of training events organized 
Nb of persons trained 
Nb of training events organized 
Nb of persons trained 
Nb of exposure visits 
Nb of persons participating in exposure visits 
Amount of USD expended from the SDF (in million dollars) 
Nb of funding proposals received, appraised and approved 
Nb of and type of public goods financed and delivered 
Nb. of technical service providers (people) supported via 
SDF to expand/upgrade their services to farmers 
Nb of farmers directly benefiting from SDF investments 
Nb of traders, input suppliers or processors benefiting from 
SDF investments 
Total private investment in priority clusters and supply chains 
by small-scale producers, MSMEs and other actors  (in 
cumulative US$), by commodity/location/source. 
Percentage of ADBL partner financial institutions (PFIs) with 
a portfolio-at-risk ≥30 days below 5% for the wholesale funds 
from the programme (CI 1.2.6) 
Percentage of small-scale producers who own an active 
savings account with ADBL or any other PFI after completed 
business skills / financial literacy training 
Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies 
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or 
amendment (CI Policy Outcome) 
Percentage of supported farmers newly using insurance 
schemes from ADBL or FI partner  
Percentage of supported people / households using rural 
financial services from ADBL and PFIs (CI 1.2.5.) 
127 
YR1 
TBM 
20 
Targets 
MTR 
TBM 
85 
4 
4 
End 
TBM 
147 
20 
8 
Targets to be 
set for each 
commodity x 
district based 
on need 
0 
US$ 70 
million 
US$ 200 
million 
100% 
100% 
100% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
Expected results 
Financial service 
providers supported 
delivering outreach 
strategies, financial 
products and services to 
rural producers, including 
smallholder farmers. 
Small-scale producers 
access a loan from ADBL 
or partner (from the 
project MTC and STC 
windows) 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
Number of financial service providers supported in delivering 
outreach strategies, financial products and services to rural 
producers, including smallholder farmers. (CI 1.1.6) 
Nb of partner FI developing, pilot testing and adopting a new 
financial product to smallholder farmers 
Nb of new financial products and services targeting 
smallholder farmers developed and adopted 
Number of people accessing financial services supported by 
the programme 
Percentage of women among farmers accessing financial 
services (50%) 
Percentage of youth among farmers accessing financial 
services (30%) 
(a) Nb of persons accessing a loan from the Medium Term 
Credit Window 
(b) Nb of persons accessing a loan from the Short Term 
Credit Window 
Amount of funds on-lent by ADBL from the programme 
window (in US$), [Disaggregated by: women, youth, DAG 
and poor households] 
21 
22 
a) Amount of funds lent to women 
b) Amount of funds lent to youth 
c) Amount of funds let to DAG individuals 
d) Amount of funds lent to poor households 
A Capacity Enhancement 
and Policy Development 
Facility is established 
Policy-relevant 
knowledge products 
developed and 
disseminated 
Outcome 3: Improved 
access by smallholder 
farmers and clusters’ 
23 
Amount of funds expended from the CEPD Facility 
Nb of persons benefiting from improved/new services or 
products of ADBL and PFIs as a result of supported capacity 
building  
Nb of policy studies or initiatives financed 
Nb of knowledge products developed 
Nb of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
(CI Policy Output 3) 
Nb of internal sharing workshops organized 
Nb of external sharing workshops organized 
Nb of media trips organized 
Number of farmers reporting improved physical access to 
markets, processing or storage facilities in locations where 
such infrastructure was delivered. (CI 2.2.6) 
128 
YR1 
4 
4 
Targets 
MTR 
8 
8 
End 
10 
10 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
8,000 
40,000 
100,000 
 4,000 
 2,400 
 20,000 
50,000 
 12,000 
30,000 
8 USD mio 
45 USD mio 
120 USD mio 
0 
0 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
 0 
4 
3 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
12 
8 
TBM 
TBM 
TBM 
22,500 
45,000 
Expected results 
actors to productive 
infrastructure. 
VITA LF 
Indicator 
# 
Project and IFAD Indicators45 
(CI = IFAD Core Indicator #) 
Corresponding Heifer Indicator 
YR1 
Targets 
MTR 
End 
Integrated markets and 
satellite markets 
constructed 
Irrigation schemes 
constructed 
Farm access feeder 
roads rehabilitated 
24 
 24 
2 
Nb of regional wholesale markets constructed  
(CI 2.1.6) 
Estimated nb of regional wholesale market users (farmers) 
Estimated nb of regional wholesale market users (traders) 
Nb of satellite markets constructed  
(CI 2.1.6) 
Estimated nb of satellite market users (farmers) 
Estimated nb of satellite market users (traders) 
Nb of irrigation schemes constructed 
Nb of ha of farmland under water-related infrastructure 
constructed or rehabilitated 
(CI 1.1.2) 
Nb of farmers benefiting from irrigation schemes constructed 
or rehabilitated 
Nb of km of roads upgraded / rehabilitated (CI 2.1.5) 
Nb of farmers benefiting from upgraded/rehabilitated roads 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
10 
33 
300 
900 
30 
75 
129 
8.1.2  Annex 2 -  VITA Theory of Change 
Please refer to the main Programme Design Report 
8.1.3  Annex 3 - Monitoring and Evaluation Matrix 
130 
8.1.4  Annex 4 – AWPB Template - Narrative part (Part 1) 
Country: 
Project Title: 
Project Number: 
Financial year: 
Planning period: 
Year of implementation  
Total project budget (in USD): 
Total expenditures to date (in USD): 
Date of loan effectiveness: 
Date of project start: 
Project duration: 
Date of project closing: 
Date of latest Logframe revision: 
Date of baseline survey: 
Date of mid-term survey: 
Date of completion survey: 
Date of Mid-Term Review 
Date of Completion Review 
A.  Background  
[Introduce briefly overall project objectives and key results achieved to date, key objectives for the next fiscal 
year and highlight any contextual issues (government policies, local economic context, socio-political context) 
that may have a bearing on project implementation during the next 12 months. Any changes in the 
implementing arrangements or implementation approaches, if required, should be highlighted] 
B. Achievements to date and proposed implementation focus for upcoming year  
[While the detailed achievements of previous AWP&B period should be detailed in the Annual Progress 
Report, this Chapter provides a very rapid overview of the status of implementation of the various Logframe 
Components, as a basis to then justify the choice of objectives and implementation focus for the new AWP&B 
period. This is done by filling the table below and providing some further textual information] 
Table 1 - Summary of main achievements to date 
Components 
% of achievement to 
date (estimation) 
Focus for new AWP&B 
period? 
(Yes/No) 
Component 1.1 
Component 1.2 
Component 1.3 
Component 1.4 
Key achievements to date: 
Key focus areas for next fiscal year: 
131 
Key anticipated challenges and proposed mitigating measures: 
C. Costs and financing 
-  Costs: [Present summary tables by components and cost category for proposed budget and provide 
explanations if required] 
-  Financing: [Present summary tables by Financing source for the proposed budget and       provide 
explanations if required] 
D. Annual Procurement 
-  Procurement  Plan:  [Provide  rationale  for  the  procurement  plan  proposed  in  annex  in terms  of  key 
goods and services to be procured during the next fiscal year] 
-  Procurement  process:  [Provide  rationale  for  the  procurement  methods  proposed  in  the  annexed 
procurement  plan  and  highlight  any  potential  procurement  challenges  and  proposed  mitigating 
measures] 
E. Expected benefits and target group outreach 
Table 3 – Estimated outreach by Target Group “category” 
Target Group 
“category” 
Total nb of persons to 
be reached by project 
completion 
Number of persons reached so far (cumulative) 
Total 
number 
Of which, 
women 
Of which, 
youth 
Of which, 
janajatis 
Total nb of additional 
persons expected to be 
reached this year (annual) 
F. Implementation support needs 
[This Chapter presents the principal capacity gaps currently identified among the PMU staff -or any other staff 
from other implementing agencies- and highlights proposed mitigating measures. For measures that are 
beyond PMU capacities to implement or finance, the Chapter also identifies the type of implementation 
support that will be required from IFAD throughout the AWP&B period, how badly is this support needed and 
the best period for this support to be provided.] 
Capacity gaps and proposed 
mitigating measures 
Implementation support requirements 
Capacity gaps 
Staff/persons in 
need of capacity 
building 
Proposed 
capacity building 
measure 
Implementation 
support needed 
from? 
In which specific 
area is it 
needed? 
When is it 
needed? 
PART II – SUMMARY AND DETAILED AWPB TABLES 
Annex: Procurement Plan
132 
8.1.5  Annex 5 - AWPB Template – Part 2 
133 
JFMAMJJASONDIFADGov.BeneficiairesOutput 1.1.1ActivityActivityActivityActivityOutput 1.1.2ActivityActivityActivityActivityEtc.Etc.Component 1Sub-Component 1.1 Sub-Component 1.2Expected results / ActivitiesIndicateurs and physical targetsResponsible Service Provider, Unit or staffBudgetEstimated CostTab (Appraisal) budgetActual estimated costsBudget categoryIndicatorsQ1Calendar of activitiesFinancing sourceAppraisal targetsAnnual targetsQ2Q3Q4 
8.1.6  Annex 6– AWPB Implementation Monitoring Template 
134 
Annual targetsAchieved targets% of  target metAppraisal targetsCumulative achievements % of target metApproved budgetActual expenditures% of budget spentTotal budgetCumulative expendi.% of budget spentOutput 1.1.1ActivityActivityActivityActivityOutput 1.1.2ActivityActivityActivityActivityEtc.Etc.Sub-Component 1.2IndicatorsExpected results / ActivitiesSub-Component 1.1 Component 1Annual targets Cumulative targetsAnnual expendituresCumulative expendituresObservations 
8.1.7  Annex 7 – Output Monitoring Tables 
Training Monitoring Table 
135 
TotalWomenYouthJanajatisTraining monitoringTraining localtion (Locality)Trainers' nameDuration (in days)Nb of sessionsNumber of groups trainedNb of persons trainedTraining SubjectTraining dateModule ToppicTraining location (Province)Training location 
SDF and other Grant Windows – Monitoring Tables 
136 
Nb. receivedNb. reviewedNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. receivedNb. reviewedNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. receivedNb. reviewedNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. receivedNb. reviewedNb. of grantsTotal valueNb. of grantsTotal valueApplication process monitoring tablesSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersFinal approval      (Nb. of proposals approved)Date of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...SuppliersSuppliersSuppliersSuppliersDate of plublic call : ………...TotalWindow 1Window 2Window 3TotalFarmersService providersTradersDate of plublic call : ………...Window 2Window 3FarmersService providersTradersDate of plublic call : ………...Window 1Window 2Window 3TotalFarmersService providersTradersDate of plublic call : ………...Service providersTradersDate of plublic call : ………...Window 1Window 2FarmersWindow 3Window 1TotalWindow 2Window 3TotalFarmersDate of plublic call : ………...FarmersService providersTradersWindow 1Window 2Window 3TotalTotalFarmersService providersTradersFarmersService providersTradersFarmersService providersTradersFarmersService providersTradersFarmersService providersTradersWindow 3TotalWindow 1Window 2Window 3TotalWindow 1Window 2Window 3Window 3TotalWindow 1Window 2Window 3TotalWindow 1Window 2Applications  received (Nb. of proposals received)Window 2Window 3TotalWindow 3TotalWindow 1FarmersService providersTradersTotalWindow 1Window 2FarmersService providersTradersWindow 1Window 2Window 3Window 3TotalWindow 2FarmersService providersTradersDate of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...Date of plublic call : ………...Window  1Window 2Window 3TotalWindow 1Window 2FarmersService providersTradersWindow 1Service providersTradersWindow 1Review of proposals   (Nb. of proposals reviewed)SuppliersDate of plublic call : ………...SuppliersFarmersGrant proposalsGrant proposalsGrant proposalsGrant proposalsDisbursementsApprovalsTradersApprovalsDisbursementsApprovalsDisbursementsService providersApprovalsDisbursements 
Infrastructure Construction Monitoring Tables 
137 
Long.Lat.PlannedActualDifference (in days)GPS positionningName of construction compagnyEstimated works' execution rateInfrastructure typeType  of intervention (construction/rehabilitation/equipment)Monitoring of small-scale infrastructure construction worksVillage/ LocalityDistrictProvinceInfra. codeCurrent works' statusDate of construction startDateDateDateDatePlannedActualDifference (in days)Total initial costsTotal final costsDate of construction completionDate of  initial hand-over / receipt by SP/PMUDate of final hand-over/ receipt by SP/PMUNb of major observations madeNb of major observations correctedMonitoring of small-scale infrastructure construction worksMonitoring of small-scale infrastructure construction worksInfra. codeOn-site supervision visits by SP 
Outreach Monitoring Table 
138 
WomenYouthJanajatisWomenYouthJanajatisWomenYouthJanajatisWomenYouthJanajatisComponent 1Component 2Component 3TotalOutreach MonitoringOf whom:Nb of actual beneficiariesNb of actual beneficiariesYear 1TargetsYear 2Of whom:Of whom:Of whom:Total nb of beneficiariesTotal nb of beneficiariesYear 3 
8.1.8  Annex 8 – Quarterly Progress Report Outline 
1)  PROJECT RESULTS AND IMPACT 
A.  ACTIVITIES AND OUTPUTS 
For each project Sub-component, present the following information: 
-  Main physical achievements:  Describe key activities implemented in the past 3 months and main 
outputs delivered against quarterly AWPB targets. Discuss and explain variances between expected 
results and achievements; as well as prospects to catch up with potential delays. 
-  Detailed  recommendations:  Identify  measures  and  actions  required  in  order  to  address  key 
implementation challenges. 
B.  TARGETING, OUTREACH AND GENDER ISSUES 
Present a table showing, per beneficiary profile, the total number of beneficiary households reached during 
the past 3 months against quarterly targets.  
2) 
IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE 
A.  PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE 
Discuss Service Providers’ and PMU performance in implementing and supervising project implementation.  
B.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENTS 
Present global and Component-wide quarterly expenditures. Identify issues or bottlenecks. 
C.  PROCUREMENT 
Present  procurement  activities  undertaken  in  current  quarter  against  the  activities  planned  in  the 
procurement plan. Identify issues and bottlenecks, as well as mitigating measures. 
3)  RECOMMENDATIONS 
Highlight key recommendations, changes that need to be introduced or further actions required in order  to 
facilitate  project  implementation  or  enhance  project  results.  Clearly  identify  responsibilities  for  main 
recommendations and timeline for follow-up. 
ANNEXES: 
- Detailed, updated Implementation Monitoring Table (Showing: quarterly planned vs. achieved targets) 
-  Detailed  financial  expenditures  table  (Showing:  annual  allocations,  annual  expenditures,  global 
allocations, cumulative expenditures to date) 
- Detailed Output and O utreach monitoring tables (CDC monitoring, small-scale infrastructure works, 
beneficiary groups’ and institutions data, training data, dairy groups’ data, vaccination campaigns, etc.) 
139 
8.1.9  Annex 9 – Annual Progress Report Outline 
Title page 
Map of project area 
Table of contents 
Table of figures and tables  
Acronyms 
INTRODUCTION  
1) 
−  Introduce basic facts about the project, the project area and key project implementation dates.  
−  Introduce the main project objectives and key project Components, as originally designed; and identify 
any changes that may have been brought to project original design or financing plan.  
−  Discuss  overall  implementation  progress  and  present  global  AWPB  execution  rate.  Highlight  key 
implementation features and global Service Providers’ performance and. 
−  Highlight the main changes in the policy, regulatory or institutional framework that may have affected the 
agricultural  or  rural  development  sectors,  or  the  MAIL,  during  the  year  under  review  and  that  may  bear 
relevance on project implementation. 
2)  PROJECT RESULTS AND IMPACT 
A.  ACTIVITIES AND OUTPUTS 
−  For each project Sub-component, present the following information: 
-  Main physical achievements:  Describe key activities implemented in the past 12-months and main 
outputs  delivered  against  AWPB  targets;  and  present  cumulative  achievements  to  date  against 
appraisal targets. Discuss and explain variances between expected results and achievements, as well 
as prospects for meeting appraisal targets by the end of project completion. 
- 
Implementation context and challenges: Analyze the key external factors or circumstances that may 
have  affected  project  implementation,  positively  or  negatively,  during  the  year.  Identify  key 
implementation problems and bottlenecks, their cause and possible solutions.  
-  Detailed recommendations: Present the detailed actions that will be taken in order to address key 
implementation challenges. 
−  Key data shall be presented in tables and charts, while detailed data will be annexed. Issues such as 
quality and reliability of data collected, or data gaps, should also be presented if relevant. If no progress 
was achieved, this should be clearly stated and reasons for delays explained. 
B.  OUTCOMES AND IMPACT 
−  For  each  Sub-Components,  present  available  outcome  and  impact  data,  or  field  observations,  and 
analyze  positive  or  negative  trends  and  unintended  effects.  In  particular,  the  report  shall  present  key 
quantitative  and  qualitative  findings  and  clear  conclusions  related  to  the  following  impact  domains:  (a) 
Beneficiaries’ capacities; (b) Improved agricultural or livestock productivity for key main crops; (c) Improved 
beneficiaries’ incomes and food security. Key data shall be summarized in tables and charts 
−  Present and analyze the external factors that may have contributed, negatively or positively, to observed 
changes and impact.  
C.  TARGETING, OUTREACH AND GENDER ISSUES: 
−  Present  a  table  showing,  per  beneficiary  profile,  the  total  number  of  beneficiary  households  reached 
during the past 12 months against annual and appraisal targets.  
−  Present targeting approach followed in current year and potential challenges.  
−  Describe  key  gender-mainstreaming  activities  undertaken  and  key  project  achievements  in  terms  of 
women outreach and empowerment. 
140 
D.  SUSTAINABILITY 
−  Analyze  current  prospects  of  post-project  sustainability,  looking  at  issues  such  as  beneficiary  groups’ 
self-sufficiency, capacities of local institutions, infrastructure operation and maintenance, etc. 
3) 
IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE 
A.  PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE 
−  Discuss  Service  Providers’  and  PMU  performance 
implementation.  
in 
implementing  and  supervising  project 
B.  PERFORMANCE OF M&E 
−  Describe key M&E activities undertaken and discuss data quality, reliability and timeliness of reporting 
by Service Providers. 
C.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENTS 
−  Present  global,  as  well  as  Component-wide,  related  to:  (a)  annual  budget  approved  vs.  annual 
expenditures; (b) cumulative expenditures to date vs. overall budget. Discuss financial management or flow 
of funds issues, as well as mitigating measures. 
D.  PROCUREMENT 
−  Present  procurement  activities  undertaken  in  current  year  against  the  activities  planned  in  the 
procurement plan. Identify issues and bottlenecks, as well as mitigating measures. 
4)  CONCLUSIONS, LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
A.  CONCLUSIONS 
−  Summarize global project performance by comparing key annual targets and yearly achievements, and 
cumulative achievements to date with global targets. Reflect on the likelihood that all project objectives shall 
be met by project completion date. 
−  Present project’s strengths and weaknesses. 
−  Analyze main implementation bottlenecks and/or facilitating factors.  
B.  LESSONS LEARNED 
−  Present main lessons learned from project implementation, based on the analysis of what learning from 
experience may be applicable to future, similar projects. 
−  Present best practices or practices worthwhile replicating. 
C.  RECOMMENDATIONS 
−  Highlight key recommendations, changes that need to be introduced or further actions required in order 
to facilitate project implementation or enhance project results.  
−  Clearly identify responsibilities for main recommendations and timeline for follow-up. 
ANNEXES: 
- Detailed, updated Project Results’ Framework (Showing: annual planned vs. achieved targets) 
-  Detailed  financial  expenditures  table  (Showing:  annual  allocations,  annual  expenditures,  global 
allocations, cumulative expenditures to date) 
-  Detailed  Output and  Outreach  monitoring  tables  (CDC monitoring,  small-scale  infrastructure  works, 
beneficiary groups’ and institutions data, training data, dairy groups’ data, vaccination campaigns, etc.) 
141 
8.1.10 
Annex 10 – Guidelines for ORMS Indicators Reporting 
The IFAD document48  entitled “Taking IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) to the Next 
Level” provides the complete list of ORMS indicators and associated definitions. Not all these indicators, 
however, are relevant in the context of VITA.  For each relevant indicator, annual targets will be identified 
(as  defined  in  the  AWPB)  and  related  yearly  achievements  will  be  reported  each  year  to  IFAD  using  a 
standard Excel-based template.  
The following table presents the ORMS indicators that are relevant for VITA and which will be reported on 
an annual basis (output indicators) or 2 or 3 years after start-up (outcome indicators). 
Level 
Outreach 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
ORMS Indicator 
Number of persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
Corresponding number of households reached 
Estimated corresponding total number of households’ members 
Land under irrigation schemes constructed or rehabilitated 
Percentage of persons/households reporting reduced water shortage vis-à-vis production 
needs 
Percentage of persons/households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, technologies or 
practices 
Percentage of persons/households reporting an increase in production 
Number of hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 
Number of rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological packages  
Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies  
Percentage of persons/households reporting using rural financial services 
Percentage of partner financial service providers with portfolio-at-risk ≥30 days below 5% 
Number of persons in rural areas accessing financial services (savings, credit, insurance, 
remittances, etc.) 
Number of financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies, financial 
products and services to rural producers 
Percentage of women reporting improved quality of their diets 
Percentage of supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in profit 
Number of persons/households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
Number of rural enterprises accessing business development services 
Number of persons trained in income-generating activities or business management 
Percentage of rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or 
contracts with public or private entities 
Percentage of supported rural producers’ organization members reporting new or improved 
services provided by their organization 
Percentage of rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales 
Number of rural producers’ organizations supported 
Number of supported rural producers that are members of a rural producers’ organization 
(modified current RIMS 1.4.5) 
Percentage of persons/households reporting improved physical access to markets, processing 
and storage facilities 
Number of kilometers of roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded  
Number of market, processing or storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated 
Number of existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for 
approval, ratification or amendment 
Number of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
48 The complete guidelines are available at: https://webapps.ifad.org/members/ec/96/docs/EC-2017-96-W-P-7.pdf  
142 
Level 
ORMS Indicator 
Number of functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported 
Reporting methodology for first-level indicators: The monitoring and reporting of output indicators 
is straight-forward and consists in the tracking of project outputs against planned, annual targets. Reporting 
will be done online by IFAD supervision mission (using IFAD ORMS website) using the information prepared 
by the PMU, to be tabled in Excel as follows: 
RIMS table template for annual reporting 
Column 1. Project indicator as included in logframe 
Column 2: Corresponding ORMS indicator. 
Column 3: Unit of measurement (e.g. number of persons). 
Column  4  -  AWPB  targets:  In  this  column,  the  quantitative  target  associated  with  the  corresponding 
RIMS/project  indicator  is  presented.  The  AWPB  is  the  main  information  source  for  this  figure.  If  AWPB 
figures are not available, the project should write “n.a.” in the corresponding cell.  
Column 5 - Actual results: The column presents the actual results achieved at the end of the period against 
the annual target identified in Column 3.  
Column 6 – Target achievement rate: The column presents the percentage of annual target met. This is 
calculated by dividing the actual results (column 4) by the intended results as per the AWPB (column 5). 
Column 7 – Final design target: This column presents the total quantitative target defined for each indicator, 
as should be identified in the project Logframe, design documents or cost tables. If target figures are not 
available in the Logframe or design documents, the project should write “NA” in the cell. The failure of a 
Logframe to provide planned figures crucially hinders the project’s ability to use results-based information 
for decision-making. For this reason, it may be necessary to revise the Logframe in order to improve its 
results-orientation and make it more useful for assessing project performance.  
Column  8  –  Cumulative  achievements:    This  column  presents  the  cumulative  value  for  the  indicator 
concerned. It is often calculated by adding up the values reported during previous years, as in the case of 
road  or  infrastructure  construction  (if  a  project  built  20  market  facilities  in  year  1  and  10  in  year  2,  the 
143 
Planned targetAchieved target% target metGlobal targetCumulative achievements % target metProject indicatorUnitPDR / Logframe targetAnnual targetCorresponding RIMS indicator 
cumulative value will be 30 at the end of year 2). For other indicators  - for example the total number of 
persons trained at least once – it will be important to avoid double-counting of beneficiaries49. 
Column 9 – Target achievement rate: This last column is calculated by dividing the actual cumulative result 
by the target established during the design stage. 
. 
8.1.11 
Annex 11 – Project Completion Review Guidelines and Report Outline 
A) Project Completion Review guidelines 
1) Detailed objectives 
The  overall  objective  of  the  completion  review  is  to  assess  and  document  overall  project  implementation 
performance  and  the  results  achieved.  This  process  calls  for  an  informed  reflection  on  the  relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of project interventions. 
More precisely, the detailed objectives of the completion process include the following: 
−  To assess  the effectiveness of project implementation,  or  the extent to  which  project objectives 
were met, and to document the immediate results and impacts of project interventions. 
−  To assess the relevance of project interventions at the time of project design and in today’s context. 
−  To review the project costs and benefits and the efficiency of  the overall project implementation 
process, including IFAD’s and partners’ performance  
−  To assess the prospects of sustainability of project benefits beyond project completion 
−  To generate  and  document useful lessons  from implementation that will help  improve IFAD’s or 
Borrower’s future programming and designs. 
−  To identify any potential for the replication or up-scaling of best project practices 
2) Methodology 
The report will use a mix of quantitative and qualitative tools in order to form an informed judgement on overall 
project performance and results. For transparency and accuracy purposes, it is important that the consultation 
with project stakeholders shall be as large and inclusive as possible and the list of persons to be met by the 
report will require careful consideration. 
Primary  sources  of  information  will  include  project  reports  and  documents  (supervision  reports,  MTR report, 
progress  reports,  AWPB,  etc.),  M&E  and  MIS  data  (including  RIMS  data),  any  surveys  or  specific  studies 
undertaken  by  the  project  (including  the  RIMS  impact  survey),  PMU  and  service  providers’  records  and  the 
records  of  the  groups  supported  by  the  project.  These  sources  will  be  used  extensively  in  order  to  generate 
quantitative  information  on  project  results  or  estimate  project  efficiency.  In  addition  to  primary  sources  of 
information, the report will collect relevant data from secondary sources, such as national and local statistics, 
other donors’ statistics, the civil society, private sector entities (trade associations, universities, etc.). These will 
be used mainly to breach information gaps on certain issues or to cross-examine the data generated from other 
sources.  
In case sufficient or reliable impact data is not available, the report should undertake a mini survey while in the 
field in order to collect basic information from a small sample of respondents (to be selected using the most 
appropriate sampling method). To this end, a questionnaire shall be developed before the field work starts. In 
addition, and in order to gather an in-depth understanding on certain issues, collect stakeholders’ feedback and 
generate important insights, the report will use a variety of qualitative tools, such as key informants’ interviews, 
focus  group  discussions and  rapid  case  studies.  Before  starting  the  field  work,  it  is important  that  the  report 
dedicates sufficient time to prepare the necessary interview guides.  
49 For example, it is wrong to report “300 households” as the cumulative results at the end of year 3 if the same 100 households were trained 
each year during 3 years; in this example, the cumulative value should be “100”. 
144 
The method of direct observation will also be used by the report. A large sample of project sites, or locations 
where project activities took place, will thus be visited in order to collect impressions and feelings, verify that 
reported interventions took place, confirm that they met expected quality standards and beneficiaries’ needs, or 
to  take  note  of  the  external  context  of  project  intervention.  Selection  of  project  sites  will  require  careful 
consideration in order to avoid biases. If found useful, the organization of a stakeholders’ workshop either before 
the field work starts or towards the end of the report, can be envisaged in order to collect initial feedback on 
project  performance  or  on  initial  report’s  findings.  In  order  to  strengthen  the  analysis  and  overcome  the 
weaknesses,  intrinsic  biases  and  the  problems  that  may  be  associated  with  a  single  method,  the  report  will 
“triangulate” all findings, combining methods and data sources in order to cross-examine initial findings.  
3) Main performance assessment questions 
The project completion review team will answer each of the following detailed questions, grouped according to 
the criteria to be used in the assessment.   
a.  Project relevance 
Broadly speaking, the report will assess the extent to which project objectives were consistent, at project design 
and throughout implementation, with the priorities of the rural poor and their own perception of their needs and 
potential;  with  the  priorities  and  poverty  alleviation  policies  and  strategies  of  the  country;  and  with  IFAD’s 
mandate and policies. More precisely, the report will answer each of the following detailed questions: 
−  Did the project design focus on, and were objectives consistent with, the needs and priorities of the rural 
poor? Was the design process participatory and did it take into account the needs, potential, livelihoods, 
asset  bases  and  development  opportunities  of  the  rural  poor  at  the  time  of  project  design?  Are  these 
characteristics, constraints and opportunities still the same today? 
−  Were the approaches promoted consistent  vis à vis the socio-politico-economic conditions at the time of 
project  design  and  vis  à  vis  prevailing  environmental  and  climate  conditions?  Were  project  objectives, 
approaches and activities consistent with IFAD’s objectives of increasing the assets and incomes of poor 
rural households, and improving their food security?  
−  Were  project  objectives  realistic  and  consistent  with  national  development  plans,  poverty  reduction 
strategies, agriculture and rural development strategies and other sectoral priorities? In particular, was the 
project design  aligned  with the MAIL  agricultural development policy?  Are  these  documents  still  relevant 
today or were there important changes in the policy context? 
−  Were  the  project  objectives  consistent  with  IFAD’s  mandate,  its  Strategic  Results  Framework  and  with 
IFAD’s country strategy as reflected in the COSOP? Were IFAD policy concerns (as reflected in policies 
and strategies on targeting, innovation, rural finance, private sector etc.) adequately incorporated into project 
design? 
−  Did  the  Project  Design  Document  include  a  well-defined,  clearly  articulated  Logframe  or  Results’ 
Framework? Were all identified activities and outputs consistent, and commensurate, for the attainment of 
proposed goal and objectives? Were external risks (or assumptions) clearly identified? Were the proposed 
indicators relevant and adequate to monitor project implementation and results? 
−  Were the initial implementation arrangements well defined and adequate to ensure a smooth, cost-efficient 
project  implementation?  Were  there  any  major  changes  in  these  arrangements,  and  if  so,  were  these 
changes appropriate and timely? 
−  Were  there major  changes  in  the  external project  environment  (e.g.  policies,  socio-economic conditions, 
political  changes,  crisis,  etc.)  since  the  project  was  designed  and  implementation  started?  Were  project 
objectives adjusted to reflect changing circumstances during implementation? Are initial (or revised) project 
objectives still valid? 
−  What were the main factors that contributed to a positive, or less positive, assessment of project relevance? 
b.  Project effectiveness 
The  report  will  assess  the  extent  to  which  all  project’s  objectives  were  achieved  in  both  quantitative  and 
qualitative terms. This will involve the careful description of the main activities undertaken by the project since 
its  start,  as  well  as  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  results  achieved  at  the  output,  outcome  and  impact  levels. 
Variations between initial and actual targets will be highlighted and the external factors that had a bearing on 
project effectiveness will be explained. More precisely, the report will answer the following questions:   
145 
−  Were  all  activities  implemented  as  planned?  If  not,  what  were  the  reasons?  Were  all  expected  outputs 
achieved  in  quantitative  and  qualitative  terms?  Did  they  lead  to  the  intended  outcomes  and  were  those 
properly measured and documented? Are there significant discrepancies between original targets and actual 
achievements, and if so, what are the reasons? 
−  Did the project achieve its broad and detailed objectives?  
−  Was project implementation well monitored? Are all results at all levels properly measured, quantified and 
documented? Is this information reliable? 
−  Did all results meet expected quality standards?  If not, what were the problems?  
−  Were all results achieved within the original timeframe and budget? 
−  Did the project provide all expected benefits to all intended target groups? Do results and achievements 
adequately fulfil the needs of these intended target groups?  
−  What are the external factors that have facilitated, or constrained, output delivery and the achievement of 
project objectives? 
−  What factors in project design and implementation account the most for the estimated results in terms of 
effectiveness?  
c.  Project efficiency 
The  report  will  assess  how  economically  project  inputs  and  resources  (funds,  expertise,  time,  etc.)  were 
converted into results. This complex analysis will involve a review of the following aspects: 
Resources’ use: 
−  What  were  the  main  expenditure  patterns?  Were  original  financial  and  budgetary  resources  spent  as 
initially anticipated? Were there deviations from original cost estimates and, if so, what were the reasons? 
Was the budget significantly amended in the course of implementation?  
−  Were  there  timely  and  adequate  financing  contributions  from  all  project  financiers,  including  in-kind 
contributions from beneficiaries? 
−  For  the  resources  spent,  was  the  number  (and  quality)  of  outputs  optimal?  Could  the  project  have 
produced more with the same resources, or the same results with less money? Could other approaches 
have produced results more efficiently in terms of costs, time and resources? 
Quality of project management: 
−  How  well  did  the  PMU  and  SPs  coordinate  and  manage  project  activities?  Were  implementation 
timetables adequately met? Was project management and SPs responsive to changes in the environment 
or the recommendations made during supervision missions of by the Project Steering Committee? Were 
the PMU and SPs adequately staffed with motivated staff members? How useful were the various project 
management tools (AWPB, Procurement Plan, M&E Plan) and the Management Information System (MIS) 
developed during implementation? Were these tools properly used by the PMU? 
−  Were there appropriate arrangements in place for sound financial management, flow of funds, financial 
record keeping and the timely preparation of financial reports? Were there any issues? 
−  How  efficient  was  the  project  M&E  or  MIS  systems  in  providing  reliable,  timely  information  on  output 
delivery,  outcomes  and  impact?  Was  M&E  information  adequately  analyzed  and  used  by  project 
management for planning and decision-making purposes? 
−  Was  the  Project  Steering  Committee  useful  and  proactive  to  help  resolve  problems  and  guide  project 
implementation? 
Quality of IFAD supervision and implementation support: 
−  To  what  extent  did  the  services  and  support  provided  by  IFAD  ensure  a  sound  project  design  and  an 
efficient  project  implementation?  Did  IFAD mobilize  the  adequate  technical  expertise  and  resources  in 
project design and implementation?  
−  Did  IFAD  provide  an  adequate  support  through  direct  supervision  and/or  country  presence?  Were 
supervision missions useful and timely? Did IFAD ensure pro-active problem identification, follow-up and 
resolution?  
−  How efficient was IFAD in handling loan administration, procurement reviews and AWPB reviews? Were 
there any delays in funds’ transfers? 
146 
−  Was IFAD proactively engaged in policy dialogue activities at different levels in order to ensure, inter alia, 
the  replication  and  scaling-up  of  pro-poor  innovations?  Was  IFAD  active  in  creating  effective 
partnerships? 
Cost-benefits analysis: 
−  For each of the main project investments, what were: (a) the actual costs and value of inputs mobilized 
(including capital costs, operation and maintenance costs, labor costs, taxes); (b) the estimated economic 
benefits  (including  revenues  from  sales,  incomes,  value  of  self-consumed  production);  and  (c)  the 
estimated social benefits? 
−  What is the cost ratio of inputs to outputs and is it comparable to local, national or regional benchmarks? 
What  are  the  loan  costs  per  beneficiary?  What  are  the  report’s  conclusions  with  regard  to  this  costs-
benefits analysis? What are the main internal or external factors that may have had a negative or positive 
impact on costs or benefits?  
d.  Project impacts 
The impact of project interventions will be carefully presented in quantitative and qualitative terms, using the 
standard IFAD’s impact domain classification. The report will examine in particular the following questions: 
−  Households’  assets:  Did  the  project  contribute  to  positive  changes  in  households’  assets?  Did  the 
composition of incomes change or was there a diversification in livelihoods’ means? Did the project improve 
ownership, or security of access, to land, water or productive resources? Were there positive changes in 
households’ assets, and if so, what were the main changes? Was there an increase in households’ financial 
assets? 
−  Food security: Did the project improve food availability, whether self-produced or purchased, to ensure a 
minimum necessary intake for all households’ members? Do project beneficiaries have an improved and 
more regular access to enough or more nutritious food? Is there a reduction in the occurrence, or duration, 
of lean periods? Did children’s nutritional status change (stunting, wasting and underweight status)? To what 
extent did the rural poor improve their access to input and output markets that could help them enhance 
their productivity and access to food? To what extent were the rural poor able to overcome market volatility 
or climate changes to ensure year-round food security? 
−  Agricultural productivity: Did the project contribute to increase agricultural, livestock and fish productivity, 
as measured in terms of cropping intensity, yields and land productivity? Are there changes in the levels of 
local production?  Are  farmers  applying  improved  or  more  sustainable  farming  practices?  Did  the  project 
ensure  that  small-scale  producers  benefited  from  increased  agricultural  production  and  were  enabled  to 
manage market fluctuations and changes in climatic or natural resources conditions? 
−  Access to markets: Are there changes in farmers’ physical access to markets (e.g. availability of roads 
and marketing outlets), in their access to market prices and information or in their bargaining power with 
traders?  Did  the  project  have  an  impact  on  the  timely  access  to  quality  agricultural  inputs  (fertilizers, 
vaccines, seeds) and on the capacities of Producers/Marketing Groups? 
−  Natural resources and the environment: Were the approaches to environment preservation and natural 
resources management  appropriate to  local circumstances and  were they effective  in addressing local 
problems? Are there positive or negative changes in the natural resources base (forests, marine/fisheries 
resources, pastureland, water resources) that may be attributable to project interventions? Did the pro ject 
have positive or negative changes – intended or unintended - on the environment? Did it contribute to the 
protection or rehabilitation of natural and common property resources (land, water, forests and pastures)? 
Has the degree of environmental vulnerability changed?  
−  Adaptation to climate  change:  Were the  approaches for  climate  change adaptation promoted by  the 
project appropriate to local circumstances and were they effective?  Did the project manage to empower 
rural communities to cope with, mitigate or prevent the effects of climate change and natural disasters? 
Are  farming  communities  more  resilient  to  such  disasters  and  are  farming  practices  better  adapted  to 
climate change? Were the coping capacities of vulnerable natural systems restored?  
−  Gender equity and women empowerment: Did the project generate changes in gender roles or gender 
relations? Are there changes in women status at the community level (participation in local elections or 
decision-making processes, representation in rural producers’ groups), at the household level (workload, 
nutrition  status,  women  influence  on  decision-making)  or  the  community  level)?  What  is  the  impact  of 
capacity-building  activities  on  individual  women  or  on  Women  Groups?  Are  there  changes  in  the 
147 
− 
institutional or legal framework that were made in favor of women as a result of project policy dialogue 
activities?   
Institutions  and policies:  Are there  changes in the capacities  of  the  various grassroots organizations 
supported  during  project  implementation  (such  as  Rural  Producers’  Groups,  Interest  Groups  or  Users’ 
Associations)? Are there changes in the institutional capacities of the main institutions involved in project 
implementation? Are there changes in the quality or range of services delivered for the rural poor? Are 
there changes in local governance or in the behaviors of local institutions? Are there changes in the policy 
or  institutional framework  as  a  result  of  project-led  policy  dialogue  activities  (e.g.  changes  in  the  laws, 
statutes, rules, regulations, procedures, national quality standards or norms)? 
e.  Sustainability 
The  report  will  assess  the  likelihood  that  the  benefits  from  project  intervention  will  continue  after  project 
completion. It will also assess the likelihood that actual and anticipated results will be resilient to risks, including 
climate-related  risks,  beyond  project  life.  The  adequacy  of  the  post-project  strategy,  as  designed  and/or 
implemented, will also be examined. More precisely, the report will examine the following questions:   
−  Was an appropriate post-project strategy developed and implemented since project start-up? 
−  Social sustainability (Empowerment): Do project beneficiaries have the necessary capacities and skills, 
individually  or  collectively,  to  continue  the  approaches  or  manage  the  investments  promoted  by  the 
project?  Are  these  socially  acceptable?  Is  there  sufficient  local  ownership  for  these  approaches  or 
investments?  Was  there  adequate  beneficiary  participation  during  project  implementation?  Is  there 
interest  and  willingness,  among  concerned  communities,  to  continue  with  promoted  approaches  or 
investments after project completion? 
−  Economic  and  financial  sustainability:  Do  project  investments  generate  sufficient  cash  flow  and 
income to offset future investment and O&M costs? Are project investments economically and financially 
viable? If not, what are the constraints?  
−  Technical sustainability: Are the approaches promoted by the project viable from a technical point of 
view?  Are  spare  parts  for  acquired  or  promoted  machineries  and  equipment  locally  available?  Do 
beneficiaries have the necessary technical capacities to operate and maintain the investments promoted 
by the project? Do they have access to adequate funds for operation and maintenance?  
Institutional sustainability: Are the institutions supported by the project self-sufficient and viable? Have 
operating  capacities  been  created  and/or  reinforced  in  national  and  local  partners?  Are  the  new 
approaches or practices promoted by the project mainstreamed within normal government operations? Is 
there a clear indication of government commitment after the loan closing date in terms of follow-up actions, 
provision of O&M funds, etc.? 
− 
−  Environmental  sustainability:  Are  the  approaches  and  investments  promoted  by  the  project 
environmental-friendly?  Are  they  helping  reduce  the  pressure  on  the  natural  resource  base?  Are  they 
having any negative impact on the environment or the natural resource base? Did promoted techniques 
and  approaches  take  into  account  climate  change  issues?  Are  they  promoting  adaptations  to  climate 
change? Can recurrent natural hazards endanger prospects of sustainability? 
−  Climate change: Are the agricultural approaches promoted by the project suitable in a context of a rapidly 
changing climate? How may changes in climatic conditions affect the sustainability of interventions in the 
long run?  Which precursors are critical to achieve long-term impact? 
f.  Targeting and outreach 
The report will assess the extent to which project interventions have reached the intended target groups, that is 
the  specific  individuals  or  organizations  for  whose  benefit  specific  interventions  were  initially  designed  and 
implemented. The report will also assess the effectiveness of the project targeting strategy. More precisely, the 
report will examine the following aspects: 
−  Did the project reach out to the expected number of beneficiaries in the manner intended? Did the project 
provide  all  anticipated  benefits  to  the  specific  socio-economic  groups  identified  in  the  Project  Design 
Document? Were there deviations from initial outreach targets and if so, what were the reasons?  
−  Was  outreach properly  monitored  in both quantitative (e.g.  number of  direct and  indirect  beneficiaries) 
and qualitative terms (e.g. beneficiaries’ socio-economic profile)? 
148 
−  Did  the  project  implement  a  sound  targeting  strategy?  Did  the  project  regularly  analyze  the  needs, 
potentials and priorities of intended target groups and the poverty dynamics in the project target area and 
developed specific outreach strategies accordingly?  
−  Were there measures taken to ensure that the poor and vulnerable groups would not be excluded from 
project  implementation  and  would  benefit  from  it;  and  that  the  non-poor  would  not  capture  project 
benefits?  
−  Did  the  project  implement  gender-sensitive  implementation  approaches?  Did  the  project  ensure  equal 
participation of men and women in implementation? Were there specific measures undertaken in order to 
promote  women  participation  in  project  activities?  Did  the  project’s  M&E  system  track  gender-
disaggregated data? 
g. 
Innovation 
The  report  will  assess  the  extent  to  which  project  interventions  have  introduced  and  tested  innovative 
approaches to rural poverty reduction. These are any processes, tools or practices that  add value or solve a 
problem in new ways. More precisely, the report will answer the following questions: 
−  Was the project designed specifically to test or lead to innovation, for example by piloting new concepts or 
technologies? Did the project test and introduce innovative ideas in the project target area? What are the 
characteristics of these innovations? Are these consistent with the IFAD definition of the concept? How did 
the  innovation  originate  and  was  it  adapted  in  any  particular  way  during  project  design?  Are  these 
approaches truly innovative with regard to the local or national contexts? 
−  Were these innovative approaches carefully monitored and documented? Were these innovations discussed 
with the Government or other actors? Were these innovative approaches successful? Did these innovations 
address relevant needs of the rural poor and are these viable?  
−  Were these innovations adopted by the rural poor, local implementation partners, government entities or 
any other actors?  
h.  Knowledge generation and sharing 
The report will assess the quality of the project knowledge management system established in the course of 
project  implementation  for  the  generation  and  sharing  of  knowledge  that  could  be  useful  to  others.  Such 
knowledge  may  concern  the  results  of  project  innovations  or  any  implementation  approaches  that  were 
successful  –  or  unsuccessful  -  in  addressing  rural poverty  issues.  More  precisely,  the  report  will  answer  the 
following questions: 
−  Did the project design include an appropriate knowledge management strategy? Was it duly implemented 
during  implementation?  Did  the  project  produce  any  knowledge  products?  Did  it  organize  knowledge-
sharing events and activities? If so, what were the quality, usefulness and outcomes of such events? 
−  Did  the  project  implementation  process  generate  any  new  and  relevant  knowledge  regarding  the 
implementation  of  pro-poor  approaches  or  rural  development  issues?  Can  this  knowledge  be  applied  in 
other contexts?   
i.  Potential for scaling-up  
The report will assess the extent to which some approaches, technologies or innovative features pilot-tested or 
successfully implemented by the project are likely to be up-scaled. It will also assess the likelihood that some 
project approaches may be replicated in other geographical areas. More precisely, the report will examine the 
following aspects: 
−  How likely is it that the project - or some of its activities, approaches or innovative technologies  - may be 
replicated in other localities or at the national level by the Government or other donors? Has any component 
or activity of the project already been replicated beyond the target area or target group?  
−  How  proactive  was  project  management,  or  other  stakeholders,  in  discussing  future  up-scaling  with  the 
Government or other development partners? What are the prospects or obstacles?  
j.  Performance of implementation partners 
The report will assess the performance of each of the various partners involved in project implementation (other 
than IFAD). These are the organizations or entities directly responsible for project implementation, for providing 
149 
strategic  guidance  and oversight  or  for  the  provision of  essential services.  More  precisely,  and  in  addition  to 
determining if all implementation partners have adequately fulfilled their respective roles and responsibilities, 
the report will examine the following points: 
−  Service  Providers:  What  was  the  performance  of  the  main  service  providers  (such  as  NGOs,  training 
institutes, business development service providers, participating financing institutions private contractors 
or  contracted  government  agencies)  involved  in  service  delivery?  Were  services  delivered  in  a  timely 
manner?  Did service  providers provide  value for  money and  did  they  adhere to agreed schedules  and 
contracts? 
−  Grass-roots  institutions:  What  was  the  performance  of  the  grass-roots  institutions  (Shuras,  Producers’ 
Groups, Women Groups, etc.) involved in daily project activities, their capacities, motivations, strengths 
and weaknesses? Were they actively participating in project implementation? What was the performance 
of the local-level or deconcentrated government agencies involved in project implementation? 
−  Central Government agencies: Did the MAIL with the covenants of the loan agreement and the provisions 
of the Project Design Document? Were they proactive in supporting project implementation and identifying 
solutions to problems? Was the Project Steering Committee fulfilling its role adequately? 
−  Co-financiers: What was the performance of external project co-financiers? Was there a timely provision 
of  funds  in  the  level  expected?  Did  co-financing  partners  adequately  support  project  implementation, 
supervision  or  oversight?  Were  all  co-financiers’  procedures  (for  example  for  financial  reporting,  the 
preparation of progress reports, etc.) harmonized among themselves and with Government’s procedures? 
k.  Lessons learned 
The report will present the main lessons learned from project implementation, based on the analysis of what 
learning from experience may be applicable to a more generic situation. In so doing, the report will refrain from 
exposing platitudes, keeping in mind the following definition of a lesson learned: “knowledge or understandings 
gained  by  experience  which  may  be  positive,  as  in  a  successful  experiment,  or  negative,  as  in  a  mishap  or 
failure”.  
All lessons learnt presented should be significant in that they have a real or assumed impact on operations; valid 
in that they are factually and technically correct; and applicable in that they identify a specific design, process, 
or decision that reduces or eliminates the potential for failures and mishaps, or reinforces a positive result.  
In order to identify these lessons learned, the report may examine the following questions: 
−  What specific knowledge or lessons can we derive from project implementation that may be used in the 
future in similar, or different, contexts?  
−  What were the project strengths and its main weaknesses? What were the main opportunities, or threats, 
− 
in the environment that have facilitated, or constrained, project implementation? 
 With the benefits of hindsight, what are the things that should have been done differently? What are the 
specific  dimensions  of  the  project  design  that  one  should  never  repeat  again  in  similar  contexts  or 
circumstances?  
−  What  are  the  specific  aspects  of  project  implementation  that  will  be  worthwhile  replicating  in  future 
interventions in  the country,  or  elsewhere, because they  were particularly  interesting  or successful?  In 
the  external  context,  what  will  be  the  important  conditions  required  for  similar  interventions  to  lead  to 
similar results elsewhere or in the future?   
l.  Conclusions and recommendations 
The report will present its overall conclusions with regard to project implementation  performance and project 
results, highlighting salient features and overall impact on poverty reduction. 
The  report  will  also  make  a  number  of  recommendations  to  the  Borrower  and  IFAD  pertaining  to  the  key 
elements for post-project sustainability or future programming or project design. 
150 
B) Annotated Outline for Project Completion Reports 
Map of the project target area 
Table of Contents 
List of acronyms  
Acknowledgements 
Project at a Glance 
A table including key quantitative information is presented at the beginning of the  document. (Refer to 
Annex IV for the template). 
Executive Summary 
The Executive Summary highlights the key findings and conclusions of the completion review regarding 
project relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability. The most significant lessons learned from 
project implementation, main implementation challenges and main success factors are summarized. The 
Summary also highlights the prospects for post-project sustainability strategy.  
A. Introduction 
The  introduction  presents  the  objectives  of  the  project  completion  review,  the  main  process  followed 
during  the  completion  review,  key  dates  of  the  in-country  work  –  including  date  of  the  final  wrap-up 
meeting - and the key persons met by the mission (the composition of which is provided in a footnote). 
It introduces the project rationale at the time of project design and any significant changes in the country 
context that may have occurred since the project appraisal — political, economic and climatic. Delays in 
project  start-up  or  implementation  and  key  project  dates  (start-up,  Mid-Term  Review,  last  supervision 
mission) are also presented.  
B. Project description 
B1. Project context 
This  section  describes  the  context  at  the  time  of  project  design,  that  is  the  main  socio-economic  and 
political  conditions  that  were  prevailing  in  the  country  and  the  project  area  when  project  design  was 
undertaken.  It  also  describes  the  project  target  area  (e.g.  natural settings  and  natural  resource  base, 
livelihood means, socio-economic and demographic characteristics). 
B2. Project objectives 
This  section  presents  the  project’s  goal,  purpose,  outcomes  and  main  outputs,  with  reference  to  the 
comprehensive project results’ framework/updated Logframe provided in Annex VI. The main problems 
that  the  project  designers  intended  to  address  are  also  described  and  discussed  in  this  section.  Any 
modifications to the original design (as per the Project Design Document) and rationale for these changes 
are presented and discussed. If the design includes any innovative features, these are also described. 
B3. Implementation modalities 
The section presents the project budget, project financiers, implementation partners, and implementation 
strategy and modalities as originally planned, and any modification that may have occurred in the course 
of  implementation.  If  the  design  includes  innovative  implementation  arrangements,  these  are  also 
described.  
B4. Target groups 
The  section  presents  the necessary  details related to the project target  groups  –  their  characteristics, 
livelihoods sources, main problems faced, etc. – and describes the socio-economic setting of the project 
target area. The targeting strategy proposed by project designers is presented. If relevant, a description 
of the specific conditions of vulnerable groups and of gender roles or gender relations is also provided 
here.  
151 
C. Assessment of project relevance 
C1. Relevance vis à vis the external context 
This section provides an assessment of the relevance of project objectives and activities in terms of: (a) 
the national strategies and policies for agriculture and rural development and poverty eradication, (b) the 
key challenges and opportunities  for  poverty reduction prevailing at the  time of project design, (c) the 
priorities  and  needs  of  the  project  target  groups  at  the  time  of  project  design  and  at  completion.  The 
section also considers whether the major design features of the project were appropriate in the context 
of the socio-politico-economic conditions prevailing at the design stage.  
The section also assesses the extent to which the initial project design has remained relevant or if any 
significant changes in the external environment or IFAD’s or Government policies have had implications 
on its relevance in today’s context.  
C2. Internal logic 
This section examines the extent to which the design was based on an in-depth problem analysis and 
the soundness of the project’s interventions logic or the “theory of change” that underlies project design. 
It  also  assesses  the  quality  of  the  Project  Logframe,  its  vertical  and  horizontal  logics  and  the 
appropriateness of all elements in the Logframe, including assumptions made and indicators selected.  
It also analyses whether proposed project activities were commensurate to achieve proposed objectives 
and  realistic  given  project  budgetary  resources  and  implementation  timeframe.  It  also  assesses  the 
extent  to  which  the  project  implementation  modalities  were  appropriate  for  an  efficient,  cost-effective 
project implementation and if the budget allocated was sufficient to produce expected results.  
C.3 Adequacy of design changes 
The  section  presents  the  changes  made  in  the  course  of  project  implementation  in  the  initial  project 
design or implementation modalities, and discusses the relevance and appropriateness of such changes. 
The section also discusses the reactivity of main stakeholders and the extent to which they took timely, 
adequate action with regard to changes in the environment. 
D. Assessment of project effectiveness 
As an introduction, a table presents the project results’ framework with achieved quantitative targets (the 
detailed results’ framework is annexed to the PCR - see template provided in Annex V). 
D1. Physical targets and output delivery 
With  specific  reference  to  the  RIMS  first-level  indicators  and  other  Logframe  indicators,  this  section 
presents the physical outputs achieved during project implementation and assesses the extent to which 
all  quantitative  targets  were  met.  The  section  also  assesses  the  quality  of  the  processes  that  were 
followed  for  achieving  these  outputs  and  the  extent  to  which  these  outputs  meet  expected  quality 
standards or norms and the needs of intended target groups. It also assesses compliance with schedules 
and timetables for output delivery and includes a comparison of the results achieved with the targets set 
out  in  the  Project  Design  Document,  Mid-Term  Review  report  and  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgets 
(AWPB).  The  main  internal  or  external  factors  which  may  have  affected  output  delivery  are  also 
highlighted, as well as the factors that have facilitated project implementation. 
D2. Project outcomes and impacts 
With  specific  reference  to  the  RIMS  second  and  third-level  indicators  and  to  the  other  Logframe 
indicators, this section assesses the extent to which the immediate project objectives (or project purpose) 
were met, both in terms of quality and scope; and the contributions made by the project to the attainment 
of the overall project goal of rural poverty alleviation.  
All  findings  and  conclusions  related  to  project  impact  are  to  be  organized  around  the  relevant  impact 
domains  presented  in  Section  E.c)  of  the  Project  Completion  Guidelines,  namely:  (a)  Households’ 
incomes and assets; (b) Food security; (c) Human and social capital and empowerment; (d) Agricultural 
152 
productivity;  (e)  Access  to  markets;  (f)  Natural  resources  and  the  environment;  (g)  Climate  change 
adaptation; (h) Gender equality and women empowerment; (h) Institutions and policies.  
Findings  and  conclusions  related  to  outcomes  are  to  be  clearly  anchored  in  a  sound  analysis  of  the 
project design “theory of change” (explaining how the achievement of outputs may have led to specific 
outcomes)  and  are  to  be  evidence-based  (through  the  use  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  data  and 
comparisons  with  pre-project  situation  or  control  groups).  The  main  external  circumstances  that  may 
have played a role in observed changes are also presented and analyzed, together with the main success 
factors or reasons of failure.  
As a conclusion, the section presents the overall mission findings and conclusions regarding the overall 
project impact on rural poverty reduction and on project’s contribution to the IFAD’s corporate objective 
of reducing rural poverty worldwide. 
D3. Targeting and outreach 
This  section  presents  the  number  and  typology  of  beneficiaries  that  were  reached  out  during  project 
implementation (in terms of social groups, gender, income status, net asset holdings, occupation, etc.) 
and  identifies  the  specific  benefits  that  they  have  derived  from  participation  in  project  activities.  A 
description of indirect project benefits and indirect project beneficiaries is also presented.  
The  section  also  assesses  the  extent  to  which  the  initial  targeting  strategy,  as  designed  and 
implemented,  was  successful  in  reaching  out  to  the  intended  target  groups.  The  specific  measures 
implemented to reach out to specific groups, such as vulnerable groups, are described together with the 
specific project activities that were targeted to them. The section also describes the specific measures 
taken to facilitate the participation of women in project activities and the adequacy of these measures. 
When relevant, an assessment of the risks of elite capture of project benefits is made and an analysis of 
how this could have been prevented is proposed.  
D4. Innovation, replication and scaling up 
This section describes the characteristics of the innovation(s) promoted by the project, how these were 
pilot-tested  and  what  were  the  results  or  benefits.  It  examines  what  were  the  key  success  factors  for 
successfully-piloted innovations or the factors that led to failure.  
The section also describes the steps that have been already taken by the Government or other partners 
in  order  to  replicate,  adopt  or  scale-up  successful  interventions,  implementation  approaches  or 
innovative  features  implemented  or  tested  during  project  implementation.  Alternatively,  the  section 
examines the potential for wider replication and adoption of successful innovations and the necessary 
conditions for this to happen. 
E.  Assessment of project efficiency 
E1. Project costs and financing 
The section presents the annual project allocations and expenditures since project start, by Component, 
while  detailed  tables  showing  final  expenditures  by  Cost  Category  are  presented  in  annex.  An 
assessment  is  made  of  the  adequacy  of  the  financial  projections  included  in  the  original  design, 
highlighting significant cost deviations from original estimates and the reasons for such deviations. The 
timeliness and adequacy of financing contributions from IFAD, the GEF, government, domestic and/or 
external co-financiers is also described. Significant revisions to the financing arrangements are noted. 
The section also highlights any evidence of cost savings made during implementation, or of expenditures 
that could have been avoided or minimized. 
E.2 Quality of project management  
The section reviews the quality of project management, its responsiveness to changes in the environment 
or the recommendations made during supervision missions. The adequacy of staffing within the Project 
Coordination or Management Unit (PCU/PMU) and staff motivation are also examined, together with the 
153 
quality  of  the  various  project  management  tools  (AWPB,  Procurement  Plan,  M&E  Plan)  and  systems 
(MIS) that were put in place during project implementation. The ability of the Project Steering Committee 
to resolve problems and guide implementation is also considered. 
The section also  includes an assessment of the performance of the project monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E)  system,  highlighting  if  this  system  has  produced  adequate  and  reliable  information  to  monitor 
project implementation performance and measure project outcomes and impact. The extent to which the 
M&E  system  was  used  for  planning  and  decision-making  purposes  is  also  analyzed.  The  quality  and 
reliability of the  RIMS data  is  also discussed. The section also  assesses  the extent to which a sound 
knowledge management strategy was implemented. 
E.3 Quality of financial management  
This  section  reviews  the  quality  of  financial  management,  as  reported  in  annual  supervision  mission 
reports and as observed by the mission. Issues related to flow of funds, procurement, bookkeeping or 
the timely preparation of quality financial reports are highlighted and their consequences analyzed. The 
section also reviews the extent to which sufficient efforts were deployed during project implementation 
in order to solve any particular issue related to financial management.  
E.4 Partners’ performance 
The section examines the performance of the various implementing partners (other than the PMU and 
IFAD which are examined in E2 and E4 respectively). It examines in particular the performance of the 
grass-roots  institutions  involved  in  daily  project  activities,  their  capacities,  motivations,  strengths  and 
weaknesses and the capacities of local-level or deconcentrated government agencies involved in project 
implementation. The capacities and performance of the main service providers (such as NGOs, training 
institutes, business development service providers, participating financing institutions private contractors 
or  contracted  government  agencies)  are  examined;  and  the  timeliness  of  service  delivery,  value  for 
money, adherence to schedules and contracts are considered.  
The section also examines the contributions of the Borrower to project design and implementation, its 
compliance  with  the  covenants  of  the  loan  agreement  and  due  follow-up  of  the  recommendations  of 
supervision  and  implementation  support  missions.  Other  areas  to  be  explored  are  also  the  timely 
provision of adequate counterpart funding and adherence with decisions taken (e.g. changes in policies 
or the legal framework).  
The  section  also  assesses  the  performance  of  project  co-financiers,  including  the  timely  provision  of 
funds in the level expected. Their support to facilitate project implementation, supervision or oversight 
(e.g. harmonization of reporting requirements or financial management practices) is also considered. 
E.5 Quality of supervision and implementation support 
This section critically reflects on the support provided by IFAD (or the Cooperating Institution) throughout 
project  implementation,  on  the  relevance  and  timeliness  of  guidance  and  solutions  proposed  to 
implementation  bottlenecks  and  on  the  flexibility  in  dealing  with  changes  in  the  project  environment, 
including  amendments  to  the  loan  agreement.  Measures  taken  to  adjust  the  project  in  response  to 
inadequacies  in  the  original  design  or  to  changes  in  the  external  environment  (policy  or  institutional 
changes, natural disasters or external shocks) are also assessed.  
The section also discusses IFAD’s (or CI’s) responsiveness and timeliness of response with regard to 
procurement reviews, AWPB reviews and loan administration. The quality and usefulness  of  IFAD-led 
supervision missions (frequency, team composition, relevance of recommendations) is also examined. 
The section also assesses the quality to any implementation support, or capacity-building, provided in 
the course of implementation by IFAD 
E.6 Project internal rate of return 
154 
This section  presents an analysis of  the actual project internal rate of return  and  compares  it  with the 
IRR estimated at the time of project design and appraisal, based on actual costs, changes made during 
implementation and changes in economic prices and market conditions. 
In case the IRR was not estimated at the time of project design and at a minimum, this section presents 
a  costs-benefits  analysis  for  all  the  investments  realized  by  the  project  under  each  main  component, 
showing  actual  costs  and  inputs  (capital  costs,  operation  and  maintenance  costs,  labor  costs,  taxes), 
value  of  traded  goods  and  non-traded  goods,  estimated  economic  benefits  (revenues,  value  of  self-
consumed production) and estimated social benefits. 
The section also presents conclusions regarding the “inputs to outputs” cost ratio using comparable local 
or national benchmarks, the “loan costs per beneficiary” and the “administrative costs per beneficiary”. 
F.  Assessment of sustainability 
This  section  presents  conclusions  regarding  the  prospects  for  the  continuation  of  project  activities  or 
benefit  streams  after  project  closure  and  the  durability  of  changes  and  impacts  brought  about  by  the 
project. The analysis also examines if actual and anticipated results will be resilient to risks and all the 
factors  influencing  sustainability.  The  various  dimensions  of  sustainability  are  taken  into  account: 
political (government commitment, stakeholders’ interests); social (social acceptability, social  capital, 
community  ownership); 
implications);  environmental 
(positive/negative  contributions,  resilience  to  external  environmental  shocks,  suitability  of  agricultural 
approaches  in  the  context  of  climate  change);  technical  (rural  producers’  capacities,  appropriate 
technologies, access to inputs) and economic (market conditions, prices). 
(policy  and 
institutional 
institutional 
The section also identifies a suitable hand-over strategy and the conditions necessary for post-project 
sustainability. The key actions and steps required in order to ensure post-project sustainability, and the 
various responsibilities, are also identified.   
G. Lessons learned and knowledge 
The section focuses on the main learning gained from project implementation or the specific lessons that 
have significance beyond the project and that the Borrower or IFAD should retain for future use or that 
can be relevant to other organizations. This new knowledge or understanding may be positive, as in a 
successful experiment, or negative, as in a mishap or failure. 
All  lessons  learnt  presented  should  be  significant  in  that  they  have  a  real  or  assumed  impact  on 
operations; valid in that they are factually and technically correct; and  applicable in that they identify a 
specific design, process, or decision that reduces or eliminates the potential for failures and mishaps, or 
reinforces a positive result.  
H. Conclusions and recommendations 
The section presents overall conclusions regarding overall project performance, highlighting key project’s 
achievements and shortfalls and key reasons for success or failure.  
It  also  describes  key  recommendations  related  to  post-project  sustainability  and  future  IFAD’s,  or 
Borrower’s, programming. 
155 
8.1.12 
Annex 12– Draft TOR for the Baseline Survey 
1)  Background 
A)  Project objectives and expected results 
B)  Logframe indicators 
C)  Target groups and target area 
2)  Purpose 
The proposed baseline survey aims at: (a) the collection of quantitative and qualitative information on the socio-
economic conditions of project beneficiaries before the start of project interventions; and (b) the quantification 
of the initial baseline values for the project Logframe indicators (impact and outcome level). Data will be collected 
from a representative sample of project beneficiaries, once they have been selected. 
Baseline  data  collected  will  be  primarily  used,  at  mid-term  and  project  completion,  as  a  reference  for  the 
measurement  of  project effectiveness  and  impacts. They  may  also  be  used  to  inform the planning  of  certain 
project interventions, or the process of beneficiaries’ selection. 
Among others and in relation with the specific project objectives and target groups, the baseline survey shall 
provide information on the following: 
−  General  socio-economic  situation  in  sample  localities  (school  enrolment,  literacy  rate,  access  to 
healthcare, poverty rate, etc.). 
−  Households’ characteristics (number of members, age, sex). 
−  Ownership of, and access to productive/arable land, irrigated land, forests (ha owned, rented, actually 
utilized). 
−  Agricultural production: Key crops grown by households (number of ha grown, average yield/ha) and 
income derived; Current level of production of key commodities. 
−  Livestock production: Types and number of animals owned by households; number of animals sold/year; 
Dairy production (type, quantities produced and sold); Annual income from livestock and dairy. 
−  Other  sources  of  income;  Total household  annual income; Total farming  income;  Number  of  income 
contributors. 
−  Key assets owned. 
−  Access to quality inputs. 
−  Access to agricultural extension or livestock husbandry services. 
−  Access to domestic water, irrigation water and water for livestock. 
−  Access to financial capital and credit. 
−  Access to roads and status of existing roads. 
−  Access to markets, traders and buyers; Access to market information. 
−  Effects of climate change on livelihoods and household-level adaptation strategy. 
−  Key drivers of rural poverty. 
3)  Methods of data collection 
After  a  review  of  the  Project  Design  Document,  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  other  relevant 
documents (e.g. lists of beneficiaries, progress reports), the Consultant shall prepare a detailed methodological 
note highlighting the sampling strategy and framework, the process and tools for data collection, including survey 
questionnaires and interview guides.  
The following methods shall be used: 
156 
Households’ survey: A quantitative survey will be carried out among a representative sample of rural households 
living  in  the  targeted  municipalities.  The  purpose  will  be  to  collect  quantitative  data  on  rural  households’ 
livelihoods, income and socio-economic status, as well as on the extent of their access to essential production 
inputs, knowledge and markets. 
One-on-one interviews with key informants: Semi-structured, open-ended interviews will be conducted with key 
informants (village or community leaders, municipal staff) in order to gain an in-depth understanding on specific 
aspects (e.g. drivers of poverty, production and marketing constraints, production levels) in the sample localities. 
Focus group discussions: In order to better comprehend the complex issue of resilience to climate change, semi-
structured interviews will be organized with groups of producers sharing common characteristics (E.g. groups 
of dairy producers, women, crop producers). 
Use of secondary data: A thorough review of available secondary data for targeted municipalities will be carried 
out  in  order  to  provide  background,  macro-level information  on  targeted  municipalities  (access  to  education, 
health, agricultural production and sales). 
4)  Sampling strategy and framework 
Using the list of selected beneficiaries, the Consultant will suggest an appropriate sampling strategy, frame and 
size. The sample shall be representative of the key characteristic or variables of project target groups and include 
an appropriate proportion of female beneficiaries, youth and marginalized groups from all targeted states, also 
representing the various commodities supported by the project. 
Depending on the extent of homogeneity of target groups’ socio-economic characteristics and other variables 
to be considered, the Consultant will consider the need to apply a purposeful, stratified cluster sampling method, 
or if other sampling methods appear more appropriate.  
5)  Key tasks to be performed 
Before field work: 
−  Review of required documentation on project objectives and target groups. 
−  Preparation of a draft detailed methodological note: This document will describe, among others: (a) the 
proposed survey methodology, processes and tools; (b) the sampling framework (including specific on 
the design methodology and sample size calculation); (c) the field implementation plan with protocols 
for the enumerators and supervisors; (d) a calendar or activities; (e) Survey questionnaire and interview 
guide; and (f) survey report outline. 
−  Finalization of the methodological note based on feedback from the PMU and IFAD. 
−  Recruitment, training and coaching of enumerators and supervisors. 
−  Pre-testing and finalization of the questionnaire and interview guides. 
−  Database development. 
In the field: 
−  Coordination with local partners and the PMU. 
−  Notification to partners and communities. 
−  Organization of survey logistics (material, transportation, lodging, etc.). 
−  Sample households’ selection based on agreed sampling method and identification of key informants in 
sample villages/localities. 
−  Administration  of  the  questionnaire  using  e-tablets  and  collection  of  qualitative  data  through  KII  and 
FGD. 
−  On-site, quality control of data by supervisors before uploading into database. 
After field work: 
−  Data analysis and preparation of draft report 
−  Finalization of survey report based on PMU and IFAD comments 
−  Delivery final report and electronic files and raw data  
157 
−  Presentation of final survey results to the PCU 
6)  Key deliverables 
At the end of the assignment, the following products will have been delivered by the Consultant: 
−  Detailed methodological note 
−  Research questionnaires and interview guides 
−  Draft survey report 
−  Final survey report 
−  Five printed and 2 electronic copies on CDs of the final report, including raw data and database.   
The  Survey  Completion  Report  shall  present  the  results  of  the  quantitative  survey  using  charts,  tables  and 
narratives according to the greed outline, while findings from FGD, KII and secondary data will provide contextual 
information and help deepen or complement survey findings. It shall also include a detailed description of the 
procedures and processes used during the field work, the description of problems faced during the exercise (if 
any) and the solutions adopted to overcome these issued. The raw data collected shall be annexed to the report 
and will also be submitted electronically.  
7)  Consultant selection 
The selection of the consultant will be according to the agreed procurement plan. At the minimum, the consultant 
or team leader should have the following profile: 
−  A University Degree in a Social Science or a related field from an accredited university. 
−  At  least  seven  (7)  years of  experience  in  the  conduct  of development  research,  socio-economic and 
impact surveys. 
−  At  least  seven  (7)  years  of  practical  experience  in  conducting  qualitative  surveys,  preferably  with  a 
background in rural development. 
−  Specific experience in data and information analysis and report writing. 
−  Prior experience in conducting baseline and impact surveys for UN agencies or the EU will be a plus. 
158 
8.1.13 
Annex 13 – Conducting Key Informant Interviews 
1)  What is a key informant interview? 
−  The term “Key Informant” refers to a person who can provide detailed information and opinions on a particular 
subject based on his/her knowledge of this particular issue. 
Example: If you need information on how project activities have influenced the use of water resources 
in the community, key informants could be the leaders of a Water Users’ Groups. 
−  Key informants can be young or old, and from a variety of socio-economic or ethnic groups.  
−  Key  informant  interviews  are  open-ended,  semi-structured  interviews.  Every  interview  should  have  clear 
objectives in terms of what kind of information is needed and how this information will be used.  
−  The output of a key informant interview is a textual description of a situation, guided by standard questions. 
2)  When do I need to conduct key informants’ interviews? 
−  Key  informant  interviews  are  tools  that  will  help  you  develop  an  in-depth  understanding  on  qualitative 
issues.  
−  Often, key informant interviews are used to gather qualitative information that will be used to “triangulate”50 
the findings of other types of evaluation methods (e.g. quantitative surveys). 
−  While there are other qualitative evaluation tools (e.g. Focus Group Discussions51), key informant interviews 
are best used if you think that some type of information can only be obtained in a context of full confidentiality. 
Example: In order to understand why 80% of members or Farmers Groups are not satisfied with project 
services, as shown in a recent survey, interviewing key informants (e.g. reputable leaders of Farmer 
Groups; or individual farmers) may be better than organizing Focus Group Discussions with groups of 
farmers, as some farmers may be too shy to express their views in public or in front of their leaders. 
−  Key informant interviews are also helpful to obtain suggestions and recommendations from key informants. 
They may hence provide a basis to explore new ideas that were never discussed before. 
3)  Limitations of key informant interviews 
−  While key informant interviews have a number of advantages  – for example they provide the opportunity to 
explore new ideas and they are simple to conduct and inexpensive – they also have a number of limitations 
Information obtained can be biased if the key informant was not properly selected.  Key informants are not 
necessary among village elites or leaders; a key informant can also be a simple farmer who is known to be 
smart, respected and outspoken. 
− 
−  Results of key informant interviews will not necessary be representative of what the entire community thinks 
and  they  may  overlook  the  perspectives  of  community  members  who  are  less  visible.  Again,  this 
stresses the importance of careful selection of key informants. 
 The information that you will get will provide very little basis for quantification. This is why such method should 
be used in conjunction with surveys.  
− 
−  Open-ended information is more  difficult and time-consuming to synthesize well enough to obtain clear 
results.  Also,  it  can  be  difficult  to  keep  interviews  focused,  making  different  interviews  difficult  to  compare 
properly. 
−  Key informant interviews are also usually more difficult to conduct and require more skills from the interviewer. 
The latter will need to be well prepared and well informed in order to get the most out of the interview.  
−  Key  informant  interviews  are  also  susceptible  to  interviewer’s  biases,  as  the  interviewer  may  only  pick  up 
information that confirms his/her preconceived ideas. 
4)  Before going to the field 
− 
Identify the discussion topics for which you need answers. The number and kinds of topics to discuss with 
key informants will depend on the time and resources available. 
50 In social sciences, triangulation means that more than two methods are used in a study with a view to double (or triple) checking 
results. This is also called "cross examination”. 
51 See Technical Guidelines No 3. 
159 
−  The questions should be such that interviewees can express opinions through a discussion/dialogue. A logical 
sequence of the questions should help the discussion flow. (See examples of questions in Appendix A). 
−  For each discussion topic, prepare an interview guide. 
Interview guide – Suggested content 
-  Name of interviewer and key informant 
-  Location and date 
-  Brief description of the objectives of the interview 
-  Lists all questions (blank space for answers) 
-  Blank space for general comments by the interviewer(s) 
-  Blank space for recommendations by key informants 
−  For each discussion topic, determine how many interviews are required (usually 3-4 per discussion topic). 
− 
Identify the key informants. This is usually done by:  
(i)  Identifying  the  relevant  groups  from  which  key  informants  may  be  drawn  (e.g.  Water  Users 
Associations; Women Groups). 
(ii) Consulting several knowledgeable persons (e.g. village leaders, field workers, project staff) who 
will help you select your key informants. For each discussion topic, be sure to interview a mix of people 
(of different ages, ethnicity, religious affiliation, educational level).  
(iii) Prepare the final list of key informants; but be ready to add additional key informants once you 
have started the interviews (it often happens that during an interview with a key informant, a name of 
a new key informant may be suggested). 
In most cases, 15 to 35 key informants are sufficient for most studies, or even less if key informant 
interviews are combined with other methods. 
−  Train  interviewers  to  ensure  that  they  understand  the  purpose  and  develop  the  proper  skills  (how  to 
encourage discussion, taking accurate and useful notes, etc.). Training needs to address team preparation, 
interview  context,  selection  of  key  informant,  sensitive  listening,  sensitive  questioning,  judging  responses, 
recording the interview and self-critical review. 
−  Pre-test the interview guides to make sure that the questions are appropriate and accurate enough, and 
that the answers permit useful analysis. Pre-testing provides an opportunity to determine whether wording of 
the questions is appropriate, whether questions elicit discussion, and to identify questions that are not easily 
understood. Pre-testing can be conducted during the training of enumerators. 
5)  Data collection: how to conduct a key informant’s interview 
−  At arrival in each village, talk to the village leader to present the work being conducted and ask for permission 
to interview village members.  
−  When you start the interview with the key informant, introduce yourself, the project objectives and explain the 
purpose  of  the  interview.  Be  sure  the  informant  understands  the  purpose  of  the  interview  and  what  you 
intend to do with the information you will receive from him/her. 
−  A good introduction will gain the interest and cooperation of the respondent without biasing the respondent’s 
answers. Emphasize the fact that the interview results will remain confidential (in the sense that the name of 
the informant will not be associated with answers collected). 
−  As in focus group discussions, key informant interviews are best conducted by two people, one leading the 
discussion and the other taking note. Accurate note taking is particularly important to make analysis and 
interpretation possible. 
−  A good interviewer will have the following abilities: 
-  A good listener who shows neutrality and does not share his/her own views on the subject  
-  Familiarity with the issue discussed, so as to be able to ask additional, unanticipated questions if 
required. 
-  A  person  who  is  able  to  seek  clarifications  and  elaboration  on  initial  responses  provided  while 
maintaining a conversational tone so as to avoid that the informant feels interrogated, judged or 
misunderstood. 
160 
APPENDIX A - FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPING THE KEY INFORMANT QUESTIONNAIRE 
GUIDES 
Topic and key informant 
Objectives 
Suggested questions 
1 – External factors affecting 
food security and agricultural 
projection during the last 12 
months  
Possible Key Informants: 
•  Village leaders/elders 
•  Representatives of Farmers’ 
Groups  
•  Representatives of Women 
Groups 
•  Village doctors/nurses 
•  Government extension staff 
who know the village well 
2 - Natural resources 
management  
Possible Key Informants: 
•  Natural Resources 
Management (NRM) Groups 
members 
•  Village leaders/elders 
• 
Farmers not part of the NRM 
group and known for their 
reluctance to be part of the 
NRM Group 
•  Government extension staff 
who know the village well 
•  Staff from environmental 
protection agency who know 
the village well 
3 - Infrastructure management 
Possible Key Informants: 
•  Representatives of 
Infrastructure Users’ Groups 
(e.g. Water Users’ 
Associations, Road 
Maintenance Groups) 
•  Villagers who use the 
infrastructure 
•  Representatives of women 
Groups 
•  Village leaders/elders 
•  District/Gov. civil engineers 
who know the village well 
Assess whether external 
shocks have had a 
significant impact of the 
food security of the 
population in the village 
Assess whether NRM 
activities are having the 
intended impact on 
livelihoods of the 
community 
Identify problems and find 
solutions for improvement 
Understand whether 
infrastructure is effectively 
managed and responds to 
the needs of the community 
Identify ways for 
improvement 
•  What  shocks  have  affected  the  population  of  the  village 
during the past 12 months? (drought, floods, crop pests and 
disease, 
loss  of 
employment,  unusually  high  level  of  human  disease,  fire, 
high costs of agricultural inputs, earthquake, thefts, conflict, 
etc.) 
livestock  diseases,  sudden 
lack  or 
•  How have these shocks affected agricultural production and 
farmers’ income?  
•  Which categories of households were the most affected (e.g. 
farmers, pastoralist, female-headed household…)? 
•  What are the other effects on food security at household and 
community level? 
•  Were there any interventions by the government or NGOs to 
address  the  situation?  Was  it  enough?  Did  all  households 
benefit? 
If such external shocks/events would occur again in the near 
future, what could the project do to help? 
• 
•  Since when is the group functional? What is the composition 
of the group? What is the purpose/mandate of the group? 
•  What is the current status of the natural resource base? (e.g. 
is pasture land overgrazed? are forests over-exploited?) How 
important is this natural resources’ base for the livelihoods of 
the community? 
•  How many members are actively participating? What is the 
frequency of meeting?  
•  What are the activities that have been implemented so far by 
the  group?  Are  these  activities  already  having  a  positive 
impact on the NR base? 
•  Are  group  activities  well  accepted  by 
community/villages?  What  are 
Is 
encountered? 
effectively? 
the  group  able 
the  whole 
the  principle  problems 
to  solve  problems 
•  How can NRM activities be further improved? 
•  What is the condition of existing village infrastructure (roads, 
schools, drinking water, transport, irrigation, communication, 
sanitation)? 
•  What  new  infrastructure  did  the  project  finance?  What 
infrastructure were renovated with project support? How was 
the 
the 
infrastructure  constructed/renovated?  (e.g.  by 
villagers themselves; by a construction company) 
•  What was the process for selecting the infrastructure to be 
constructed/renovated?  Was  is  an  inclusive  process?  Did 
this 
youth 
women 
identification/selection process? 
participate 
and 
the 
in 
•  How many people are/will benefit from these new/renovated 
infrastructure? Are people satisfied with the infrastructure? 
How has the infrastructure changed the living conditions of 
the beneficiaries? 
161 
Topic and key informant 
Objectives 
Suggested questions 
4 – Access to markets 
Possible Key Informants: 
•  Representatives from 
Farmers’ Groups or 
Associations 
Local traders 
• 
•  Staff from local auction yards 
•  Staff from local/central 
agricultural statistics bureaux 
Local transporters 
• 
Understand whether there 
is an enabling environment 
to improve farmers’ access 
to markets  
Identify constraints and 
potentials 
•  What  are  the  systems  in  place  for  infrastructure  operation 
and  maintenance?  Are 
these  systems/mechanisms 
effective?  Do  people  pay  fees  or  taxes  to  use  this 
infrastructure? How is O&M financed? 
•  What are the current problems? What could be done to solve 
these problems? 
•  What are the main crops grown in the area? Where, and how, 
are  they  sold?  Are  they  sold  at  the  farm  gate  through 
middlemen;  through  bulk  transportation  organized  by  the 
farmers? Do farmers tend to store their production to sell it at 
the best price? Do farmers have some bargaining power to 
obtain the best prices for their products? Are there contract 
farmers in the area? 
•  Are  there  physical  barriers  to  markets  (e.g.  poor  road 
networks)?  Are  there  trade  or  production  restrictions  (e.g. 
trade regulation, price controls, production bans)? 
Is  the  right  infrastructure  in  place:  energy  and  water 
infrastructure (to lower production and marketing risks)? rural 
roads? transportation and market infrastructure? storing and 
processing infrastructure? 
• 
•  Do  local  farmers  have  access  to  information  on:  prices  of 
products  and  the  local  level  and  at  final  consumer’s  level; 
quality  requirements  (e.g.  export  markets;  supermarkets); 
about  places  and  best  periods  for  selling  their  products; 
about potential buyers? About niche markets? 
•  Are local farmers organized in Farmer Organizations? If so, 
what type of services do FOs extend to their members? 
•  For each of these main crops, what were the average prices 
given to farmers for their production at  the farm gate,  and 
how much were these products sold in the local markets? Is 
there a high price volatility for these crops? How do farmers 
access information on market prices? 
•  What are the crops which could be grown in the project area 
and which would have a better marketing potential?  
162 
8.1.14 
Annex 14 – Conducting Focus Group Discussions 
1)  What is a focus group discussion? 
− A focus group discussion is a facilitated discussion among 8 to 12 carefully selected participants. The 
idea is that group members discuss the topic among themselves, with guidance from a facilitator. 
− It  is a  method  used  to  obtain  in-depth  qualitative  information  on  perceptions  and  ideas  from  a  group  of 
people who have something in common (e.g. they have a shared interest in discussing the topic) or who are 
from  similar  backgrounds.  Homogeneous  groups  are  indeed  preferred  because  mixing  age  and  gender 
groups may inhibit some people, especially women or the youth, from expressing their views in front of others. 
− Focus groups discussions are structured around a set of  pre-determined questions – usually no more 
than  10  –  but  the  discussion  should  be  free-flowing.  Ideally,  participants’  comments  will  stimulate  and 
influence the thinking and sharing of others.  
− If facilitated well, focus group discussions can bring out rich and detailed information. It generally stimulates 
rich  responses  and  also  provides  a  valuable  opportunity  to  gain  insights  into  behaviors,  attitudes,  and 
feelings. 
− It takes more than one focus group discussions on any one topic to produce valid results – usually 3 or 4. 
You will know you have conducted enough discussions (with the same set of questions) when you are not 
hearing anything new anymore, i.e. you have reached a point of saturation.  
− Focus group discussions generate qualitative information and the output will be a textual description of a 
situation. As such, findings will not be representative of the views of the entire population. This is why 
focus  group  discussions  are  best  used  to  complement  the  findings  of  RIMS  surveys  or  annual  outcome 
surveys, for example to understand better a specific finding emerging from these surveys. 
Limitations of focus group discussions 
2) 
− Facilitation of a focus group requires considerable skills – both in moderating the group and in adequately 
recording the responses.  
−  The flexible format makes it susceptible to facilitator bias, which can undermine the validity and reliability 
of findings.  
−  Discussions can be sidetracked or dominated by a few vocal individuals.  
−  The information can be difficult to analyze; comments should be interpreted in the context of the group 
setting.  
3)  Before going to the field 
−  When preparing for an annual outcome/RIMS survey exercise, choose the topics to be discussed in focus 
group  discussions,  and  the  specific  information needs  for each  topic (e.g.  the  information  you  need  in 
order to know whether a particular outcome was achieved and why/why not).  
−  The  number  of  discussion  topics  to  address  in  focus  group  discussions  will  mainly  depend  on:  (i)  the 
identified information gaps; and (ii) the time and resources available.  
−  For each discussion topic, prepare interview guides (e.g. list of open-ended questions). The Annex provides 
examples of questions that could be included in interview guides. Include a short narrative of the objective 
of  the  focus group  in  each  interview  guide,  so  that  the  facilitator  always has  in  mind  the objective  of  the 
discussion and can refocus if necessary.  
In the interview guide you can leave blank space under each question so that the assistant facilitator can 
easily take note. In this case you will need to print one copy of the interview guide for each focus group. 
−  Pre-testing is mandatory in all cases, as this provides an opportunity to determine whether wording of the 
questions  is appropriate,  whether questions elicit  discussion,  and  to  identify  questions  that  are  not  easily 
understood. Pre-testing can be conducted during the training of enumerators. 
− 
4)  Data collection: how to conduct a focus group discussion 
−  At  arrival  in  each  village,  talk  to  the  village  leader  to  present  the  work  being  carried  out  and  ask  for 
permission to interview village members.  
−  You can conduct one or more focus group discussions in each village, but try not to discuss different 
topics with the same group.  
−  Select participants for each focus group discussion. The  selection of participants is extremely important. 
Focus group participants should be able to provide relevant information on the particular topic, and the group 
should be heterogeneous enough so that various and diverse opinions can be shared. It may be a good idea 
to consult the village leader(s) and field workers for identification of adequate focus groups participants. 
Ideally, the focus group discussion should be led by a moderator and an assistant who takes notes. 
− 
163 
−  Before starting the discussion, introduce the topic, explaining the objectives of the focus group (e.g. “this 
discussion should help us understand what impact project activities have had on women empowerment”). 
−  Explain that every participant is expected to contribute to the discussion. Example: “Before we start, I 
would like to remind you that there are no right or wrong answers in this discussion. We are interested in 
knowing what each of you think, so please feel free to be frank and to share your point of view, regardless 
of whether you agree or disagree with what you hear. It is very important that we hear all your opinions.” 
−  The  discussion  should  take  no  more than one  hour. 45  minutes  is  ideal;  if  it  is longer  there  is a  risk of 
fatigue from the group participants. 
−  The focus group moderator has a responsibility to adequately cover all prepared questions within the time 
allotted. S/he also has a responsibility to get all participants to talk and fully explain their answers. Some 
helpful probes for this include: 
- 
- 
- 
“Can you talk about that more?” 
“Help me understand what you mean” 
“Can you give an example?” 
−  Take detailed notes during the discussion. This will facilitate the subsequent analysis. Ideally, the note taker 
should pre-analyze the results during the discussion, so that only the most important points are recorded. 
General principles for conducting focus group discussions52 
Location: Interviews should be conducted in a relatively private place, where participants feel comfortable speaking. 
Introduction: Facilitator should open the session with a traditional greeting and other local meeting conventions (e.g. a 
prayer), explain who they are and whom they work for, the purpose of the data collection, what will be done with the 
information, and who will have access to it. Facilitators should then explain that they do not make decisions about project 
support or interventions. 
Flexibility: Facilitators should begin the discussion in general and concrete terms. They should be flexible, while making 
sure that all topics get covered (following the interview guide). Granting participants space and time while guiding the 
conversation in the right direction is a difficult task. Although facilitators should not appear rushed, clear time limits should 
be set for each session; one hour is recommended. 
Participation: Facilitators should be constantly aware of their own biases and the ways in which they may be perceived 
by participating communities. The tone of interviews should be informal, not interrogatory. Although care should be taken 
to ensure that all participants in a group context contribute to the discussion, the interviewer should respect sensitive issues 
and the right of participants not to respond. Interviewers should avoid implicit and explicit value judgments while conducting 
interviews. 
Timing: Fieldwork should be sensitive to time issues: the schedule of the study (e.g. the need to have data before a certain 
date); the time of the day the team arrives in the community (e.g. key informants may be busy, women or men may be 
working in the field); and the season of the year (e.g. unavailability of a certain group of the population due to season 
migration  or  work  in  the  files).  It  is  important  that  each  team  knows  how  to  handle  various  problems  that  may  be 
experienced during the fieldwork.  
forms. 
52 Source: WFP, CFSVA guidelines, 2009 
164 
Facilitation skills: Take some time to reflect on what would you do if…    
o  The Focus Group participants are very quiet, unresponsive and reluctant to answer your questions? 
o  Some of the selected Focus Group participants are late in arriving? 
o  A  number  of  other  local  people  (who  were  not  selected  as  Focus  Group  participants)  want  to  join  the 
discussion? 
o  When your facilitation team arrives, the local authorities have set up the venue so that you have chairs and a 
table, but the participants have mats on the ground? 
o  The discussion on one topic goes on for much longer than expected? 
o  The village leader wants to sit in on the focus group? 
o  Some of the selected Focus Group participants do not come at all? 
o  One Focus Group participant is dominating the discussion? 
o  The  venue  for  the  Focus  Group  is  noisy  or  uncomfortable  so  that  participants  are  distracted  during  the 
discussion? 
o  Your facilitation team are unexpectedly invited to join the village chief / local authorities for lunch, but you have 
arranged to leave in order to get to another Focus Group in the afternoon? 
o  During the discussion some of the participants tell you about a serious problem (e.g. community conflict, child 
abuse,  corruption,  economic  exploitation  by  others)  which  you  feel  it  is  important  for  the  development 
programme to be aware of and/or take action on? 
Characteristics of good facilitators and note takers 
Ideally, a good facilitator should have: 
•  Previous experience in qualitative data collection 
•  Previous experience in collecting data related to rural development 
•  Strong interview skills 
•  An understanding of group dynamics 
• 
• 
• 
•  Knowledge of the local language and an ability to accurately translate into the language of the study 
Interest in the subject and in participants’ views (curiosity) 
The ability to understand and elaborate on participants’ opinions 
Familiarity with key concepts related to rural development 
(e.g. English) 
A good note taker should have: 
• 
•  Knowledge of the local language and an ability to accurately translate into the language of the study 
Familiarity with key concepts related to rural development 
• 
(e.g. English) 
The ability to understand what are the most important points being discussed and what are the details 
that do not necessarily need to be recorded 
Interesting Internet resources: 
-  On-line 
DO_TOPIC.html  
training  module  on 
focus  group  discussion:  http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-56615-201-1-
- Tips for conducting focus groups interviews:  http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaby233.pdf  
-  WFP  technical  guidance  sheet  on  qualitative  data  analysis:  http://www.wfp.org/content/technical-
guidance-sheet-no9-qualitative-data-collection-and-analysis-food-security-assessments  
165 
APPENDIX B - FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPING THE INTERVIEW GUIDES FOR FOCUS GROUPS- 
EXAMPLES  
Objective 
Examples of questions 
Topic and 
participants 
1- Gender and 
women 
empowerment 
Participants: Women 
beneficiaries 
Assess the situation of women in the 
community and the influence project 
activities have had on gender 
dynamics in the community.  
The discussion should focus on the 
current role of women in the 
community, compared to the 
previous year or the situation before 
the project.  
It should also enable the project 
team to understand what makes the 
women more powerful and how the 
situation can be further improved. 
•  What  are  the  decision-making  capacities  of  women  in  the 
household? in community activities? Was there any change since 
the beginning of the project? 
•  What major financial decisions are made by men and which by 
women at the household level? At the community level? 
•  What different coping mechanisms are available to women and 
men to lessen the risk of food insecurity for their families? 
•  How do gender roles (e.g. workload, time, mobility) influence the 
ability of women and men to participate in the project? 
•  What does empowerment mean to you? How does this translate 
in everyday life?  
•  Are women usually allowed to decide on the number of children in 
the family and whether the girls can go to school? Can women 
venture out of her home without the permission of her husband? 
Can women spent part of the money they earn on things they want 
without discussing with their husband? 
•  Are  there  any  women’s  groups  formed  in  the  village?  Are  they 
functioning? Why/why not? 
•  Do women have same access to microcredit as men? Was there 
any  change  since  the  beginning  of  the  project?  Can  women 
purchase productive assets or land in their own name? Can they 
open a bank account in their own name? 
•  What is the level of participation of women in social gatherings, 
community  meetings  and  in  development  activities?  Was  there 
any change since the beginning of the project? 
•  Are there any women in the community that lead certain events, 
or groups? If so, do the men support them? 
•  Do women have ownership or usufruct (right of using and enjoying 
all the advantages and profits of the property of another without 
altering or damaging the substance) rights? 
•  Are  there  any  inequalities  in  work  load,  wage  rate,  access  to 
economic resources, between women and men? Was there any 
change since the beginning of the project? 
•  For how many months/year can you meet your own consumption 
from your own production or from your own cash? Is your food 
security situation improving? If not, what are the problems?  
•  Were there in the recent past any external, extraordinary events 
that may have affected positively or negatively your food security 
situations? What did the project do to help? 
•  How do you manage getting access to food in times of scarcity? 
What could the project do to help? What do you think the  food 
security situation will be in the next 6 months?  
•  What types of training or extension services have you received 
recently? Who has organized this training? What were the topics? 
How often were you trained? What was your main motivation to 
attend?  
•  Was training extended to both men and women? If so, were there 
female trainers or extension staff? What was the process to the 
selection 
•  Where/how was the training organized? Was the training location 
convenient? Where the timing of the  training convenient? Were 
the training facilitators/extension staff good? 
166 
2. Food security 
Participants: 
Project beneficiaries 
 Assess level of food security among 
beneficiaries 
3 - Agricultural 
technologies and 
production  
Participants: 
Farmers/producers 
Assess quality of training and 
extension services 
Assess impact of this training on  
agricultural/livestock production 
Topic and 
participants 
Objective 
Examples of questions 
•  Were the training/extension topics relevant to your needs? If not, 
what  type  of  training/extension  topics  would  be  more  relevant? 
Can you influence the training/extension services topics? 
•  Have you been able to apply, on your own, the new technologies. 
If  not,  why?  If  yes,  what  was  the  outcome?  Are  these  new 
technologies  helping  you  increase  your  agricultural/livestock 
production? 
•  Do you have sufficient access to the necessary production inputs? 
If not, what are the problems? How can the project help? 
•  How  do  you  consider  the  state  of  natural  resources  in  your 
community?  Has  it  been  improving  or  declining  in  the  recent 
years? 
•  Has  the  project  done  anything  to  improve  natural  resources 
management? How? Did you observe any impact? Explain. 
•  Patterns in access to land, water resources, pastures, and other 
community resources.  
•  What is the land tenure system? Was it improved by project? Do 
you have more access to land now?  
•  What are the main constraints and opportunities for getting access 
to  natural  resources?  Do  you  observe  a  change  since  the 
beginning of project activities? 
•  What have been the most significant changes in your life since the 
beginning of project activities? 
•  Are  you  satisfied  about  the  project  activities  in  your  village? 
Why/why not? 
•  Any success story on how project activities have impacted your 
life?  
•  Any  negative  impact  of  the  project  on  your  life?  On  the  village 
social structure?  
•  Are there any farmers’ groups in the village? 
•  Do they participate in decision making at project/local level? 
•  Are grassroots institutions available to self-monitor and evaluate 
their own progress? 
•  Change in capacity to market own production? 
•  Terms and conditions of marketing arrangements? 
•  What are the different types of the organizations that work in the 
community? What are their activities? Who benefits? Any impact 
at village/household level? 
•  What are the community-based groups currently operating? What 
are their activities? Who benefits?  
4- Natural resources 
Participants: village 
members who earn 
income from natural 
resources 
Assess whether natural resources 
are declining and if project activities 
have a positive impact on NRM. 
If no impact, understand why and 
discuss how better effectiveness 
can be achieved. 
6- Project impact 
Participants: 
Beneficiaries men 
and women  
Capture unintended and/or 
undesirable effects of the project at 
household and village/community 
level. 
Identify individuals for success 
stories or case studies  
7- Empowerment of 
grassroots 
institutions 
Participants: 
grassroots 
organizations 
members 
Assess whether grassroots 
institutions are effective and 
respond to the needs of the 
community. 
Understand how they could be more 
powerful and have more impact. 
Identify problems and find solutions 
to make them more effective. 
167 
8.1.15 
Training Participants’ list 
Annex 15 – Data Collection Forms – Draft Templates 
DATE OF TRAINING :       FROM _____________   TO ______________ 
TRAINING TITLE : 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
TRAINING MODULE: 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Financial literacy 
Production 
Post-production 
Others 
  Business Skills 
TRAINING SUBJECT:  
NAME OF CONSULTING FIRM : 
____________________________________________________________________ 
NAME AND SIGNATURE OF TRAINER  
________________________________________________________________ 
TRAINING LOCATION:     STATE : ______________________       
LOCALITY _________________________________ 
# 
VITA BENEFICIARY 
NUMBER 
FAMILY NAME 
FIRST NAME 
SIGNATURE 
SEX  AGE 
Sub-total : 
Total youth (below 35 years) 
168 
B2B Meetings’ Minutes 
169 
    Province:Name of Minutes' taker:_________________________    Commodity:    Date:_________________________    Corridor:    Cluster ID Nb:    Participants:NameBeneficiary  NbNameVerbalWrittenType of value chain:MilkCheeseVegetablesPotato seedsOther (Specify)_____________________________YesNo(Quantity)    (Unit)Subject of agreement:Sales at fixed priceQuantity agreed: (________)Sales at market priceQuantity agreed: (________)Sales with fixed volumeQuantity agreed: (________)Input provisionProvision of technical adviceOther (Specify)_____________________________Date of next meeting:Meeting conclusions:________________________________________Traders / Buyers:Locality of provenanceType of contract:Meeting minutes (discussion points):Contract signed/agreement made?:________________________________________________________________________________Producers:________________________________________B2B Meeting Minutes 
Multi-Stakeholders’ Cluster Meeting - Minutes 
170 
Province:Corridor(s):Cluster Id Nb.:Date of meeting:Meeting location:Name of Facilitator:Signature of Facilitator:Minutes :Key decisions:Multi-stakeholder cluster meetings -  MinutesSubject of meeting: 
171 
NameSignatureSexAgeNameSignatureLocality of residenceOccupationSexAgeNameSignatureLocality of residenceOccupationSexAgeNameSignatureLocality of residenceOccupationGenderAgeBuyors and marketing companiesService providers (input suppliers, processors, financial services)OthersMulti-stakeholder cluster meetings -  List of participantsFarmers and rural producersBeneficiary Nb. 
Cluster Profile Template 
172 
General information:"Name" of cluster:Cluster ID Nb.:Cluster location : Associated corridor:Commodities:Nb of associated Farmers' Groups:Date of cluster establishment:MenWomenNb of membersList of associated Farmers' GroupsGroup ID NbLocalityCommodity Cluster Profile Form  
173 
1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thTotal:  1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thTotal:(k) Financial institutions(l) Others (f) Agricultural input suppliers (g) Public extension service providers (h) Private extension service providers (i) Processors (j) Municipality staff(a) Farmers and rural producers(b) Representatives of formal  Farmers' Groups/Cooperatives(c) Representatives of informal  Farmers' Groups/Cooperatives (d) Interprofessional organizations (e) Traders and shopkeepers(k) Financial institutions(l) OthersDate:Nb de participants, by category (g) Public extension service providers (h) Private extension service providers (i) Processors (j) Municipality staff(a) Farmers and rural producers(b) Representatives of formal  Farmers' Groups/Cooperatives(c) Representatives of informal  Farmers' Groups/Cooperatives (d) Interprofessional organizations (e) Traders and shopkeepers (f) Agricultural input suppliersCluster meetings' participantsDate:Nb de participants, par categorie: 
Farmers’ Group Profile Template 
174 
1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thProvince:Locality:Address:"Name" of Farmers' Group:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thFarmers' Group VITA Number:Main commodity:Date of creation:Date of official registration:Main contact phone number:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thDate of last elections:2020202120222023202420252026202720202021202220232024202520262027Nb. of members having duly paid their fees:Main Services Provided to Members (record nb of members receiving services)Type of servicesGeneral Assembly MeetingsOther MeetingsNumber of participants:List of Management Committee MembersGeneral informationFarmers' Group Profile Form   (…)SecretaryTresorierSexAgeContact or phone numberPresidentTotal fees collected:Membership FeesNumber of active members:FunctionNameDate of election or nominationDate:Date:Number of participants:Date:Number of voters:Elections of Management Committee Members 
175 
               Date of  leaving the groupLIST OF GROUP MEMBERSFamily NamePhone NumberDate of  joining the groupFirst NameSexDate of BirthJanajalit?VITA Beneficiary Number 
INDIVIDUAL FARMER PROFILE FORM 
176 
Province:Locality:Address:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thFamily name:Date:First name:Date of birthSex:Single-headed family?:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thNumber of children:Date:Farmers' Group VITA Number:Phone number:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thLandBaseline2026Date:Area of agricultural land ownedAre of agricultural land rentedAreas of agricultural land cultivateArea of agricultural land irrigated1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thBaseline2026Date:LivestockSource:Nb of cowsNb of goatsNb of chicken1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thBaseline2026Date:PPI scoreSource:1st2nd3rd4th5th6th7th8thDate:Source:Individual Farmer Profile FormCapacity Building SupportBusiness Skills TrainingMentoring SupportProduction TrainingPost-production TrainingLiteracy Training202320232023Livestock Vaccination Services  General information  
177 
1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd season1st season2nd seasonNet profit from agricultural productionCommodityUnit2020202120222023202420252025Income from agricultural salesCommodityUnit202020212022202320242025202520252025CommodityProduction dataUnit20202021202220232024Production, sales and profit data (vegetables, cereals, potato seeds) 
178 
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4MilkDairy productsLive animalsQ1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4MilkDairy productsLive animalsQ1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4MilkDairy productsLive animals202320242025202020212022202320242025202020212022202320242025202020212022Net profit from agricultural productionCommodityUnitIncome from agricultural salesCommodityUnitProduction, sales and profit data (dairy)Production dataCommodityUnit 
Dairy Farmers Diaries – to be based on best practice examples, e.g. from RERP, Cambodia 
179 
8.1.16 
PMU M&E Specialist  
Annex 16– M&E Specialist and KM Expert (Draft) 
Reporting line: Project Director 
Main responsibilities: 
▪  Develop and maintain a simple but comprehensive M&E system and fine-tune the M&E Section of the 
draft PIM (including detailed methodologies and any required additional tools (standard data collection 
forms and analysis tables), processes and responsibilities for the monitoring of project implementation 
(activities, outputs) and the measurement of results (outcomes and impact). 
▪  Assist in the development of a simple MIS (Excel or Access-based) for the recording of M&E data and 
the preparation of standard consolidates tables for the tracking of activities, outputs and outreach. 
▪  Ensure that the MIS is regularly updated with required information by all intended M&E actors and 
MIS users. 
▪  Provide inputs for the finetuning of the targeting strategy (in particular for the definition of adequate 
selection criteria) and ensure that the M&E system will help track targeting and outreach performance 
(e.g. number and profile of beneficiaries, types of benefits received). 
▪  Prepare the TOR for the baseline, mid-term and completion surveys, including the description of the 
proposed survey methodology (sampling frame and sample size, draft questionnaire) and provide the 
appropriate guidance to the selected service providers in order to ensure timely and reliable survey 
reports. 
▪  Provide the necessary initial training and continuous guidance and technical support to all PMU staff 
and grassroots implementers in charge of data collection in order to ensure data quality and reliability. 
▪  Organize periodic field visits in order to verify the quality and validity of M&E data submitted by 
grassroots implementers and collect formal and informal feedback from project beneficiaries on their 
satisfaction with project activities. 
▪  Prepare quarterly, half-yearly and annual progress reports, as well as more regular summary 
performance tables and other dashboards; and prepare and update digital maps showing all project 
sites and interventions. 
▪  Supervise, or design and conduct, periodic surveys and other qualitative surveys in order to collect 
data and evidence of early outcomes or feedback from beneficiaries. 
▪  Prepare consolidated ORMS tables and other data tables to be submitted annually to IFAD and ADBL 
▪ 
Management. 
Identify implementation problems, bottlenecks or delays and inform Project Management about the 
need for corrective actions.  
KM Expert 
Reporting line: Project Director 
Main responsibilities: 
▪  Prepare a KM Plan to identify the key topics worthwhile studying during implementation (e.g. women 
participation in agriculture, women access to legal land titles, applying climate smart agricultural 
techniques, etc.), the key tools and processes for the collection of required data, information and 
evidence, and the key tools and processes for the documentation and sharing of knowledge, lessons 
learned and best practices. 
▪  Ensure that lessons learned and best practices are properly identified, captured and documented) and 
that they are regularly shared to the relevant audience (project partners, policy makers, development 
partners) through appropriate means (including the participation in relevant meetings and events). 
▪  Prepare, produce and disseminate required knowledge material, using various means (studies, 
videos, case studies, print and web articles)  
▪  Coordinate with ADBL Communication Department for the production and dissemination of various 
communication products. 
▪  Organize and facilitate knowledge sharing workshops and events. 
180 
8.1.17 
Annex 17 - ESMP Matrix 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
1) Environmental 
Potential threat to forest and biodiversity resources including: 
Encroachment or expansion of 
agriculture in forest area, 
% reduction of fallow land in municipalities   
Baseline/mid-
term/completion and 
annual. 
(A) Secondary sources: Registries 
from municipalities, local Forestry 
Groups and/or provincial Forestry 
Departments; (B) Primary source: 
VC Cluster surveys. 
Excessive harvesting of forest 
products and open grazing   
Increasing water pollution  
Improper waste management  
Land and soil degradation  
Threat from introduction of 
exotic varieties and breeds 
Social  
Potential increase on the 
workload on women 
(especially from road 
maintenance activities) 
Within high risk communities, 
negative social dynamics from 
greater social and economic 
empowerment of women  
Investment failing: Depletion 
of HH assets and livelihoods' 
base to the point where they 
can no longer recover; 
Indebtness by loan 
beneficiaries unable to repay 
their loans. 
Climate change  
(a) % of farmers with herds in stall feeding system 
(b) % of municipalities with acceptable "current 
herd vs maximum carrying capacity" ratios 
(c) % of farmers using feed from sustainably 
managed fodder and forage sources  
(a) % farmers using efficient water use 
technologies  
(b) Number of farmers trained in IPM 
(a) % of project-supported markets with a waste 
management plan and an efficient waste 
management system                                                            
(b) Nb. of capacity building events organized for 
small-scale producers and micro entrepreneurs 
Annual  
Annual 
(a) Baseline/mid-
term/final; (b) Annual 
Farmers Diaries, Farm Diaries, VC 
Cluster surveys, Baseline/mid-
term/final impact surveys,  
(a) Baseline/mid-term/final impact 
surveys; Farmers' diaries (b) Project 
training records 
Project "infrastructure" records; 
Training reports; Reports from field 
inspection visits by PMU staff 
(a) % of farmers using sound IPM practices                                                                  
(b)% of municipalities with an increase in the land 
area managed through IPM 
(a) Annual; (b) 
Baseline/mid-
term/completion. 
(A) Secondary sources: Registries 
from municipalities, local Forestry 
Groups and/or provincial Forestry 
Departments; (B) Primary source: 
VC Cluster surveys 
Ex ante:  Component 1 activities to ensure that 
only certified/verified seeds suppliers are 
supported under the various Funds or capacity 
building activities. 
n/a 
n/a 
(a) % of women among meetings' participants (VC 
meetings, cluster meetings, municipalities 
meetings) and awareness raising events 
(b) % of women among project training, capacity 
building events and exchange visits 
(c) % of women beneficiaries with increased time 
spent for leisure 
(a) and (b): Annual; (c) 
baseline/mid-
term/completion. 
(a) Lists of participants in meetings 
or awareness raising events 
(b) Training records 
(c) IFAD empowerment survey. 
% of highly vulnerable women among GALS 
beneficiaries 
Upon beneficiaries' 
selection, mid-term 
and completion. 
PPI survey; Qualitative survey on 
women empowerment 
(a) % of farmers repaying their loans according to 
agreed schedule  
(b) Nb of beneficiary farmers compelled to sell 
their collateral because they are unable to repay 
their loans.                 
Annual 
ADBL and partner FI partners 
181 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Means of Verification 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Flood and landslide  
Drought, water shortage  
Change in disease timing and 
outbreaks  
Occurence of windstorms 
Heat stress 
% of beneficiary households with a crop or 
livestock insurance   
% of household using improved water 
management practices  
(a) % of farmers using sound IPM practices    
(b) % of beneficiary households with a crop or 
livestock insurance   
% of beneficiary farmers reporting an improved 
access to processing infrastructure or improved 
storage capacity 
Upon beneficiaries' 
selection, mid-term 
and completion. 
Baseline/mid-term/completion 
surveys; Farmers' diaries and ADBL 
MIS. 
(a) Baseline/mid-
term/final; (b) Annual 
Baseline/mid-term/final impact 
surveys; Farmers' diaries. 
(a) Annual and 
baseline, mid-term, 
final; (b) Baseline, mid-
term, final  
Baseline/mid-term/final impact 
surveys; Farmers' diaries. 
Baseline, mid-term, 
final 
Baseline/mid-term/final impact 
surveys 
182 
8.2  Financial Management Annexes 
8.2.1  Appendix FM-1: Designated Account Reconciliation Statement  
For the Year ended _____________________ 
IFAD Financing Agreement Number:________ 
Designated Account Number:______________ 
Section 1 
Amount in USD 
(Denomination 
currency) 
Amount in 
NPR  (if 
applicable)  
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Total advanced by IFAD 
Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 
Equal present outstanding amount advanced by IFAD 
1 
2 
3 
Section 2 
4 
Balance of Designated Account as per attached bank  statement as 
of ..........(date, Month & Year) 
Plus balance of operating accounts  
Plus cash on hand  
= Total bank balances as of ..........(date, Month & Year) 
Plus amount claimed in this application  
WA No. 
Plus amounts withdrawn from Designated Account and not yet 
claimed  
WA No.  
WA No. 
Provide reasons for not yet claimed.  
Plus amounts claimed in previous applications and not yet credited 
at the bank statement date, or claimed after the bank statement 
date  
W. A. No.  
Amount 
Date 
US$ 
Less: interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please enter zero) 
Total advance accounted for (Line 5 through line 9)  
Explanation of any difference between total outstanding advance 
(line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)  
Insert explanations: e.g. 
Non eligible amount to be refunded to the designated account 
calculation errors in application of percentage financing 
counterpart financial resources to be reimbursed 
cheques not yet cleared/presented to Bank 
Date: 
Key Check: 
Signature:  
Name in Full: 
Title in Full: 
Opening and closing balances of the  designated and project account should match with corresponding figures 
reported in the Sources and Uses of funds report (report 1). 
183 
184 
 Yes or No 
8.2.2  Appendix FM-2: Checklist for a Withdrawal Application 
IFAD Financing No. ______ 
WA No. ______ 
Reporting period [ from date/to date] 
Form 100 
1. Sequential numbering of WA 
2. WA amount tallies with sequentially numbered summary sheets 
3. Categories/sub-categories charged as per Schedule 2 of Financing Agreement 
4. % of financing applicable for each category or sub-category 
5. Availability of funds in categories and the overall financing amount 
6. Currency of payment 
7. Completeness and accuracy of banking instructions  
8. Complete name and address of correspondent bank 
9. WA is signed by Authorized Representative 
Statement of Expenditure 
1. Eligibility of expenditures claimed 
     a) Within SOE financial ceiling  
     b) Expenditures under specific Category [ ____ ] eligibility 
2. Form 102 signed by designated Project Accountant, Project Director, Authorized Representative 
3. Form 102 supported by signed Form 101 (for items reported in 2. but above over the financial 
ceiling)  
Designated account - Replenishment Requests 
1. Amount within ceiling figure agreed as a reasonable limit ( ___ USD or ___  ]) 
2. Amount at least equal to 20% of the agreed reasonable limit 
3. Exchange rate used 
4. Completeness of designated account banking and account details 
5. Enclosed designated account Reconciliation and Bank Statements 
Supporting Documentation (attached if required) 
1. Copy of contract 
2. Copy of invoice, certified by Project Director 
3. Copy of bank guarantee and performance guarantee (for advance payment) 
4. Copy of delivery receipt 
5. Copy of evidence of payment 
6. Completed Form 101 (A or B)  
7. Completed Form 102 (A or B)  
Procurement 
1. Copy of “No objection/s” provided by IFAD 
2. Copy of Contract Monitoring Record/s Form/s 
Compliance with Condition/s for Disbursement 
1. In accordance with terms in Section E. para --- of the Financing Agreement 
2. In accordance with terms in Section ___ of the Letter to the Borrower  
Expenditure incurred/committed before Project Completion Date (PCD) 
1. Expenditure verified as eligible: 
     a) contract signed before PCD 
     b) goods delivered before PCD 
     c) services completed and/or rendered before PCD 
Remarks: 
   ____________________ 
   Prepared by Finance Manager            
   Dated:  ____________________  
_____________________ 
 Certified by Project Director 
            Dated: _____________________ 
185 
8.2.3  Appendix FM-3:  Recovery Plan  
(Only if advance is provided to designated account); 
RECOVERY PLAN 
Designated Account No. 
IFAD Loan No.: 
Borrower: 
Loan Effective Date 
(Today) Date: 
IFAD Loan Amount 
(Denominated Currency SDR 
or USD) 
0.00  
Loan Completion Date: 
Loan Closing Date 
Remaining # of months to 
closing date 
WA No. 
Date 
INR 
USD 
SDR 
Unjustified balance 
USD 
SDR 
Authorized 
Initial 
Payment(s) 
JUSTIFICATION: 
Period 
covered by 
WA 
WA 
No. 
(Expected) 
Date of WA 
Estimated 
value 
(INR) 
Estimated 
value 
(USD) 
Proposed 
Recovery 
% 
Recovery 
Amount 
(USD) 
Cumula
tive 
(USD) 
Cumulative 
Unjustified 
Balance 
(USD) 
Month, Year 
Month, Year 
Month, Year 
Month, Year 
Month, Year 
Month, Year 
TOTAL 
Note: Unjustified balance at the time of loan closing will be refunded to IFAD  
Prepared by: 
Certified by: 
Approved by: 
(Project title) 
(Project title) 
(Project title) 
Date 
Date 
Date 
186 
Budget ('000) 
Financier 
% 
N
o
G
n
a
o
L
D
A
F
I
r
e
f
i
e
H
r
o
t
c
e
s
e
t
a
v
i
r
P
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
B
s
k
n
a
B
l
a
c
o
L
&
e
t
a
t
S
t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G
Remarks 
% 
)
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
(
t
n
e
p
S
% 
)
l
a
u
n
n
A
(
t
n
e
p
S
8.2.4  Appendix FM-4: Annual Work Plan and Budget  
1: Sample Annual workplan and budget  
Indicators  
Quarterly  
Planned 
Budget 
Implementation targets 
Q
Project  RIMS   
1 
Q
2 
Q
3  
Q
4 
f
f
a
t
S
/
t
i
n
U
e
l
b
i
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
)
l
a
t
o
T
(
l
a
s
i
a
r
p
p
A
)
l
a
u
n
n
A
(
d
e
n
n
a
l
P
)
l
a
t
o
T
(
d
e
s
i
v
e
R
)
b
a
t
s
o
c
(
t
s
o
C
t
i
n
U
t
i
n
U
)
d
e
s
o
p
o
r
P
(
t
s
o
C
t
i
n
U
)
l
a
u
n
n
A
(
d
e
v
e
i
h
c
A
% 
)
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
(
d
e
v
e
i
h
c
A
% 
)
l
a
t
o
T
(
l
a
s
i
a
r
p
p
A
)
l
a
t
o
T
(
d
e
s
i
v
e
R
)
l
a
u
n
n
A
(
d
e
n
n
a
l
P
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
C
t
e
g
d
u
B
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
Objectives/ 
Expected 
Results 
  Component - 1 
  Sub-Comp 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Sub-total 
  Component - 2 
  Sub-Comp 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Sub-total 
  Component - 3 
  Sub-Comp 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Sub-total 
  Total 
187 
2: Summary Annual Work Plan and Budget by component and by financier 
Components 
GoN 
IFAD 
Loan 
Heifer  Private 
sector 
Beneficiaries  Banks 
State & 
Local 
Government 
Total 
Component 1 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub-total 
Component 2 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub-total 
Component 3 
Sub Component 
Sub Component 
Sub-total 
Total 
3: Summary Annual Work Plan and Budget by category and by financier 
Categories 
GoN 
IFAD Loan 
Heifer 
Private 
sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
State & Local 
Government 
Total 
 Category I 
Category II 
Category III 
Category IV 
Category V 
Total 
4 : Summary Annual Work Plan and Budget by category and component  
Category/Components 
Comp 1 
Comp 2 
Comp 3 
Total 
Category I 
Category II 
Category III 
Category IV 
Category V 
Total 
188 
8.2.5  Appendix FM-5: Sample Monthly/Quarterly Budget Execution Report 
Project:________________ 
Fiscal year:_____________ 
Month:_________________ 
Description 
Up to previous 
Month 
Month 
Year to Date 
Commitments 
Budget 
Actual 
Budget 
Actual 
Budget 
Actual 
% 
Yet to be paid 
Component 1 
Sub-component 1.1 
Activity 
Activity 
Sub-component 1.2 
Activity 
Activity 
Sub-component 1.3 
Activity 
Activity 
Component 2 
Sub-component 2.1 
Activity 
Activity 
Sub-component 2.2 
Activity 
Activity 
Sub-component 2.3 
Activity 
Activity 
Component 3 
Sub-component 3.1 
Activity 
Activity 
Sub-component 3.2 
Activity 
Activity 
Total 
189 
8.2.6  Appendix FM-6: Financial Reporting Tables 
1: Statement of expenditures by category (Amount in NPR)  
Upto Last 
Month 
For the 
Month 
Year to 
date 
Cumulative to 
date 
AWPB 
Allocation 
Budget 
Balance 
Upto 
Last 
Year 
Description 
Category 1 
Category 2 
Category 3 
Category 4 
Category 5 
Total 
190 
2: Financial performance per expenditure category and financier (Amount in INR)  
IFAD Loan 
GoN 
Heifer 
Private Sector  beneficiaries 
Banks  
State & Local 
Government 
Total 
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
C
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
Total 
3: Financial performance per component and financier (Amount in INR)  
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
C
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D
IFAD Loan 
GoN 
Heifer 
Private Sector 
beneficiaries 
Banks 
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
State & Local 
Government 
Total 
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
e
h
t
r
o
F
d
o
i
r
e
P
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C
Component 1   
Sub com 1.1   
Sub com 1.2   
Sub com 1.3   
Component 2   
Sub com 2.1   
Sub com 2.2   
Sub com 2.3   
Component 3   
Sub com 3.1   
Sub com 3.2   
Total 
191 
4: Projected fund flow forecast  
Source of Fund 
AWPB 
Allocation 
Expenditures up to 
last quarter 
AWPB Allocation 
Balance 
Funds forecast for 
the quarter 
IFAD Loan 
GoN 
Heifer 
Private sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
State & Local Government 
Total 
192 
5: SOE withdrawal application statement (Amount in INR)  
WA No: 
Date  Categories in NPR 
Withdrawal Application submitted to IFAD 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Total in 
INR 
USD 
Equivalent 
Rejected  by 
IFAD 
 in NPR 
In USD 
Net 
Reimbursed 
in USD 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
Sub-total 
B. Direct Payment 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
Sub-total 
Total 
WA Pending for Submission: 
A. Replenishment 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
Sub-total 
B. Direct Payment 
W.A. No. 
W.A. No. 
Sub-total 
Total 
Grand Total  
193 
6: Register of Contracts 
Date:____________ 
IFAD Financing No.:  
Project: ………………………… 
Contract 
Serial No.  
Financier  Contract 
No. 
Percentage 
of 
Financing 
Type of 
Procurement 
Page No._____ of___ 
Reporting Period: …………………………………….   
Descriptio
n of 
Works, 
Goods, 
Consulting
/Other 
Services 
Name and 
Address of 
Contractor
/ Supplier 
Contract 
Coordinat
or 
Date of 
Contract 
Performanc
e, Contract 
Duration 
and Delivery 
Period 
Contract 
Amount (in 
the currency 
of the 
contract)   
Category 
No. as per 
Schedule2 
of IFAD 
Financing 
Agreement 
Reference to 
the Approved 
Procurement 
Plan/AWPB 
Prior 
or Post 
Review 
Remarks 
and Date of 
IFAD 'No 
Objection' 
194 
7: Contract Payment Monitoring Form 
Project __________________ 
Contract Number: as per contract register 
Description of Contract: 
Procurement File No._______________Component_______  Contract Officer:_______________ 
Date of "No Objection":______________ 
Name and Address of Supplier:_______ 
Bank Details: 
 Email: 
Telephone 
Contract Summary 
(In INR/USD) 
Document 
Original Contract 
Amendment (AM-1) 
Amendment (AM-2) 
Total Amount 
Contract Reference  No. 
Amount      
(IN USD) 
Amount      (IN 
NPR)  
Dates 
(start/end) 
Bank Securities or Bonds (in NPR/USD) 
Document 
Name of Financial Institution 
Date 
Amount 
Expiry 
Date 
Extension 
Advance Payment 
Performance Bond 
Other 
Monitoring of Payments (In NPR/USD) 
Progress 
Certificate 
Payment Schedule 
Payments Issued 
Balance Due 
on Contract 
Milestone 
Expected 
Amount 
No.  Date 
Invoice 
No. 
Payment 
Date 
Amount 
Paid 
Cheque or 
WA No. 
Total 
Amount 
Finance Officer: __________________  Project Director:________________ 
195 
8: Physical progress report 
Category  Project Activity by 
Original Plan 
component/Sub-
component 
Physical  Cost 
Completion 
date 
Physical Progress 
to date 
Cost to date 
Revised plan for 
completion 
Actual 
Planned  Actual  Planned  % of Actual to 
Total Cost  Completion 
plan 
date 
Component - 1 
Sub-Comp 1.1 
Activity 1 
Activity 2 
Sub-total 
Component - 2 
Sub-Comp 2.1 
Activity 1 
Activity 2 
Sub-total 
Component - 3 
Sub-Comp 3.1 
Activity 1 
Activity 2 
Sub-total 
Total 
196 
8.2.7  Appendix FM-7: Grant Register  
Activity 
Grantee 
Grant Agreement Date 
Grantee Contribution 
Project Contribution 
Total Amount 
Instalments 
1st 
2nd 
Final 
Total 
Remarks 
Grant completion date 
Instalment 
1st  
2nd  
Final  
As per Agreement 
Milestone to be achieved 
Paid 
Date 
Amount 
Date 
Amount  
197 
8.2.8  Appendix FM-8: Fund Utilization Certificate (Beneficiary) 
Utilization Certificate 
Utilization Certificate for the Year  ................. 
Name of Beneficiary  
District 
Municipality  
Description of grant 
Start Date 
Completion 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
SUMMARY OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS 
 CONTRIBUTION 
Installment 
1st 
Project 
2nd 
Total 
Beneficiary  
Current 
Period 
Cumulative 
to Date 
Total 
Up to 
Previous 
Period 
RECEIPTS: 
Opening Balance 
Grant received  
Total 
EXPENDITURES: 
Materials 
Labour 
Other Costs 
Total Expenditures 
Closing Balance:  
Cash in Hand 
Cash at Bank 
Total 
Secretary / Chairperson 
Name 
Signature 
Date  
Project Officer Counter signature 
Name 
Signature 
Comment 
Date 
198 
8.2.9  Appendix FM-9:  Statement of loan  
Name of Bank/Financial Institution: 
Period: 
Borrower (Sub-
project) 
Authorized person 
of Borrower 
Loan Approved 
Amount 
Date 
Loan Disbursed 
Amount 
Date 
Interest  
Repayment 
Principal 
Interest 
Principal 
Outstanding 
Interest 
Total 
Remarks 
199 
8.2.10 
Appendix FM-10:  Indicative chart of accounts 
1. Number of code assigned to each group and sub-group 
Group/Sub-
group 
Project 
Implementin
g Offices 
Number of Code 
1 
2 
Assets/ 
Liabilities/Income
/Expenses 
1 
District 
Source of 
Fund 
Component  Sub-
component 
Activitie
s 
Categ
ory 
Expenditure 
Heads 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2. Example of code assigned to each group and sub-group 
Group & Sub-group 
Project 
Implementing Offices 
Assets/ 
Liabilities/Income/Expenses 
District 
Source of Fund 
Component 
Sub-component 
Activities 
Categories 
Account Heads 
Code Assigned for  Number of Code 
VITA 
ADBL 
PMU/State/Branch 
Offices  
Assets 
1 
2 
1 
Liabilities  
Income 
Expenses 
Districts  
GOV 
IFAD Loan 
State 
Municipal 
Banks 
Beneficiaries 
Income 
Expenses 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
Assigned code 
1 
0-99 
1 
2 
3 
5 
1 to 77 
1 to 6 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1 to 4 
1 to 4 
1 to 99 
1 to 5 
1 to 99 
1 to 99 
200 
3. Example of account code of account head for livestock staff training  
Group/Su
b-group 
Project 
VITA 
Implem
enting 
Agencie
s 
PMU 
Assets/Lia
bilities/In
come/Exp
enses 
Expenses 
District 
Source 
of Fund 
Compon
ent 
Sub-component 
Activities 
Category 
Expenditur
e Heads 
Dhanush
a 
IFAD 
Loan 
Inclusive 
Supply 
Chain 
Developm
ent 
1 
Farm Business 
Capacity 
Development 
Mentoring and 
Mobilization of Products 
Training 
Staff 
training 
1 
01 
2 
01 
Account 
Code 
1 
01 
1 
14 
2 
The account code for conducting staff training from IFAD loan by PMU for first activity of sub-component 1 of component 1 and category 2 of training 10111421101201. 
201 
8.2.11 
Appendix FM-11: Petty cash form  
1: Petty Cash Disbursement Voucher 
Petty Cash Voucher No. 
Payee: (Name) 
Date: 
Rs. 
Rupees in words: 
_____________________________________________________________only 
Account Head 
Account Code 
Activity Code 
Particulars: 
____________ 
Received by 
Date 
______________ 
Prepared by 
Designation 
Date 
_______________ 
Recommended by 
Designation 
Date 
____________ 
Approved by 
Designation 
Date 
202 
2: Statement of Petty cash & Request Form 
Period From…………………to…………………….. 
Date 
PCDV. No.  Particulars 
Account 
Code 
Activity Code  Receipt 
Payment 
Closing 
Balance 
Total 
Rupees in words: _________________________________________________________________ only. 
It is requested to reimburse Rs. ………………… spent from the petty cash as per above petty cash 
statement. The supporting documents of expenses incurred have been attached with this statement. 
Submitted By:   
      Recommended By:  
      Approved By: 
203 
3: Petty Cash reconciliation Form 
Part 1 - Petty Cash Reconciliation 
Date_____________________ 
Description 
Opening balance of Petty cash  
Amount (INR) 
Received during the period 
Total petty cash balance 
Payments during the period 
Petty cash closing balance 
Physical petty cash balance as per Cash count 
Difference  
Explanation for difference, if any: 
Part 2 - Cash Count  
Denomination 
Number 
Amount (INR) 
_____________________ 
Counted & Reconciled by 
______________________ 
Reviewed by 
204 
8.2.12 
Appendix FM-12: Fixed assets register 
S. 
No 
Assets 
Description 
Identification 
No. 
Manufacturer 
Serial No. 
Supplier  Date of 
Purchase 
Invoice No. 
& Date 
Source of 
funding 
Cost  Date of 
Receipt 
Location  User  Verified 
on 
Verified 
by 
Transfer/ 
Disposal 
date 
Amount 
Remarks 
205 
8.2.13   
Appendix FM-13:  Vehicle Record Forms 
1: Vehicle Log 
Vehicle No.__________________  Assigned Driver ________________ 
Date  Time 
Place of Visit 
Purpose of 
Visit 
KM/Mileage 
Mileage 
Driven 
Fuel Purchase 
Departure 
Arrival  From 
To 
From 
To 
Mileage  Qty. 
Lubrica
tion 
Qty. 
User 
Name 
User 
Signature 
206 
2: Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle No.__________________   
Assigned Driver _______________ 
Date 
Repairs 
Service & Maintenance 
Description 
Garage  Cost 
Description 
Garage 
Cost 
Type 
Insurance 
Period 
Fitness Test 
Cost 
Date 
Cost 
207 
8.2.14     
Appendix 14: Expenditure record forms 
1: Cumulative expenditure by component as on …. 
Component 
IFD Loan  Government  Heifer 
Private 
Sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
State & local 
Government 
Total 
Component 1 
Component 2 
Component 3 
Total 
2:  Budgeted expenditure and performance against AWPB 
Component 
AWPB (NPR) 
Actual (NPR) 
Per cent of Actual 
to AWPB 
Total 
3: Budgeted expenditure and performance against AWPB 
Financier 
AWPB (NPR) 
Actual (NPR) 
Per cent of Actual 
to AWPB 
IFAD Loan 
Government 
Heifer 
Convergence 
Private Sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
State & Local Government 
Total 
208 
4: Financial performance by financier (Amount in USD) 
Appraisal 
(USD ‘000) 
Disbursements 
(USD ‘000) 
Per cent 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD Loan 
Government 
Heifer 
Convergence 
Private Sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
State & Local Government 
Total 
5:  Financial performance by financier by component as on .....(Amount in USD) 
IFAD Loan 
Government 
Heifer 
Private Sector 
Beneficiaries 
Banks 
Component 
Component 1 
Component 2 
Component 3 
Total 
Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal   Actual    %   Appraisal   Actual    %   Appraisal   Actual    %  Appraisal 
 Actual    %   Appraisal   Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  % 
State & Local 
Government 
Total 
6: IFAD loan disbursement as at ....................(Amount in USD) 
Category Description 
Original 
Allocation 
Revised 
allocation 
Disbursed 
WA 
Pending 
Available 
Balance 
Percent 
Disbursed 
Category 
Code 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Total 
209 
8.2.15 
Appendix FM-15: Quarterly Interim Financial Reports  
1.  Quarterly financial reports 
Type of Report 
Quarterly Financial Reports 
1 
Sources and Uses of 
Funds (all financiers) 
2 
3 
Summary of 
Expenditures by Loan 
Categories and By 
Financiers (USD) 
Financial performance 
by financier by 
component 
4 
Cash forecast by 
financier 
5 
Progress report on Audit 
recommendations  
The Focus/Scope of the report 
These reports are a formal requirement by IFAD and 
they  are to be sent to IFAD and to be used by the 
management to monitor the project's medium term 
financial performance. The report must be submitted 
to IFAD within 45 after the end of the respective 
reporting period, The exact content and format is 
agreed between IFAD and the Borrower/ Recipient. 
This report discloses how much funds the project has 
received from different financiers how these funds 
have been spent by expenditure category during the 
reporting period as well as cumulative. This report also 
discloses the projects cash balances. 
This report discloses how much funds the project has 
spent by expenditure category and by financier. 
This report discloses how much funds the has project 
received from each financier and how these sources 
have been spent by project component during the 
reporting period and cumulatively. The report also 
compares these figures with the targets set in the 
Annual Workplan and Budget and the Project design 
report (PDR). 
This report discloses the breakdown of the project's 
cash forecast for the following two quarters by 
financier. The breakdown includes opening and closing 
balances of the different accounts as well as estimated 
income and from different financiers and estimated 
expenditures by category. 
This report summarises all the recommendations made 
by the external auditors of the project, the project 
management's action plan to address these 
recommendations and the current status of these 
planned actions. 
Remarks 
Variation of this report 
already part of the 
Project financial 
statements (sources 
and uses of funds) 
Required by IFAD only 
on adhoc basis. Should 
be part of the project's 
monthly internal 
reporting (for 
management use)  
210 
2: Sources and Use of Funds by Category (all financiers) 
Project Name :____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
Reporting Period 
(Quarterly) 
Cumulative 
annual 
Cumulative 
project life 
Amounts in INR 
 Description 
Sources of Funds (income) 
IFAD Loan  
Government Funds 
Heifer 
Banks 
Beneficiary  
Exchange rate differences (gain/loss) 
Total  
Use of Funds (expenditures) by Project 
Category   
Category 1 
Category 2 
Category 3 
Category 4 
Category 5 
Category 6 
Category 7 
Total expenditures 
Income less Expenditures 
Other 
Payables/commitments 
Receivables (including advances) 
Total 
Opening Cash Balance (Comprising of):  
Designated Bank Account 
IFAD project Account  
Other Project Accounts 
Beneficiary Project Accounts 
Cash book 
etc. 
Closing Cash Balances (comprising of): 
Designated Bank Account 
IFAD project Account  
Other Project Accounts  
Beneficiary Project Accounts 
Cash book 
etc. 
Key checks: 
•  Opening cash balances the report should match with the closing balances of the same report for the 
• 
• 
previous reporting period. 
Sources of funds from the IFAD loan and grant for the reporting period should match with the totals of 
the WA-SOE schedule (report no. 5) 
The total uses of funds (expenditures) for the reporting period and cumulatively (from the start of the 
project until the end of the reporting period) should equal total the expenditures in report 2 and 3. 
and the report to the Government   
211 
• 
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" should equal the corresponding 
figures reported to the national government. 
Explanatory Notes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The projects should prepare the Interim financial progress reports (IFPR) using the same accounting 
basis/standard that they use when they prepare the annual financial statements. 
The currency of the IFR should be the same currency as the project annual financial statements. 
The  financial  information  presented  in  the  IFPR  should  always  be  generated  by  proper  accounting 
software. Excel is not an acceptable accounting software and it should only be used to edit and combine 
data to fit the agreed format 
"Reporting  period"  refers  to  transactions  occurred  in  the    quarterly/semi-annual  reporting  period  as 
agreed with IFAD, "cumulative annual"  refers to the occurred transactions from the beginning of the 
fiscal year until the end of the reporting period and "cumulatively"  refers to the occurred transactions 
from the beginning of the project life until the end of the reporting period. 
The  sources  of  funds  for  each  individual  financier  should  include  all  income  and  all  disbursement 
methods (replenishments, direct payments and reimbursements). 
Note that an exchange gain / loss is not an eligible expenditure by itself, and should not be reported as 
a separate expenditure item. Instead, if there are realized gains / losses these should be booked to 
specific approved expenditures/expenditure categories. 
•  Only cash Beneficiary contribution should be reported. Not in-kind 
• 
• 
• 
The rows for "receivables and payables" are designed to fit the report to modified cash and accrual basis 
of accounting. 
"Opening cash balances" reflect the opening balances of each bank account opened and maintained by 
the project including the (petty) cashbook. 
"Closing cash balances" reflect the closing balances of each bank account opened and maintained by 
the project including the (petty) cashbook. 
212 
3: Summary of Expenditures by Loan Categories and By Financiers 
Project Name :____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
Financing Source (in currency of the financial statements) 
Government 
Heifer 
Banks  
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Cumula
tive 
Reporting 
period 
Cash 
forecast 
for Next 
reportin
g period   
Cumul
ative 
Reporting 
period 
Cash 
forecast 
for Next 
reporting 
period   
Cumula
tive 
Reporting 
period 
Cash 
forecast 
for Next 
reporting 
period   
Cumula
tive 
Reporting 
period 
Cash 
forecast 
for Next 
reporting 
period   
Cumula
tive 
Reporting 
period 
Cash 
forecas
t for 
Next 
reporti
ng 
period   
Cumula
tive  
Reportin
g period 
Cash forecast 
for Next 
reporting period   
 Category 
Description 
of category 
IFAD Loan 
Category 
allocation 
as per 
financing 
agreement 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VII 
Total 
Unallocated 
Key checks: 
• 
• 
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" should equal the corresponding figures disclosed in the sources and uses of funds report. 
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" by financier should equal the corresponding figures disclosed in the "Financial performance by 
financier by component" report. 
Explanatory notes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The financial information of the report should be based on the same accounting basis/standard as the project annual financial statements. 
The currency of the report, should be the same currency as the project annual financial statements. 
The financial information presented in the report should always have been generated by proper accounting software. Excel is not an acceptable accounting 
software and it should only be used to edit and combine data to fit the agreed format 
The categories of expenditure should mirror the categories of the Financing Agreement 
"Reporting period" refers to transactions occurred in the quarter/semi-annual reporting period as agreed with IFAD period and "cumulative"  refers to the occurred 
transactions from the beginning of the project until the end of the reporting period 
An exchange loss should not be reported as a separate expenditure item. Instead, it should be linked to specific expenditures/expenditure categories 
• 
•  Only cash Beneficiary contribution should be reported. Not in-kind. 
• 
"Cash forecasts" refers to the estimated expenditures for the following reporting period.   
ccxiii 
4: Financial performance by financier by component 
Project Name :____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
IFAD Loan 
Government (Budget & tax) 
Heifer 
Banks 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
 Reporting period   
Cumulative 
 Reporting period   
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actual  %  
Planned 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actual  % 
Cumulative 
Planne
d 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
 Reporting period    Cumulative 
 Reporting period   
Cumulative 
 Reporting period    Cumulative 
 Reporting period   
Cumulative 
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actua
l 
% 
Planned 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(AWPB) 
Actual  % 
Planned 
(Design 
report) 
Actual  % 
Component 
Component-1  
Sub Component 
1.1 
Sub Component 
1.2 
Sub Component 
1.3 
Sub-Total 
Component-2  
Sub Component 
2.1 
Sub Component 
2.2 
Sub-Total 
Component-3  
Sub Component 
3.1 
Sub Component 
3.2 
Sub-Total 
Total 
214 
Key checks: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" should equal the corresponding figures disclosed in the sources and uses of funds report  
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" by financier should equal the corresponding figures disclosed in the  "Summary of Expenditures 
by Loan Categories and By Financiers"  report  
The Planned AWPB figures should match with the figures from the most recent approved AWPB 
The Planned AWPB figures should match with the figures from the most recent approved cost tables/ Project Design Report (PDR) 
The total expenditures for the "cumulative" and "reporting period" should equal the corresponding figures reported to the national government. 
Explanatory notes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The projects should prepare the report using the same accounting basis/standard that they use when they prepare the annual financial statements  
The currency of the report, should be the same currency as the project annual financial statements. 
The financial information presented in the report should always be generated by proper accounting software. Excel is not an acceptable accounting software and it 
should only be used to edit and combine data to fit the agreed format 
"Reporting period" refers to transactions occurred in the  quarter/semi-annual reporting period as agreed with IFAD period and "cumulatively"  refers to the 
occurred transactions from the beginning of the project until the end of the reporting period 
Similar to the project annual statements, only cash Beneficiary contribution should be reported, not in-kind contributions 
Planned (AWPB) refers to the total annual planned expenditures as expressed in the relevant annual workplan and budget (AWPB). The planned (AWPB) 
expenditures should be expressed in the same currency as the actual expenditures expenditure to enable comparison of budgeted expenditures against actual 
expenditures.  
"Planned (design report)" refers to the total project expenditures as expressed in the project design report. The planned (design report) expenditures should be 
expressed in the same currency as the expenditures to enable comparison of expenditures at design against actual expenditures.  
"Actual" refers to the actual expenditures already incurred in the specified time period. 
• 
•  % this column compares the planned (AWPB or design report) expenditures with the actual expenditures - actual expenditures are divided by the planned (AWPB 
or design report) expenditures. 
215 
5: Semi-annual cash flow forecast by financier (in currency of the DA) 
Project Name :____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
Quarter 1 
IFAD 
Loan 
Govt  Heife
r 
s
k
n
a
B
Total (all 
financiers) 
IFAD 
Loan 
Quarter 2 
Govt  Heifer 
s
k
n
a
B
Total (all 
financiers) 
Time period 
Financier 
Opening balances consisting of: 
Designated Bank Account 
Project Account 
Government funding account 
Heifer 
Cash at hand 
Total 
Cash Inflow from 
IFAD Loan 
Government  
Heifer 
Other Sources 
Total Cash Inflow 
  Cash Outflow (expenditures) 
  1- Civil works 
  2- Goods, Equipment & 
vehicles 
  3-Training and Studies 
  4-Credit Line 
  5-PMU Salaries and operating 
costs 
Total Cash Outflow 
Net Cash flow 
Closing balance 
Designated Bank Account 
Project Account 
Government funding account 
Heifer  
Cash at hand 
Total 
  Total Funds Available 
Key Checks: 
• 
The opening balances should match with the closing balances of the sources and uses of funds report 
• 
• 
• 
The cash outflows in the different categories should match with the cash forecast outlined in the "Summary 
of Expenditures by Loan Categories and By Financiers" report. 
Explanatory notes: 
The  currency  of  the  report  should  be  the  currency  of  the  Designated  Account,  usually  in  USD.  When 
converting expenditures in to the Currency of the DA one should apply the prevailing exchange of the last 
day of the reporting period. 
•  When reporting the opening and closing balance  for accounts with pooled funds from different financiers 
such  as  the  operating  account,  these  funds  should  be  attributed  to  the  original  financing  source  in  the 
respective column. 
216 
6: Progress report on Audit recommendations 
Project Name:____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
Recommendation 
 Date of the 
recommendation 
Planned action to 
address the 
recommendation  
Current Status of the 
planned action 
217 
7: Statement of Expenditures/ Withdrawal Application Statement by financing source and Disbursement Method 
Project Name :____________________ 
Lead Project Implementing Agency:__________________ 
Reporting Period:______________ 
WA submitted to IFAD during the reporting period - IFAD Loan 
WA no 1 
(currency 
of the DA) 
WA no. 1 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 2 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 2 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 3 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 3 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 4 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 4 
(Currency 
of the PFS) 
Total 
(currency 
of the DA) 
Total 
(currency of 
the PFS) 
Disbursement Method: 
DA replenishments 
Direct payment 
Reimbursements 
Total 
Rejected from IFAD 
Net Reimbursed 
WA submitted to IFAD during the reporting period - IFAD grant 
WA no 1 
(currency 
of the DA) 
WA no. 1 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 2 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 2 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 3 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 3 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 4 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 4 
(Currency 
of the PFS) 
Total 
(currency 
of the DA) 
Total 
(currency of 
the PFS) 
Disbursement Method: 
DA replenishments 
Direct payment 
Reimbursements 
Total 
Rejected from IFAD 
Net Reimbursed 
218 
WA pending submission to IFAD - IFAD Loan 
WA no 1 
(currency 
of the DA) 
WA no. 1 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 2 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 2 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 3 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 3 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 4 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 4 
(Currency 
of the PFS) 
Total 
(currency 
of the DA) 
Total 
(currency of 
the PFS) 
Disbursement Method: 
DA replenishments 
Direct payment 
Reimbursements 
Total 
WA pending submission to IFAD - IFAD Grant 
WA no 1 
(currency 
of the DA) 
WA no. 1 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 2 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 2 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 3 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 3 
(Currency of 
the PFS) 
WA no 4 
(currency 
of the 
DA) 
WA no 4 
(Currency 
of the PFS) 
Total 
(currency 
of the DA) 
Total 
(currency of 
the PFS) 
Disbursement Method: 
DA replenishments 
Direct payment 
Reimbursements 
Total 
Key checks: 
• 
• 
The figures disclosed in the "WAs submitted to IFAD" - section should match with the corresponding figures of the historic transaction report of the IFAD Loans   
System (LS). 
The figures disclosed in the "WAs pending submission" -  section should match with the corresponding figures in the "cash inflow"- section of the Cash forecast 
report (report no. 6). 
Explanatory notes:  
• 
The "Currency of the DA" refers to the currency in which the Designated Account is maintained and the Withdrawal applications are submitted. In cases of direct 
payments, or reimbursements the currency of the WA might differ from the currency of the Designated Account.  In these cases the sums should be converted to 
the currency of the Designated Account for the purpose of the report. 
• 
The "Currency of the PFS" refers to the currency in which the project financial statements (PSF) are prepared. 
219 
8.2.16 
Appendix FM-16: Project Financial Statements 
Sample of Project Audited Financial Statements 
Accruals Based Accounts 
Project Name……………………………….. 
Implementing Agency……………………… 
IFAD Loan/ Grant Number (s)…………………….. 
PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED July 15 or 16 , 202X 
220 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED July 15 or 16, 202X 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
Project Information and performance                                                       
Statement of project management responsibilities                    
Report of the independent auditor                                         
Statement of Financial Position    
Statement of Operating Performance (by category)   
Statement of Operating Performance (by component)                       
Statement of Cash flows                                 
Statement of  Comparison of Budget and Actual  by Category                   
Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual by Component                               
Designated Account Statement                                             
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement                                                             
SOEs -Withdrawal Application Statement                                                                   
Notes to the Financial Statements    (A summary of significant accounting policies and 
other explanatory notes)  
221 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
PROJECT INFORMATION AND PERFORMANCE 
•  Institutional Details/Information:  Implementing agency, status, location, 
names, account numbers and address of bankers (Designated and Project accounts) 
name and address of independent auditors 
•  Members of the Project Implementing Unit: Names and roles 
•  Background Information on the Project: Source of financing: size of 
Loan/Grant(s), effective and closing date(s) 
•  Project Objectives:   As per Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
•  Project Costs: By component and category of expenditures as per Financing 
Agreement and Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
•  Summary of Performance: Physical progresses as per Progress/Supervision 
Reports 
222 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
Statement of Project Coordinator's/Management Responsibilities 
223 
(INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S LETTERHEAD) 
REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS 
(Auditor’s report on the Project Financial Statements ad Designated Accounts) 
224 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS ON JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Particulars 
ASSETS  
Current Assets 
Notes 
202X/2X 
(Current Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous Year) 
In NPR 
In NPR 
Cash and Cash equivalents 
 4 
Receivables 
Prepayments 
Total Current Assets 
Non-Current Assets 
Infrastructure, plant and equipment                             9 
Motor Vehicles                                                                 
9 
9 
Building 
Total Assets 
LIABILITIES 
Current Liabilities 
Payables 
Other  
Deferred Income (Designated Account balance) 
Total Current Liabilities 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Non-Current Liabilities 
Payables                                                                                 
XXX 
Net Assets 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
NET ASSETS/FUNDS 
Accumulated Surplus/Deficit 
XXX 
XXX 
Total  Net assets/Funds                                                                                        
                                   XXX 
XXX 
225 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF OPERATING PERFORMANCE (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Category 
Particulars 
Notes 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
Cumulative 
to date 
In NPR 
In NPR 
In NPR 
Sources of Funds 
IFAD Financing: 
Replenishments to DA of IFAD Loan 
IFAD Loan Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Heifer 
ADBL Funds 
State & Local Government 
Beneficiaries  
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
Application of Funds 
Project Expenditures (By Categories): 
IFAD Credit 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
Government Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
Heifer 
BBB 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
ADBL Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
State and Local Government 
AAA 
Beneficiaries 
AAA 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
SURPLUS/DEFICIT 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
1 
2 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
226 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF OPERATING PERFORMANCE (BY COMPONENT) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Component  Particulars 
Notes 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
Cumulative 
to date 
In NPR 
In NPR 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Sources of Funds 
IFAD Financing: 
Replenishments to DA of IFAD Loan 
IFAD Loan Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Heifer 
ADBL Funds 
State & Local Government 
Beneficiaries  
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
Application of Funds 
Project Expenditures (By Component) : 
IFAD Credit 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
Government Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
Heifer 
AAA 
ADBL Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
State & local Government 
CCC 
Beneficiaries 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
SURPLUS/DEFICIT 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
3 
227 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Particulars 
Notes 
Cash Flow from Operating Activities 
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash 
Provided by operating activities: 
Depreciation and amortization 
Changes in other accounts affecting operations:  
Increase/decrease in payables 
Increase/decrease in receivables 
Increase/decrease in prepaid expenses 
Increase in Other current assets 
Net cash flows from Operating activities 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
Purchase of project property and equipment 
Sales of project property and equipment 
Other 
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 
Proceeds from Grant/Loan not recognised  as 
Income/Deferred 
Proceeds from Counterpart financing not recognised as 
income 
Other 
Net Cash used in Financing Activities 
Net Increase/(Decrease) in Cash and Cash 
Equivalents 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at beginning of Period 
Cash and Cash Equivalent at the end of Period 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
In NPR 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXXX 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXXX 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
228 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS BY 
CATEGORY 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Category  Description 
Notes 
202X/2X 
Budget 
202X/2X 
Actual  
Variance 
In INR 
In INR 
In INR 
FINANCING 
IFAD Financing: 
Replenishments to DA of IFAD Loan 
IFAD Loan Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Heifer 
ADBL Funds 
State & Local Government 
Beneficiries  
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
Project Expenditures: 
(By Category Of Expenditures) 
IFAD CREDIT 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
Government Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
Heifer 
BBB 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
ADBL Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
TOTAL 
State and Local Government 
AAA 
Beneficiaries 
AAA 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
Surplus/Deficit for the period 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
1 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of X% was due to…. 
229 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS BY 
COMPONENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or16, 202X 
Comp.  Description 
Notes 
202X/2X 
Budget 
202X/2X 
Actual 
Variance 
In INR 
In INR 
In INR 
FINANCING 
Replenishments to DA of IFAD Loan 
IFAD Loan Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Heifer 
ADBL Funds 
State & Local Government 
Beneficiries  
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
Project Expenditures: 
(By Component Of Expenditures) 
IFAD CREDIT 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
Government Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
Heifer 
AAA 
ADBL Funds 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
State & local Government 
CCC 
Beneficiaries 
BBB 
CCC 
TOTAL 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
Surplus/Deficit for the period 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
3 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of X% was due to…. 
230 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
Account No:  ____________ 
Bank: __________________ 
Address: ________________ 
Particulars 
Notes 
Amount in USD 
Equivalent 
Amount in NPR 
1 Opening Balance 
   Add: 
2 IFAD Replenishments: 
   Date 
   Date 
3 Bank Interest (If any) 
  Total 
WA No 
WA No 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
    Deduct: 
4 Transfers to Operating Accounts/Government 
Treasury: 
   Date 
   Date 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
5 Bank Charges 
6 Exchange Rate Difference 
7 Closing Balance as at July 15 or 16, 202X 
(as per Bank Statement) (1+2+3-4-5-6) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
231 
Amount in USD (Currency of 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement  
For the year ended July 15 or 16, 202X 
Project Title: 
IFAD Loan/Grant No.: 
Designated Account No.: 
Bank:   
DA) 
S.N.  Description 
1. 
TOTAL ADVANCED BY IFAD 
2. 
LESS: TOTAL AMOUNT RECOVERED BY IFAD 
3. 
4. 
5. 
EQUALS PRESENT OUSTANDING AMOUNT ADVANCED 
TO THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT (NUMBER 1 LESS NUMBER 2) 
BALANCE OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT PER ATTACHED 
BANK STATEMENT AS OF DATE: DATE, MONTH, YEAR 
PLUS BALANCE OF THE PROGRAMME ACCOUNT(S)  
PLUS BALANCE OF SUB-ACCOUNTS 
PLUS CASH IN HAND 
TOTAL OF BANK BALANCES, PA, SUB-ACCOUNTS & CASH IN HAND BALANCE  
(4+5): 
Sub-total of  5: 
6. 
PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT CLAIMED IN THIS APPLICATION. No. XXX 
7. 
PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT WITHDRAWN FROM THE  
SPECIAL ACCOUNT/PA AND NOT YET CLAIMED (=3-4-5-8-11) 
REASON: 
Eligible amount for which Withdrawal Application (WA) has 
not yet been prepared. 
8. 
PLUS: AMOUNTS CLAIMED IN PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED AT 
DATE OF BANK STATEMENT AND CLAIMED AFTER DATE OF BANK STATEMENT 
Date 
APPLICATION No. 
AMOUNT 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
SUBTOTAL OF PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED 
9. 
MINUS: INTEREST EARNED 
10. 
TOTAL ADVANCE ACCOUNTED FOR (NO.4 THROUGH NO.9) 
11. 
EXPLANATION OF ANY DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TOTALS APPEARING ON LINES 3 AND 10 
Non-eligible amount to be refunded to PA XXX 
Non-eligible amount to be refunded to PA XXX 
12.  DATE: 
SIGNATURE: 
Name in Full: 
Title in Full: 
XXX 
XXX 
232 
Currency 
XXX 
Amount 
0.00 
-XXX 
0.00 
XXX 
0.00 
XXX 
0.00 
+XXX 
+XXX  
+XXX 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
=XXX 
0.00 
+XXX 
0.00 
+XXX 
0.00 
0.00 
+XXX 
0.00 
-XXX 
0.00 
=XXX 
0.00 
+XXX 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
By Category of Expenditures  in Local Currency 
Withdrawal 
Application Number 
Date  Cat 1 
In 
NPR 
Cat 2 
in 
NPR 
Total in 
NPR 
USD 
Equivalent 
Rejected  by 
IFAD 
A. Replenishment 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Sub-total 
B. Direct Payment 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Sub-total 
Total 
WA Pending for 
Submission: 
A. Replenishment 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Sub-total 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
B. Direct Payment 
XXX 
XXX 
Sub-total 
Total 
Grand Total  
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Explanatory notes: 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Net 
Reimbursed 
in USD 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
In 
USD 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
•  Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the 
historical exchange rate of the transfer to the Operating (Project) Bank Account 
•  Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
•  The subtotal of amounts of withdrawal applications disbursed by IFAD should 
reconcile with the Sources and Uses of Funds Statement. 
233 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JULY 15 or 16, 202X 
1  FINANCIAL REPORTING UNDER INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC SECTOR 
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (IPSAS) /Nepal Financial reporting Standards 
(NFRSs) 
In  accordance  with  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)/ 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), notes to the financial statements 
of an entity should: 
•  Present any information about the basis of preparation of the financial statements 
and the specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant transactions 
and other events, and 
•  Provide additional information  which is not presented on the face of the financial 
statements  but  is  necessary  for  a  fair  presentation  of  the  entity’s  cash  receipts, 
cash  payments,  cash  balances  and  other  statements  as  statement  of  financial 
position. 
2  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
The  principle  accounting  policies  adopted  in  the  preparation  of  these  financial 
statements are set out below: 
A   Basis of Preparation 
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Public 
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) based on the Accrual Basis of Accounting / Nepal 
Financial Reporting Standards (NFRSs).  
B Basis of Accounting 
The accrual basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events when they occur 
rather  than  when  cash  is  received  or  paid  by  the  entity.  Expenses  are  therefore 
recognised when incurred and income when earned. 
C Foreign Currency Transactions 
Foreign  currency  translation  for  the  income  and  expenditure  account  items  are 
converted using the actual historic exchange rate at the conversion from designated 
account to project bank or government bank account. Where part of the expenditures 
has to be met from the proceeds of subsequent draw downs from designated account 
to project bank or government bank account, this is done on First in First out (FIFO) 
basis.    All  local  expenditures  paid  from  the  project  bank  accounts/currency  are 
translated  back  to  the  USD  at  the  actual  rate used for  the  transfer from  designated 
bank  to  project  bank  account.  Cash  balances  held  in  foreign  currency  are  reported 
using  the  closing  buying  exchange  rate.    Gains/Losses  on  foreign  currency 
transactions/balances are dealt within the Designated Account Statement.  
3  BUDGET  
The budget is developed on a cash basis, and with the same classification and for the 
same period as the financial statements, while the financial statements are prepared 
on an accrual basis. The approved budget covers the period from July 16 or 17, 202 
to July 15 or 16, 202x.  Material variances (above XXX) have been explained as notes 
to the financial statements.  
234 
4  CASH/FUND BALANCES 
Reconciliation 
Bank Accounts 
A/c No_______  Project Account 
A/c No_______  Other Project 
Account  
A/c No_______ IFAD Designated 
Account 
Total 
202X/2X 
(Current Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
202X/2X 
(Previous Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
5  GOVERNMENT COUNTERPART FUNDS 
Cumulative contributions, yearly contributions (compared to budget). For information 
only include details of tax treatment and counterpart contributions as tax exemption. 
6  OTHER DONOR FUNDS 
List of Donors 
1 
2 
3 
Total 
202X/2X 
(Current Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
202X/2X 
(Previous Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Add details of cumulative and expected contributions  
7  OTHER RECEIPTS 
Description 
Interest Income 
other income (specify) 
Total 
202X/2X 
(Current Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
202X/2X 
(Previous Year) 
In NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
8  NON-CURRENT ASSETS (For disclosure purpose only) 
Cat 1 -Infrastructure 
Cat 2 Vehicles 
Cat 3-Equipment 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
Amount in NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
 Description 
 Costs 
Opening 
Balance 
235 
Additions 
(Statement of 
Receipts and 
Payments) 
Disposals 
Closing 
Balance 
 Description 
  Accumulated  
Depreciation 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Cat 1 -Infrastructure 
Cat 2 Vehicles 
Cat 3-Equipment 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
Opening Balance 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Additions 
(Statement of 
Receipts and 
Payments) 
Disposals 
Closing Balance 
 Description 
Net Book Values  
Opening Balance 
Additions 
Disposals 
Closing Balance 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
Cat 1 -Infrastructure 
Cat 2 Vehicles 
Cat 3-Equipment 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Current 
Year) 
202X/2X 
(Previous 
Year) 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
(XXX) 
XXX 
This  schedule  includes  all  assets  acquired  from  the  commencement  of  the  Project. 
These assets are stated at cost. Existence and beneficial ownership have been verified 
by  the  auditors.    Apart  from  the  summary  schedule,  detailed  schedules  for  annual 
changes to be included. 
9  YEARLY PROCUREMENTS  
Include here a list of the yearly procurements including procurement methods. 
10 ALLOCATION AND USE OF THE FUNDS OF THE LOAN 
Allocated 
Disbursed 
Available Balance 
Category 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD 
AAA 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
236 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
Total 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
11 RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS DISBURSED BY IFAD AND FUNDS RECEIVED BY 
THE PROGRAMME 
Disbursed by IFAD 
Received by Project 
Difference 
Category  Amount 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
Total 
NPR 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD 
Amount 
INR 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD 
NPR  SDR  USD 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX  XXX 
237 
8.2.17 
Appendix FM-17: Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of 
Project  
1: Terms of Reference for the Audit of the Project 
The template terms of reference (ToR) can be found in Annex 7 of the Handbook. 
2 : Letter of Engagement of Auditor 
To the Project Management (or appropriate Project Director): 
You  have  requested  that  we  audit  the  project  financial  statements  of  the.........  Project  
[insert name of the project), which comprises the statement of financial position as at July 
15  or  16,  202X,  statement  of  operating  performance,  statement  of  cash  flows,  and 
statement of comparison of budget and actual for the year then ended, and notes to the 
financial statements, including summary of significant accounting policies. We are pleased 
to  confirm  our  acceptance  and  our  understanding  of  this  engagement  by  means  of  this 
letter.  
The objectives of our audit are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, 
and to issue an auditor's report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance as a high 
level  of  assurance,  but  is  not  as  guarantee  that  an  audit  conducted  in  accordance  with 
International  Standards  of  Supreme  Audit  Institutions  (ISSAI)  or  national  Standards  on 
Auditing (NSAs) will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatement 
can  arise  from  fraud  or  error  and  are  considered  material  if,  individually  or  in  the 
aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decision of users 
taken on the basis of these financial statements. 
Our audit will be carried out in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit 
Institutions  (ISSAI)  or  national  Standards  on  Auditing (NSA)  promulgated  by the  ICAN. 
Those standards require that we comply with ethical requirements. As part of an audit in 
accordance  with  NSAs,  we  exercise  professional  judgement  and  maintain  professional 
scepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
• 
Identify  and  assess  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  financial  statements, 
whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those 
risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for 
our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is 
higher  than  for  one  resulting  from  error,  as  fraud  may  involve  collusion,  forgery, 
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
•  Obtain  an  understanding  of  internal  control  relevant  to  the  audit  in  order  to  design 
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of 
expressing  an  opinion  on  the effectiveness  of  the  entity's  internal  control.  However, 
we will communicate to you in writing concerning any significant deficiencies in internal 
control relevant to the audit of the financial statements that we have identifies during 
the audit. 
•  Evaluate the appropriateness of an accounting policies used and the reasonableness of 
accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management. 
•  Evaluate  the  overall  presentation,  structure  and  content  of  the  financial  statements, 
including  the  disclosures,  and  whether  the  financial  statements  represent  the 
underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
In  forming  our  opinion  on the financial  statements,  we  will  perform  sufficient tests  and 
reviews  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  as  to  whether  the  information  contained  in  the 
238 
underlying accounting records and other source data are reliable and sufficient as the basis 
for  the  preparation  of  the  financial  statements.  We  will  also  determine  whether  the 
information is properly communicated in the financial statements. 
Because of the nature of the tests and other inherent limitations of an audit, together with 
the inherent limitations of internal control, there is an unavoidable risk that some material 
misstatements  may  not  be  detected,  even  though  the  audit  is  properly  planned  and 
performed in accordance with NSAs. However, we expect to provide you with a separate 
management letter concerning any material weaknesses in internal control that come to 
our notice. 
Our audit will be conducted on the basis that management acknowledge and understand 
that they have responsibility: 
(a)  For the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance 
with  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)/Nepal  Financial 
Reporting Standards (NFRS) based on the Accrual Basis of Accounting; 
(b)  For  such  internal  control  as  management  determines  is  necessary  to  enable  the 
preparation  of  financial  statements  that  are  free  from  material  misstatements 
whether due to fraud or error; and 
(c)  To provide us with: 
(i)  Access to all information of which management is aware that is relevant to the 
preparation  of  the  financial  statements  such  as  records,  all  legal  documents, 
documentation and other matters; 
(ii)  Additional information that we may request from management for the purpose 
of the audit; and  
(iii)  Unrestricted access to persons within the project from whom we determine it 
necessary to obtain audit evidence. 
As  part  of  our  audit  process,  we  will  request  from  management  written  confirmation  of 
representations made to us in connection with the audit. 
We look forward to receiving the full cooperation of your staff  during our audit. We trust 
that they will make available to us whatever records, documentation and other information 
we may request in connection with our audit. 
Our  fees  will  be  as  mutually  agreed  based  on  our  proposal,  plus  direct  out-of-pocket 
expenses.  
Please sign and return the attached copy of this letter to indicate your acknowledgement of, and agreement 
with, the arrangements for our audit of the financial statements including our respective responsibilities. 
Name of firm or company, (Chartered accountants) 
NOTE: Additional items may be included in the engagement.  
239 
 3:  Audit log 
(a) Summary Status of Audit Observations 
Project Name:  ________________________  Loan Financing No. ___________________________ 
Financial 
Year 
Audit Observations according 
to Audit Report 
Audit Observations Settled 
Audit Observations 
Outstanding 
Numbers  Value (INR) 
Numbers  Value  (INR) 
Numbers  Value (INR) 
Total: 
(b) Detailed Log of Audit Observations  
Audit 
Ref. 
Audit 
observations 
Amount per 
Observation 
(INR) 
Action taken by 
the project 
(Reply of Para 
wise) 
Auditor's Validation 
Results 
Implemented/Settled 
Partially Settled  
Total amount 
not 
Implemented/ 
Pending (INR) 
Audit Observations 
Project Name: 
Loan/Grant/Financing No. 
Class: 
Financial 
S. 
Serious/ 
year 
No. 
general 
Total: 
240 
8.2.18  Appendix FM-18: Sample Terms of Reference of the Internal 
Auditor 
The  internal  auditor  will  conduct  internal  audit  on  half  yearly  basis  in  accordance  with 
Auditing & Assurance Standards prescribed by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Nepal,  include  such  tests  and  controls  as  the  auditor  considers  necessary  under  the 
circumstances and shall be responsible for the following: 
•  Check  eligibility  of  expenditure  with  supporting  documents  to  substantiate  the 
nature and amounts of expenditures for intended purpose and compliance with the 
prevailing  Laws,  financial  rules  and  procedures,  financing  agreement,  project 
agreement,  and  letter  to  the  borrower,  general  conditions  of  IFAD,  and 
procurement guidelines, and memorandum of understanding. 
•  Ensure that all project funds received under the project have been used with due 
attention  to  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  and  only  for  the  purposes  for 
which the financing was provided. 
•  Ensure  that  all  required  books  of  accounts  for  the  financial  transactions  of  the 
project are being maintained and updated, bank accounts are being reconciled and 
financial reports are being prepared correctly. 
•  Ensure that the accounting and financial management systems remain reliable and 
effective in design and assess the extent to which they are being followed. 
•  Review  the  efficacy,  adequacy  and  application  of  accounting,  financial  and 
operating controls and thereby ensure the accuracy of the books of accounts. 
•  Verify that the system of internal check is effective in design and operation in order 
to  ensure  the  prevention  of  and  early  detection  of  defalcations,  frauds, 
misappropriations and misapplications. 
•  Assess the effectiveness of operation of the project’s financial management system, 
review effectiveness of internal control mechanism in project implementation. 
Identify areas of significant inefficiencies in existing systems and suggest necessary 
remedial measures for improvements if required.  
• 
•  Review that allocation of the expenditure between IFAD and counterpart funding is 
in accordance with the IFAD financing agreement, Memorandum of Understanding, 
subsidiary loan agreement and cost table. 
•  Review statutory compliances as may be applicable such as proper deduction and 
filing of TDS, Income tax, PF returns and other applicable.  
•  Review  the efficiency  and  timeliness  of  the  funds flow mechanism  at the  PMU  of 
the  Lead  Programme  Agency  and  the  concerned  implementing  agencies  and 
whether  there  are  delays  impacting  the  timely  implementation  of  project.  The 
auditor  should  also  identify  and  report  the  reasons  for  such  delays  and  possible 
remedial measures. 
•  Ensure  that the  records  of  all  procurement,  agreement,  work  /  purchase  orders, 
invoices, receipts, stock registers, contract register, contract payment monitoring 
form etc. are properly maintained and retained for the required period.  
•  Review  the  contract  management  and  ensure  compliance  with  the  terms  and 
conditions of the contract. 
•  Check  that  the  Statements  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  submitted  by  PMU  to  IFAD  are 
reconciled with the expenditures reported in the financial reports. 
•  Ensure that the SOEs are submitted in timely manner to PMU by the implementing 
partner/ agencies and partner groups/organizations. 
•  Check whether adequate records are maintained regarding the assets created and 
assets acquired by the project, including description, details of cost, identification 
and location of assets.  
•  Carry out physical verification of a sample of assets created out of the project and 
comment on its utilization and whether they are adequately safeguarded.  
241 
•  Ensure  whether  the  physical  verification  of  assets  is  being  carried  out  with  due 
diligence by the PMU and implementing agencies at least once in a year.   
•  Check the accounting for the advances to project implementing agencies, project 
staff, suppliers and service providers and monitoring of settlement of advances. 
•  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents and records have been separately 
maintained  in  respect  of  all  project  activities  and  that  clear  nexus  exist  between 
supporting  documents,  accounting  books  and  records  and  the  periodic  financial 
reports of the implementing agencies and the PMU. 
•  Confirm  that  the  agreed  procurement  procedures  and  arrangements  have  been 
followed for works, goods and services and basic principles of economy, efficiency 
and social equity have been followed. 
•  Check  that  the  monthly/quarterly  expenditure  statements  showing  approved 
budget,  expenditure  during  the  month,  and  cumulative  expenditure  against  the 
activity / sub activity during the period in accordance with the books of accounts, 
statement  of  outstanding  advance  and  fund  balance,  statement  of  expenditures 
and fund utilization statement submitted by the implementing agencies and ensure 
that they are being submitted on time to PMU. 
•  Check that project accounts have been prepared in accordance with International 
Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)/  Nepal  Financial  Reporting  Standard 
(NFRSs) based on Accrual Basis of Accounting. 
•  Check corrective actions taken by the management for audit deficiencies reported 
in the previous external and internal audit report and status of outstanding audit 
observations.  
The Internal Auditor shall conduct internal audit at PMU and other cost centres if required 
based on nature and volume and transactions and risk assessment and submit half yearly 
reports to the Project Director along with the actions taken to resolve audit observations.  
242 
8.3  Terms of Reference for key posts 
ToR for key posts under the programme  
1. ToR for Programme Director (ADBL CEO) 
2. ToR for Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director) 
3. ToR for Focal Person Coordinator 
4. ToR for Focal Person Officer 
5. ToR for Supply Chain Coordinator 
6. ToR for Supply Chain Officer 
7. ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Expert 
8. ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Coordinator 
9. ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Officer (Technical Officer) 
10.  ToR for Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert 
11.  ToR of Climate Smart Agriculture Finance Specialist 
12.  ToR for Infrastructure Expert 
13.  ToR for Infrastructure Procurement Specialist 
14.  ToR for Sub-engineers/Overseers (Provincial offices) 
15.  Programme Chief Finance Officer 
16.  Accounts Officer – Provincial and Branch Offices 
17.  Account Assistants – PMU, Provincial and Branch Offices 
18.  ToR for Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist 
19.  ToR for Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
244 
246 
248 
250 
252 
254 
256 
258 
260 
261 
263 
267 
267 
269 
270 
272 
274 
276 
280 
243 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
Summary of role: 
1.  ToR for Programme Director (ADBL CEO) 
VITA Programme Director 
Steering Committee 
All programme activities.  
ADBL HO 
The Programme  Director (PD) will lead the overall delivery of all aspects of the 
programme, ensure close coordination between component teams and among 
implementing partners within scope, budget and timeline along the 
commitments specified in the programme financing agreement, under the 
guidance of the programme Steering Committee to achieve high quality and 
timely agreed results and deliverables of the programme. The PD will be fully 
supported by the PMU in this role. 
ADBL CEO serves as the VITA Programme Director 
Mode of contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
•  Overall management, facilitation and supervision of programme 
implementation, under the guidance of the Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC)  
•  Ensure full integration of Component 1, 2 and 3 activities and teams to 
deliver whole programme results. 
•  Coordinate and manage the relationship[ between ADBL and key 
implementing partners and stakeholder for the programmes  
•  Provide guidance and  leadership to establish and setting up the PMU and 
programme teams, putting in place the management, financial and 
operations procedures for programme implementation. 
•  Supervise the appointment/hiring of competent key programme personnel.  
•  Overall guidance and support to PMOUin preparing relevant aspects of the 
Programme Implementation Manual, strategies and guidelines covering all 
component operations and systems including fund necessary for 
programme implementation 
•  Overall guidance and support to PMU in establishing accounts and 
accounting procedures, financial arrangements and ensuring effective 
management of procurement, disbursement and funds replenishment 
operations in accordance with prescribed procedures 
•  Coordination of IFAD Supervision and Implementation missions regarding 
Programme progress and ensure timely submission of annual work plan and 
budget for approval and withdrawal application  for disbursement 
•  Supervision and monitoring all programme activities and timely reporting on 
programme performance and impact to MOF, IFAD and the Steering 
Committee as required by government and IFAD  
•  Attend programme Steering Committee (SC) and ensure smooth 
coordination and cooperation with MOF, MOALD, NRB, IFAD and other 
concerned stakeholders in implementing programme activities. 
Inclusions aspects 
244 
•  Take overall responsibility of programme performance on raising 
smallholder incomes, including for poor and near poor farmers. 
•  Develop a corporate programme approach in which both the inclusion and 
market aspects of the Programme are equally important.  
•  Represent programme approach and progress to social and economic 
inclusion in the policy and development arena.  
•  Ensure that evidence-based analysis from Programme interventions inform 
IFAD policy and support and extend the agenda for inclusive market 
development in Nepal.  
Experience & 
qualifications 
ADBL CEO 
245 
2.  ToR for Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director) 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director) 
Programme Director (PD) 
All PMU staff. 
Senior programme staff in provincial/branch offices – in coordination with 
relevant line management structures. 
ADBL HO 
The Programme Coordinator will assist the PD to lead the overall delivery of all 
aspects of the programme and ensure close coordination between all 
components and activities within scope, budget and timeline along the 
commitments specified in the contract signed with IFAD, under the guidance of 
the Programme Director and the programme Steering Committee to achieve 
high quality and timely agreed results and deliverables of the programme.. The 
PC will lead the PMU. 
Deputed by ADBL 
Main 
responsibilities 
To assist the PD in carrying out the following responsibilities: 
•  Overall management, facilitation and supervision of programme 
implementation, under the guidance of the Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC)  
•  Ensure full integration of al, component activities and teams to deliver 
whole programme results. 
•  Provide day-to-day management of relationship with key implementing 
partners and programme stakeholder 
•  Provide guidance and  leadership to establish and setting up the PMU and 
programme teams, putting in place the management, financial and 
operations procedures for programme implementation. 
•  Supervise the assignment /hiring of competent key programme personnel.  
•  Overall guidance and support to PMU in preparing relevant aspects of the 
Programme Implementation Manual, strategies and guidelines covering all 
component operations and systems including fund necessary for 
programme implementation 
•  Overall guidance and support to PMU in establishing accounts and 
accounting procedures, financial arrangements and ensuring effective 
management of procurement, disbursement and funds replenishment 
operations in accordance with prescribed procedures 
•  Coordination of IFAD Supervision and Implementation missions regarding 
Programme progress and ensure timely submission of annual work plan and 
budget for approval and withdrawal application  for disbursement 
•  Supervision and monitoring all programme activities and timely reporting on 
programme performance and impact to MOF, IFAD and the Steering 
Committee as required by government and IFAD  
•  Attend the Programme Steering Committee as the Member Secretary 
Inclusions aspects 
246 
•  Take overall responsibility of programme performance on raising 
smallholder incomes, including for poor and near poor farmers.. 
•  Develop a corporate programme approach in which both the inclusion and 
market aspects of the Programme are equally important.  
•  Represent programme approach and progress to social and economic 
inclusion in the policy and development arena.  
•  Ensure that evidence-based analysis from Programme interventions inform 
IFAD policy and support and extend the agenda for inclusive market 
development in Nepal.  
Experience & 
qualifications 
ADBL PMU Director 
247 
3.  ToR for Focal Person Coordinator 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Focal Person Coordinator  
Programme Coordinator and Head, SME Department  
Component 1 team in coordination with PD 
Duty station: 
ADBL SME Department  
Summary of role: 
Under the direct supervision of Programme Coordinator and guidance of Head, 
SME Department, the Focal person will facilitate and support the delivery of all 
aspects of Component 1 in tandem with component 2 activities and ensure 
close coordination between Programme Implementation Unit and SME 
department of ADBL. S/he will guide and coach Provincial/Hub staff for 
implementation and support ADBL SME Department for identify critical areas of 
investment, business planning, investment analysis and other areas that lead to 
improved performance of the SMEs financing and overall supply chain system.  
Mode of contract: 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual 
contract will be extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory 
performance in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
Main 
responsibilities 
•  Responsible for overall management, facilitation, and supervision of 
Component 1 implementation under the guidance of Programme 
Coordinator and Head, SME Department;  
•  Ensure full integration of Component 1 and Component 2 activities and 
ensure smooth coordination and cooperation among Programme teams and 
Bank staff to deliver whole Programme results; 
•  Facilitate and support ADBL SME Department to identify critical 
interventions for investment, business planning, investment analysis and 
other areas that lead to improved performance of the SMEs financing and 
overall supply chain system in close coordination with PIU;  
•  Facilitate and Support ADBL SME Department in undertaking 
comprehensive analysis of all interventions recommended through the 
MSPs which are subsequently supported by loans under the Programme;  
•  Facilitate and support market intelligence on investment made by other 
like-minded banks and FIs;  
•  Provide strategic support to SME Department team for enhancing credit 
support in developing respective supply chains investment proposals;  
•  Ensure that evidence-based analysis from Programme interventions inform 
ADBL policy and support inclusive financing development in Banks 
•  Coordinate, Coach and Mentor Supply chain team and other Programme 
staff on supply chain development practices and processes: through focused 
and actor driven Programme facilitation for specific supply chains in 
continuous multi-stakeholder consultation process (MSP); 
248 
Experience & 
qualifications 
•  Develop training modules /manuals on SCD and MSP and conduct training 
and capacity building activities on supply chain development and market 
system facilitation to Programme staff at various level; 
•  Support staff for Brokering “win-win” and trust-based business or service 
relationships among Supply chain actors including improvement in business 
enabling environment; 
•  Support Programme Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) team to establish 
supply chain specific baselines for the M&E system and result 
measurements, 
•  Contribute to the knowledge development in the relevant supply chains by 
undertaking case studies and document and promote learning in 
activities/investment following the knowledge agenda; 
•  Document the lessons learn around agricultural finance, the effectiveness 
and efficiency and other support mechanisms, in collaboration with other 
relevant staff and make suggestions for their improvement; 
•  Facilitate and support for Preparing Annual Work Plan and Budget and 
progress report related to Component 1;..  
•  Undertake any other duties as requested by the Provincial Director.  
Required 
•  Master’s degree in business administration, Agribusiness Development, 
Marketing or equivalent with at least 7 years of professional experience in 
supply chain promotion and private sector development with demonstrable 
evidence of the results achieved 
•  Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders through 
advisory skills and multi-stakeholder consultation processes, value chain 
upgrading workshops and training.  
•  Experiences with business ideation, proposal/plan development, appraisal, 
monitoring and evaluation, and feasibility analysis.  
•  Possess high quality attributes on leadership, facilitations, and coaching. 
•  Excellent spoken and written English.  
•  Proven skills in staff and budget management, networking and external 
communication.  
•  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
Preferences given to: 
•  Experience in agriculture Supply chains, public private partnership, and 
service market development 
249 
4.  ToR for Focal Person Officer 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Focal Person Officer 
Head, SME Department  
Component 1 team  
Duty station: 
ADBL SME Department  
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Under the direct supervision of Head, SME Department and technical guidance 
of Focal person Coordinator, the Focal person officer will support the delivery 
of all aspects of Component 1 in tandem with component 2 activities. S/he will 
assist the Coordinator for identify critical areas of investment, business 
planning, undertaking comprehensive analysis of all interventions and other 
areas that lead to improved performance of the SMEs financing and overall 
supply chain system.  
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual 
contract will be extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory 
performance in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
Main 
responsibilities 
•  Work with Focal Person Coordinator for overall management, facilitation, 
and supervision of Component 1 implementation with full integration 
Component 2 activities; 
•  Assist FPC to identify critical interventions for investment, business 
planning, investment analysis and other areas that lead to improved 
performance of the SMEs financing and overall supply chain system in close 
coordination with PIU;  
•  Assist and support Coordinator in undertaking comprehensive analysis of all 
interventions recommended through the MSPs which are subsequently 
supported by loans under the Programme;  
•  Conduct market study and collect information related to specific supply 
chain on market dynamics to derive strategies for investment;  
•  Assist in conducting training and capacity building activities on supply chain 
development and market system facilitation to Programme staff at various 
level; 
•  Contribute to the knowledge development in the relevant supply chains by 
undertaking case studies and document and promote learning in 
activities/investment following the knowledge agenda; 
•  Document the lessons learn around agricultural finance, the effectiveness 
and efficiency and other support mechanisms, in collaboration with 
provincial Programme team; 
•  Facilitate and support Coordinator for Preparing Annual Work Plan and 
Budget and progress report related to Component 1;.  
•  Undertake any other duties as requested by the Focal Person Coordinator 
which fall into the domains and areas of responsibility.  
250 
Experience & 
qualifications 
Required 
•  Master’s degree in business administration, Agribusiness Development, 
Economic or relevant with at least 3 years relevant experience or Bachelor’s 
degree with 5 years’ experience on Supply chain development in particular 
agriculture Supply chains, preferably working experience with private 
sector 
•  Sound experience in business plan development, appraisal, and feasibility 
and market analysis,. service provision and supply chain development.  
•  Ability to work in a multi-disciplinary team and facilitate the working of 
other team members; 
•  Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and 
entrepreneurial skills.  
•  Excellent spoken and written English.  
•  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
Preferences given to 
•  Candidate having experience in agriculture Supply Chains development, 
Investment analysis, public private partnership, and service market 
development. 
251 
5.  ToR for Supply Chain Coordinator 
Position: 
Supply Chain Coordinator (SCC) 
Reports to: 
Provincial Director 
Technical report to Focal Person Component 1 Coordinator in PIU 
Supervises: 
Technical supervision and coaching of Supply Chain Officers 
Duty station: 
Respective Provincial Offices as designated by the Programme 
Summary of role: 
Mode of 
contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
Under the direct supervision and guidance of Provincial Director and and Focal 
Person Coordinator, the SCC will be responsible for implementation of the supply 
chain development interventions in tandem with other component in the 
respective Hub/Corridor and to guide and coach Hub Staff to facilitate and support 
supply chain actors in strengthening linkages, business planning, investment 
analysis and other areas that lead to improved performance of the supply chain 
system 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract 
will be extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory performance 
in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
•  Responsible for field implementation and supervision of identified critical 
interventions for investments, enhancement of relationships, development of 
enabling institutions and services stimulating actor driven multi-stakeholder 
consultation process (MSP) for the specific Supply chains within the 
districts/clusters. 
•  Coordinate, Coach and Mentor Supply Chain Officers and other staff for 
facilitation of supply chain development interventions including supply chain 
planning, implementation, monitoring and reporting in specific supply chains; 
•  Facilitate and Support farmers, producer organisation, agribusiness, service 
provider in developing concept notes and investment/business plans for 
assessing credit /loans from Banks within specific supply chains; 
•  Facilitate and support Producer organisation, cooperatives and agri-business to 
meet market requirements and strengthening technical, financial and business 
services providers/provision for specific supply chains;  
•  Strengthen capacities of Programme staff in enhancing service capacities of 
agribusiness/traders, producer group and service providers and their 
relationships, within informal and formal contracting arrangements, 
•  Brokering “win-win” and trust-based business and/or service relationships 
among supply chain actors to work towards reliable, fair and long-term 
relationships and or buyer or service contracts including improvement in 
business enabling environment; 
•  Provide strategic support to field team for inclusion of poorer households in 
developing respective supply chains investment proposals.  
252 
Experience & 
qualifications 
•  Contribute to the knowledge development in the relevant supply chains by 
undertaking case studies and document and promote learning in 
activities/investment following the knowledge agenda; 
•  Undertake any other duties as requested by the Provincial Director.  
Required 
•  Master’s degree in business administration, Agribusiness Development, 
Economic, Marketing or equivalent with at least 7 years of experience in supply 
chain development in particular agriculture supply chains, and private sector 
development.  
•  Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders through 
advisory skills and facilitation of multi-stakeholder consultation workshops.  
•  Sound experience in business development, service provision and supply chain 
development;  
•  Experiences that demonstrate high quality attributes on leadership, 
facilitations and coaching and innovativeness.  
•  Excellent spoken and written English.  
•  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
Preferences given to 
Candidate having experience in Supply chains /supply chain upgrading and up-
scaling approaches, multi-stakeholder consultation processes, service market 
development  
253 
6.  ToR for Supply Chain Officer 
Position: 
Supply Chain Officer (SCO) 
Reports to: 
Supply Chain Coordinator /Lead 
Technical report to Focal Person Coordinator in PIU 
Supervises: 
Technical supervision and coaching of Supply Chain Officers 
Duty station: 
Respective Provincial Offices as designated by the Programme 
Summary of role: 
Mode of 
contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
Under the direct supervision and guidance of Supply Chain Coordinator, will be 
responsible for implementation of the Supply Chain development interventions in 
the respective Corridor and to guide and coach NGO Staff to facilitate and support 
Supply Chain actors in strengthening linkages, business planning, investment 
analysis and other areas that lead to improved performance of overall Supply 
Chain. 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract 
will be extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory performance 
in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
• Responsible for field implementation and supervision of identified critical 
interventions for investments, stimulating actual scaling as part of focussed and 
actor driven multi-stakeholder consultation process (MSP) for the specific 
supply chains within the districts/clusters. 
• Coordinate, coach and mentor field staff within the district for facilitation of 
supply chain development initiatives including supply chain planning, 
implementation, monitoring and reporting in specific supply chains in 
partnership with private sector to meet the market requirements with support 
of SEM officers;   
• Coordinate and facilitate all business-related training /workshop including B2B, 
B2S linkages, contract arrangement and MSPs at cluster/district/corridor as per 
need in close coordination with concerned stakeholders;  
• Facilitate and Support farmers, producer organisation, cooperatives, 
agribusiness, service provider in developing investment/business plans for 
assessing loans within specific supply chains; 
• Facilitate and support NGO staff & Social Mobiliser for timely collection and 
assessment of business proposals / plans from technical, business, 
management, financial and inclusion perspective in the specific supply chains 
and micro enterprises; 
• Facilitate and support producer’s organisation and agri-business to meet market 
requirements including contractual arrangements and strengthening technical, 
financial and business services providers/provision for specific supply chains in 
coordination with Bank staff and SEM officer;  
• Brokering “win-win” and trust-based business and/or service relationships 
among supply chain actors and work towards reliable, fair and long-term 
254 
Experience & 
qualifications 
relationships and or buyer or service contracts including improvement in 
business enabling environment; 
• Facilitate and support group/cooperatives for collective marketing and 
operation /strengthening of collection Centre within production clusters & 
districts involving private sector/Agribusiness;  
• Coordinate with private sector to ensure the supply of improved agricultural 
inputs to meet the production targets as per market demand through the 
beneficiaries; 
• Coordinate and support Corridor team to maintain Programme’s external 
relations and visibility, including coordination with like-minded organizations & 
Programmes perusing similar objectives in the target corridor and sharing of 
best practices for wider dissemination; 
• Contribute to the knowledge development in the relevant supply chains by 
undertaking case studies and document and promote learning in 
activities/investment following the knowledge agenda; 
• Timely and regular reporting to Supply chain Coordinator as per prescribed 
format, hard or electronic, or both;  
• Undertake any other duties as requested as directed by Corridor Manager and 
Supply Chain Coordinator. 
Required 
• Master’s degree in business administration, Agribusiness Development, 
Economic or relevant with at least 3 years relevant experience or Bachelor’s 
degree with 5 years’ experience on Supply chain development in particular 
agriculture Supply chains, preferably working experience with private sector 
• Sound experience in business development, service provision and supply chain 
development.  
• Experiences with management and market analysis, proposal/plan 
development, appraisal, monitoring and evaluation, and feasibility analysis.  
• Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders and facilitation 
of multi-stakeholder consultation workshops and training.  
• Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and entrepreneurial 
skills.  
• Excellent spoken and written English.  
• Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
Preferences given to 
Candidate with experience of Enterprises promotion, business facilitation, supply 
chain /Supply Chain development and market-oriented Programmes  
255 
7.  ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Expert 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Social Economic Mobilization Expert (SEM) 
Programme Coordinator, VITA and Heifer  
Social Economic Mobilization Team 
Duty station: 
Programme Implementation Unit (PIU)  
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Main responsibilities 
Under the direct supervision of VITA PD and technical guidance and supervision of Heifer 
PD, the SEM Expert will lead the performance of all Social mobilization activities of the 
Programme in close coordination with various thematic team.S/he is also responsible for 
providing technical guidance and support to hub/corridor Social Mobilization team and 
NGOs  for  capacity  assessment,  developing  capacity  building  plan  and  ensure  its 
implementation for producer organisation strengthening as per the programme objectives. 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory performance in the preceding 
contract assessed by the Programme. 
•  Coordinate, Supervise and Manage the implementation of Programme field activities 
by taking overall responsibility for the mobilization of households to participate in 
Programme supply chain activities along agreed management lines.  
•  Support  Supply  Chain  team  in  guiding,  monitoring  and  backstopping  supply  chain 
activities and the Finance team for strengthening group/cooperatives to meet the buyer 
demand & financial institutions requirements; 
•  Develop  Institutional  Development  Strategy  for  strengthening  the  capacities 
/capabilities  of  group/cooperatives,  NGOs,  and  Municipal  Authorities  for  effective 
implementation of the strategy and action plans;  
•  Develop ToR, and selection criteria for contracting NGOs for their involvement in 
VITA,  ensuring  quality  of  their  work  and  providing  technical  support  and  onsite 
coaching and mentoring as required; 
•  Responsible  for  the  management,  capacity  building  and  backstopping  NGOs  in 
formation,  development  and  strengthening  of  producers’  groups,  particularly  in 
strengthening supply chain development; 
•  Ensure  that  lessons  from  social  mobilization  and  field  activities  are  continually 
collected so as to inform strategic direction for Programme implementation to ensure 
Programme deliverables are met in an intended manner and disseminate evidence for 
influencing policy and practice; 
•  Be responsible for monitoring progress on inclusion objectives on a regular basis so 
that these can inform Programme management and enable them to refine operations.  
•  Contribute  to  the  knowledge  development  and  sharing  strategy  related  to 
organisational development approach towards all actors and other stakeholders in the 
relevant sectors;  
•  Continually  assess,  update  and  improve  Programme  economic  models  of  financial 
interventions to ensure they are relevant to Programme objectives.   
•  Provide managerial support for the identification of Business Skills Facilitators (BLF) 
and the optimal phasing of training and capacity building.  
•  Communicate  with  the  BSF  training  service  providers  to  ensure  that  BSF  capacity 
building fully serves Programme objectives.  
•  Timely  and  regular  reporting  to  Programme  Coordinator  as  per  prescribed  format, 
hard or electronic, or both.  
•  Undertake any other duties as directed by Programme Coordinator  
256 
Experience 
qualifications 
& 
Required 
•  Master’s degree in Social Science, social work, rural development or related subject 
with at least 5 years’ or Bachelor’s degree with at least 7 years’ experience in social 
mobilization, social inclusion and economic empowerment.  
•  Proven skills in enterprises promotion, supply chain & economic development and 
solid understanding of the theory and practice of inclusive development.  
•  Excellent  interpersonal  skills,  proven  networking,  team  building,  decision  making, 
organizational and communication skills  
•  Demonstrated knowledge and sound Understanding of issues relating to gender and 
social inclusion including economic development.  
•  Ability to work in a multi-disciplinary team and facilitate the working of other team 
members; 
•  Excellent communications skills - spoken and written, both in English and Nepali and 
possess good report writing skills; 
•  Good  inter-personal  skills  and  capacity  to  work  effectively  with  a  range  of 
institutions.  
Preferences given to 
•  Candidate  with  experience  of  Enterprises  promotion,  business  facilitation,  supply 
chain /Supply Chain development and market-oriented Programmes 
257 
8.  ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Coordinator 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Social Economic Mobilization Coordinator (SEM) 
Provincial Director  
Technical report to SEM expert   
Supervises: 
Social Economic Mobilization Team including NGOs 
Duty station: 
Respective Provincial Offices as designated by the Programme 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Main responsibilities 
Under the direct supervision of Provincial Director and technical guidance of SEM Expert, 
The SEM coordinator will lead the Social mobilization activities within the state/Hub in 
close  coordination  respective  supply  chain  team.  S/he  is  also  responsible  for  providing 
technical  guidance  and  support  to  District  /Cluster  based  Social  Mobilization team  and 
NGOs  for  capacity  assessment,  developing  capacity  building  plan  and  ensure  its 
implementation for producer organisation strengthening as per the programme objectives. 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory performance in the preceding 
contract assessed by the Programme. 
•  Coordinate, Supervise and Manage the implementation of Programme field activities 
in  respective  Hub/Corridor  by  taking  overall  responsibility  for  the  mobilization  of 
households  to  participate  in  Programme  supply  chain  activities  along  agreed 
management lines.  
•  Support  Supply  Chain  team  in  guiding,  monitoring  and  backstopping  supply  chain 
activities and the Finance team for strengthening group/cooperatives to meet the buyer 
demand & financial institutions requirements; 
•  Facilitate  and  support  Producer  organization  mobilization  and  strengthening  so  as 
meet the traders demand in coordination with supply chain teams. 
•  Providing support to NGO/service providers to implement the Programme gender and 
social inclusion and social mobilization strategies and policies in the state. 
•  Facilitate  and 
support 
/capabilities  of 
group/cooperatives, NGOs, and Municipal Authorities for effective implementation 
of the Programme activities;  
the  capacities 
strengthening 
in 
•  Ensure  that  lessons  from  social  mobilization  and  field  activities  are  continually 
collected so as to inform strategic Supply chain development.  
•  Be responsible for monitoring progress on inclusion objectives on a regular basis so 
that these can inform Programme management and enable them to refine operations.  
•  Contribute  to  the  knowledge  development  and  sharing  strategy  related  to 
organizational development approach towards all actors and other stakeholders in the 
relevant sectors;  
•  Provide managerial support for the identification of Business Skills Facilitators (BLF) 
and the optimal phasing of training and capacity building.  
•  Communicate  with  the  BSF  training  service  providers  to  ensure  that  BSF  capacity 
building fully serves Programme objectives.  
•  Facilitate and support documentation of experiences, lessons learned, good practices, 
and  case  studies  as  part  of  knowledge  development  and  facilitate  exchange  of 
information; 
•  Timely  and  regular  reporting  to  Programme  Coordinator  as  per  prescribed  format, 
hard or electronic, or both.  
•  Undertake any other duties as directed by Provincial Director and SEM Expert.   
258 
Experience 
qualifications 
& 
Required 
•  Masters’  degree  in  Social  Science,  Rural  Development,  Sociology,  Development 
Studies or equivalent with more  than 7 years of professional working experience in 
formation and strengthening grassroots-level rural institution including promotion of 
cooperatives and development; 
•  Proven skills in strategic supply chain planning and solid understanding of the theory 
and practice of inclusive development.  
•  Proven track record in developing training manuals and facilitation trainings at various 
levels.  
•  Experiences  that  demonstrate  high  quality  attributes  on  leadership,  facilitations  and 
coaching and innovativeness;  
•  Ability to work in a multi-disciplinary team and facilitate the working of other team 
members; 
•  Excellent communications skills - spoken and written, both in English and Nepali and 
possess good report writing skills; 
•  Good inter-personal skills and capacity to work effectively with a range of institutions.  
Preferences given to 
•  Candidate  having  experience 
in  capacity  assessments  and  strengthening  of 
group/cooperatives and private sector and proven track record in business facilitation, 
agriculture supply chain /Supply Chain development. 
259 
9.  ToR for Social Economic Mobilization Officer (Technical 
Officer) 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Social Economic Mobilization Officer (SEM) /Technical Officer  
Provincial Director  
Technical report to SEM Coordinator 
Supervises: 
Social Economic Mobilization Field Team including NGOs and Private Service Provider 
Duty station: 
Respective Districts/Clusters as designated by the Programme 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Main responsibilities 
Under  the  direct  supervision  of  Provincial  Director  and  technical  guidance  of  SEM 
Coordinator,  the  SEM  officer  will  be  responsible  implementation  of  Programme  field 
activities in respective district through Partner NGOs for the mobilization of households 
to participate in Programme supply chain activities along agreed management lines. S/he 
will  coordinate  and  support  public  &  private  service  providers  (LRPs,  VAW,  and 
extension  worker)  to  deliver  technical  support  for  improved  &  sustainable  production, 
post-harvest  technologies  and  marketing  activities  in  the  designated  agricultural  supply 
chains of the Programme.  
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable up to the Programme period based on satisfactory performance in the preceding 
contract assessed by the Programme. 
•  Coordinate, Supervise and Manage the implementation of Programme field activities 
in  respective  district  through  Partner  NGOs  for  the  mobilization  of  households  to 
participate in Programme supply chain activities along agreed management lines.  
•  Facilitate,  support  and  mobilize  NGOs/Social    Mobilizer  in  providing  support  to 
producers  group  for  market  led  crop  plan  development  in  clusters  to  achieve  the 
perceived volume and quality as demanded by the private sectors /traders;  
•  Provide  technical  and  advisory  support  to  NGOs  and  Social  Mobiliser  in  the 
assessment and development of household investment proposals to access credit from 
Bank; 
•  Facilitate and provide technical support in conducting extension services to farmers, 
farmers groups, cooperatives and agribusiness and support on those aspects concerned 
with the production/postharvest handling of agricultural commodities involving public 
and private service providers; 
•  Liaise  and  coordinate  with  municipalities’  level  agriculture,  livestock  and  forestry 
technical staff in delivering quality technical services to producer groups as and when 
required in timely manner in coordination with Partner NGOs;  
•  Coordinate  with  Supply  chain  officers  to  facilitate  producer’s  group  linkages  with 
agribusiness  &  service  providers  and  work  towards  reliable,  fair  and  long-term 
relationships  including  contractual  arrangements  supporting  overall  agricultural 
commodities supply chain development;  
•  Coordinate and facilitate all the training related to Agriculture production and post-
harvest  management  at  corridor/district  level  and  support  in  the  delivery  of  those 
training with concerned stakeholders;  
•  Provide strategic support to NGOs/Social Mobilizer on social mobilization methods 
that support & ensure the inclusion of poorer households in Programme supply chain 
opportunities;  
260 
•  Provide  technical  backstopping  to  NGOs/SM  if  required,  to  enable  the  timely 
collection of data for the MIS and liaise with M&E team to ensure optimal operation 
of MIS towards Programme objectives;   
•  Mentor  NGOs/Social  Mobilizer  in  the  identification  of  Business  Financial  Literacy 
Facilitators  (BFLF),  monitor  the  effectiveness  of  training  and  provide  feedback  to 
enable capacity building to be optimized;  
•  Conduct  and  facilitate  district  level  training  to  farmers,  entrepreneurs,  service 
providers as per training module prescribed from the Programme;  
•  Facilitate Municipality level stakeholders & partners/NGOs meeting and also ensure 
quality  implementation  of  activities  planned,  regular  monitoring  and  reporting  in 
timely manner;  
•  Coordinate with local bodies, local agencies and like-minded organizations and seek 
contribution in maximizing Programme benefits; 
•  Timely and regular field field data collection from NGOs, analysis, and reporting to 
SEM coordinator as per prescribed format, hard or electronic, or both;  
•  Facilitate and support documentation of experiences, lessons learned, good practices, 
case studies as part of knowledge development and facilitate exchange of information 
among concerned stakeholder; 
•  Other activities as directed by the SEM coordinator and Provincial Office personnel.  
& 
Required 
•  Bachelor degree in Agriculture or Livestock/Veterinary science  with at least 5 years’ 
experience  or  Master’s  degree  in  above  mentioned  subject  with  at  least  3  years  of 
experience in relevant filed.  
•  Proven  skills  in  enterprises  promotion,  supply  chain  development,  agricultural 
marketing,  and  business  linkages,  delivery  of  field  level  extension  activities  and 
organizing trainings. 
•  Excellent  interpersonal  skills,  proven  networking,  team-building,  decision  making, 
organizational and communication skills  
•  Good spoken and written skill in both English and Nepali and possess good skills in 
report writing 
•  Good inter-personal skills and capacity to work effectively with a range of institutions.  
•  Good computer skills 
Preferences given to 
Experience 
qualifications 
•  Candidate  having  experience 
strengthening  of 
group/cooperatives and business facilitation, agriculture supply chain /Supply Chain 
development.  
in  capacity  assessments, 
10. 
ToR for Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Agricultural Value Chain Financing Expert 
Programme Coordinator 
Climate Smart Agricultural Finance Specialist 
Digital Banking Experts (short term) 
Duty station: 
PMU 
261 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Main responsibilities 
Under  the  supervision  of  the  PMU  Coordinator,  the  Agricultural  Value  Chain 
Financing Expert (AVCFE)  will provide overall technical leadership in strategizing, 
planning, implementation co-ordination, and monitoring of private investment 
financing  through  medium  and  short-term  credit  and  equity  financing  by 
beneficiary  farmer-borrowers  and  entrepreneurs  and  expansion  of  financial 
inclusion under the programme. In doing so, the AVCFE will contribute actively 
in cost-effective delivery of financial services and in building the capacity of VITA 
Programme staff for effective planning and timely implementation of activities. 
The AVCFE is also responsible for the professional development and coaching of 
ADBL staff and on demand staff of the wholesale borrower institutions.  
Rolling annual contract with a probation period for first six months. The annual 
contract  will  be  extendable  up  to  end  of  Programme  based  on  satisfactory 
performance against the preceding contract. 
corporate  planning/micro- 
•  Working  closely  with  the  PMU  Coordinator  and  relevant  units  of  ADBL 
including 
enterprise/credit 
departments,  relevant  provincial  directors,  VITA  Programme  staff,  and 
branch  managers,  prepare  annual  plans  for  activities  related  to  private 
financing, staff capacity building and policy support  and  integrate them fully 
with the similar plans of ADBL; 
small 
and 
•  Using Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) as basis, assist ADBL to: (i) 
further specify areas for adapting ADB’L policies, procedures, and loan and 
other financial product papers in supporting private financing activities under 
VITA and; (ii) incorporate relevant revisions in such policies, procedures and 
product papers while paying due attention to issues related to targeting and 
social  inclusion  and  environmental,  climate  variability  and  sustainability 
considerations;   
•  Working  in  close  collaboration  with  Digital  Finance  Department  of  ADBL, 
anchor short-term digital banking experts in developing and refining digital 
financing products of ADBL and  when  demanded  by participating financial 
institutions  (PFIs)  that  helps  in  enhancing  efficiency  and  outreach  of  the 
concerned  financial  institutions  and  thereby  achieve  increased  financial 
deepening and inclusivity;  
•  Work collaboratively with all relevant units of ADBL assist them reduce the 
portfolio  risks originating from  inefficient agricultural markets, imbalanced 
value chains with bottlenecks and excess capacity and where risks become 
unavoidable  offering  appropriate  risk  transfer  mechanisms  such  as  group-
based crop and livestock insurance scheme being implemented by ADBL; 
•  Assist ADBL to enhance the capacity of ADBL and PFIs in building the capacity 
of  the  staff  in  efficiently  and  effectively  providing  value  chain  financing 
services to the targeted clientele and to that end help identifying training and 
other  capacity  building  needs,  developing  on-line  and  in-person  training 
modules focused on value chain analyses, client selection, loan appraisal and 
262 
on selective basis conduct training and capacity building activities to project 
staff at various level; 
•  Working  closely  with  relevant  departments  of  ADBL  prepare  request  for 
proposal  for wholesale lending, short-list potential  PFIs,  and negotiate  the 
terms  and conditions including spread, grace and repayment periods, area 
coverage, outreach etc. 
•  Support  M&E  officials  to  strengthen  monitoring  system  for  private 
investment  through  expansion  of  agricultural  value  chain  financing,  staff 
capacity building and policy support activities; 
•  Provide  technical  support  on  agricultural  financing  activities  during  Joint 
Supervision Support and Design Missions, and participate on missions when 
required; and 
•  Working  collaboratively  with  field  network  and  ADBL  and  PFIs,  and  KM 
officer,  identify  innovative  agricultural  value  chain  financing  practices  and 
disseminate these widely within VITA network including  that of PFIs, wider 
ADBL and other Nepalese financial institutions involved in agricultural value 
chain financing. 
Experience 
qualifications 
& 
•  At least 15 years work experience in agricultural financing with proven track 
record of leading successful agricultural value chain financing programmes; 
•  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively in a team 
environment;   
•  Knowledge  and  experience  in  building  capacity  of  stakeholders  and  track 
record of facilitating multi-stakeholder consultation processes; 
•  Excellent  skills  in  speaking  and  writing  Nepali  and  English  languages, 
preference will be given to those who can communicate verbally in one or 
more major regional languages prevalent in Nepal; and 
•  Master’s  degree  or  equivalent  in  commerce,  business  administration, 
accounting,  agricultural  economics,  economics,  agriculture,  or  related 
subject. 
11. 
ToR of Climate Smart Agriculture Finance Specialist 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Climate Smart Agriculture Finance Specialist (CSAFS) 
Programme Coordinator 
Technical supervision / backstopping of Credit Officer, Supply chain co-
ordinators/officers  
Duty station: 
PMO 
Summary of role: 
Under the supervision of the Programme Coordinator (ADBL PMU Director), the 
Climate Smart Agriculture Finance Specialist will provide overall technical 
263 
leadership in planning, implementation, monitoring and reporting of climate 
smart agriculture finance.  Moreover she/he will be fully responsible for 
implementation & reporting of climate resilient and environment safeguard 
related activities and ensure effective coordination, management and capacity 
building of programme staff related bank staffs, supply chain actors for 
effective planning and timely implementation of activities within the 
programme. The CSAFS is also responsible for the professional development 
and coaching of the programme team such that they can run all programme 
activities without external support.   
• Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual 
contract will be extendable based on satisfactory performance against the 
preceding contract assessed by the programme and need. 
Mode of contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
• Ensure coordination and collaborative ownership of stakeholders on climate 
smart activities and environment safeguard initiatives at all levels 
• Assist ADBL to identify gaps in climate smart agriculture financing guideline, 
loan request form, loan appraisal system and implementation of ADBL and 
its PFIs. 
• Assist ADBL to: (i) additionally codify its Credit Manual to: (a) fill the gaps 
identified in the VITA PDR and (b) elaborate on existing provisions related to 
environmental and climate variability aspects, along with extensive cross 
referencing to ADBL’s own policies and procedures scattered over a variety 
of documents and relevant regulatory guidelines issued by NRB; and (iii) 
monitoring closely how well the requirements specified are being 
implemented by also effectively using Bank’s compliance systems; 
• Co-ordinate closely and provide evidence-based feedback on the policies and 
regulations of Nepal Rashtra Bank with respect to environmental issues 
related to banking practices in general and agricultural finance in particular; 
• Assist and advice financial institutions that borrow from ADBL on wholesale 
basis under VITA on environmental issue related to the agricultural 
operations under VITA in particular and agricultural lending in general; 
• Advise ADBL and wholesale borrowers in understanding and devising 
strategies that reduce the portfolio risks originating from events and 
processes such as climate change and unsustainable agricultural practices;  
• Support ADBL in developing suitable crop and livestock insurance products in 
line with ADBL existing agri-insurance program.  
• Assist ADBL to develop climate smart agricultural insurance products that 
could be bundled with climate smart agricultural loan products. 
• Assist ADBL to maintain climate smart agricultural database and agricultural 
market information system (AMIS).   
• Provide technical advice for ensuring effective implementation of strategies 
for climate smart agriculture, and alignment with national activities and 
policies on climate change and environmental safeguard; 
264 
• Work in close coordination with programme staff to ensure activities are 
climate resilient/proof and environmentally sustainable, paying close 
attention to preventing maladaptation; 
• Coordinate the development of training modules / manuals on climate 
change, sustainable/resilient farming, environment safeguard, climate smart 
planning / proofing and financing and on selective basis conduct training and 
capacity building activities to programme staff at various level; 
• Provide technical advice and explore opportunities on the adoption of 
climate and environment smart planning under VITA and ADBL’s operation in 
general;  
• Support M&E officials to establish environment and climate change related 
baseline, and to develop and implement result measurement tools to trace 
the progress 
• Provide technical support on environment and climate change issues during 
Joint Supervision Support and Design Missions, and participate on missions 
when required; 
• Work closely in collaboration with IFAD Country Programme technical 
experts to identify climate-smart innovations, and with KM Officers to 
disseminate related knowledge. 
• Support programme staff to integrate climate and environment risk 
assessment in loan appraisal, technically support to implement and update 
aligning with the central bank and national policies  
• Build coordination among the climate change related stakeholders and 
disseminate programme progress, exchange new learnings, apply new tested 
practices to the programme  
• Assist planning team to adequately include activities and budget as 
suggested by the SECAP  
Required 
• Master Degree or equivalent in, agro-ecology, agri-economics, sustainable 
agriculture or  MBA with at least 10 years experience in agricultural/green 
financing with demonstrable evidence of the results achieved.  
• Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders through 
advisory skills and facilitate multi-stakeholder consultation processes, value 
chain upgrading workshops and training.  
• Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and 
entrepreneurial skills;  
• Possesses high quality attributes on leadership, facilitations and coaching. 
• Excellent spoken and written English.  
• Proven skills in staff and budget management, networking and external 
communication.  
• Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
265 
Experience & 
qualifications 
Preferences given to: 
•  prior experience on working with issues related to environment, climate-
change and sustainable agriculture in the context of a financial institution.     
•  experience in climate smart agriculture and green financing  
266 
12. 
Position: 
Reports to: 
ToR for Infrastructure Expert 
Infrastructure Expert 
Programme Coordinator 
Supervises: 
Infrastructure Procurement Specialist (PMU) 
Sub-engineer/overseers (Provincial offices) 
Duty station: 
PMU 
Summary of role: 
Manage all aspects of the implementation of Component 3 and ensure close coordination 
of the Component with other aspects of the programme. 
Mode of contract: 
Main responsibilities 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable based on  satisfactory performance in the preceding contract assessed by the 
Programme. 
•  Manage the overall process for identification, selection, approval and contracting of 
all sub-projects under Component 3, with support of the Infrastructure procurement 
Specialist 
•  Ensure all sub-project designs and implement reflect appropriate climate smart design 
principles. 
•  Ensure sustainable operation and maintenance plans are in place prior to final approval 
of sub-projects, including institutional, technical and financial aspects 
•  Review and recommend for approval the agreements for each sub-project, including 
verifiable payment milestones  
•  Supervise  and  verify  completion  of  the  approved  works  by  the  sub-project 
implementers, including via the Sub-Engineers/Overseer 
•  Verify  progress  of  each  sub-project  against  payment  milestones  and  recommend 
release of payments as contracted where such payment milestones have been met 
•  Provide  technical  assistance  and  capacity  building  as  required  to  the  sub-project 
Experience 
qualifications 
implementers. 
& 
Required 
•  at least a bachelor degree in civil engineering or equivalent and shall have minimum 
ten (10) years’ of experience in rural infrastructure works, including at least two of: 
irrigation/multi-use rural water systems; roads or buildings/market structures. 
•  Extensive experience of GON infrastructure and procurement systems 
Preferences given to 
•  Experience of multi-lateral donor funded programmes.  
(ii) Inspector of Work                                           
The Inspector of Works shall have diploma or equivalent in civil engineering and must have five (5) 
years’ experience in road and infrastructure works. 
(iii) Surveyor              
13. 
Position: 
Reports to: 
ToR for Infrastructure Procurement Specialist 
Infrastructure Procurement Specialist 
Infrastructure Expert 
267 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
n/a 
PMU 
To  manage  all  aspects  of  the  process  for  the  selection  of  all  sub-project  infrastructure 
works and supervision of their construction of under Component 3.   
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable based on  satisfactory performance in the preceding contract assessed by the 
Programme. 
Main responsibilities 
•  administer  the  process  for  identification,  selection,  approval  and 
contracting of all sub-projects under Component 3 
•  prepare template agreements for the financing of each type of sub-
project and sub-project implementer 
•  define  the  procurement  practices  to  be  used  by  the  sub-project 
implementers  and  ensure  these  are  reflected  in  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
overall GON-IFAD VITA financing agreement 
supervise  and  verify  the  procurement  practices  of  the  contracted 
sub-project implementers for the concerned works 
• 
•  provide  technical  assistance  and  capacity  building  on  appropriate 
procurement and contract management practices to the sub-project 
implementers. 
Experience 
qualifications 
& 
Required 
•  At least bachelor degree in civil engineering, procurement or equivalent and shall have 
minimum seven (7) years’ of experience in infrastructure-related  procurement. 
•  Experience of GON procurement systems 
Preferences given to 
•  Experience of rural engineer, including irrigation, roads or buildings/market structures 
•  Experience of procurement systems under multi-lateral donor funded programmes.  
268 
14. 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
ToR for Sub-engineers/Overseers (Provincial offices) 
Sub-engineers/Overseers (Provincial offices) 
Infrastructure Expert  
n/a 
Provincial offices 
Summary of role: 
Provide on-site supervision of all infrastructure sub-projects approved under the program.  
Mode of contract: 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual contract will be 
extendable based on  satisfactory performance in the preceding contract assessed by the 
Programme. 
Main responsibilities 
•  On-site inspection and verification of works completed under approved sub-projects 
ensure works completed as approved. 
•  Verification of completion of partial works in relation to payment milestones  
•  Verification of any agreed in-kind contributions from the sub-prject implementers 
•  Provision  of  technical  advice  and  input  to  sub-project  implementers  to  address  any 
issues identified 
•  Verification that agreed arrangements for operation and maintenance are in place as 
agreed and as per the agreed time schedule 
•  Support  the  Infrastructure  Procurement  Specialist  (PMU)  to  conduct  spot  check 
verification of procurement practices used and compliance with required procedures 
•  Very that the agreed climate smart elements of the design are implemented as agreed 
Experience 
qualifications 
& 
Required 
•  Diploma or equivalent in civil engineering or similar and must have five (5) years’ 
experience in rural infrastructure works. 
Preferences given to 
•  Prior experience as an Inspector of  Works or similar. 
•  Experience of climate smart design in rural infrastructure 
269 
15. 
Programme Chief Finance Officer 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Programme Chief Finance Officer 
Programme Coordinator 
Accounts Officers 
Accounts Assistants 
Duty station: 
PMU 
Summary of role: 
Ensuring overall fiduciary and financial management, administration and 
reporting of the programme in line with the programme financing agreement. 
Mode of contract: 
To be deputed by the ADBL   
Main 
responsibilities 
• Preparation  of  the  budget  of  the  Programme  following  budgeting 
procedures of the ADBL within specified period for submission to the 
Programme  Coordinator,  Programme  e    Committee  Budgeting  and 
IFAD. 
• Expediting the release of funds for timely implementation of different 
activities  by  the  provincial  and  branch  offices  of  the  ADBL,  partner 
financial  institutions,  local  government  implementing  agencies  and 
beneficiaries.  
• Ensuring  timely  payment  to  the  contractors,  suppliers,  service 
consultants,  beneficiaries  and  other 
providers,  Programme 
implementation. 
• Reviewing  the  supporting  documents  of  the  expenditures  and 
recommending for approval. 
• Ensuring  maintenance  of  accounts  of  the  Programme  properly, 
correctly and timely for preparation of financial statements.   
• Monitoring  fund  utilization  by  the  partner  financial  institutions,  local 
government, implementing agencies and beneficiaries. 
• Preparing periodical financial statements and submission of quarterly, 
half  yearly  and  annual  financial  statements  to  the  Programme 
Coordinator and IFAD.  
• Preparation  and  submission  of  withdrawal  application  and  related 
documents to IFAD on a frequent basis. 
• Reviewing, supervising and monitoring provincial and branch offices 
and provide the required guidance to them.  
• Ensuring  that  the  expenditure  is  within  approved  budgets  and  seek 
amendments  to  the  AWPB  and  prepare  supplementary  budgets,  if 
needed. 
• Ensuring timely settlement of advances. 
• Ensuring adherence of procurement policy of the ADBL and guidelines 
of IFAD.  
• Ensuring maintenance of proper procurements records, fixed assets, 
loan and grant register, designated and Programme bank accounts. 
• Ensuring compliance with legal covenants of the IFAD and prevailing 
Laws.  
• Providing  training  to  the  Programme  finance  and  accounts  staff  on 
accounting and reporting requirement of the Programme. 
• Ensuring completion of internal and statutory audit within deadline.  
270 
• Providing response on the internal audit report and external auditor's 
management letter. 
• Implementation of recommendations of the internal, external auditors 
and supervision of the IFAD missions. 
• Providing  financial  data  required  for  preparation  of  a  Programme 
Completion Report.  
• Any other task assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Experience & 
qualifications 
 Qualification: 
• Chartered Accountant (Member of the ICAN)/post-graduate din commerce 
and accountancy/ business management 
Experience: 
• Minimum 5-10 years of experience in financial accounting of 
Programme/company with post-graduation in commerce and accountancy 
and minimum 3-5 years experience for Chartered Accountants. 
• Computer literacy and proficiency in accounting software and use of spread 
sheets. 
• Good knowledge of accounting. 
• Working knowledge of audit requirements for financial compliances.   
271 
16. 
Accounts Officer – Provincial and Branch Offices 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Accounts Officer  – Provincial and Branch Offices 
Programme Chief Finance Officer 
Accounts Assistants 
Duty station: 
PMU 
Summary of role: 
Ensuring overall financial management, administration and reporting of the 
programme in line with the financing agreement. 
Mode of contract: 
To be deputed by the ADBL   
Main 
responsibilities 
•  Preparing the budget of the Programme as per guidelines and budgeting 
procedures of the ADBL within specified period. 
•  Reviewing the supporting documents of the expenditures and 
recommending for approval. 
•  Ensuring timely payment to the contractors, suppliers, service providers, 
Programme consultants, beneficiaries and other implementation. 
•  Ensuring maintenance of accounts of the Programme properly, correctly 
and timely for preparation of financial statements.   
•  Monitoring fund utilization by the partner financial institutions, local 
government, implementing agencies and beneficiaries. 
•  Preparing periodical financial statements and submission of quarterly, half 
yearly and annual financial statements to the PMU.  
•  Ensuring the expenditure incurred for the Programme within the approved 
budget. 
•  Ensuring timely settlement of advances. 
•  Ensuring adherence of procurement policy of the ADBL and guidelines of 
IFAD.  
•  Ensuring maintenance of proper procurements records, fixed assets and 
Programme bank accounts. 
•  Submission of the financial statements in the format required for 
preparation of the withdrawal application to PMU. 
•  Ensuring compliance with legal covenants of the IFAD and prevailing Laws.  
•  Ensuring completion of internal and statutory audit as per program within 
deadline.  
•  Providing response on the internal audit report and external auditor's 
management letter to the PMU 
• 
Implementation of recommendations of the internal, external auditors and 
supervision of the IFAD missions as directed by the PMU. 
•  Perform physical verification of Programme fixed assets each year. 
•  Providing financial data required for preparation of a Programme 
Completion Report.  
272 
•  Any other task assigned by the Chief Finance Officer and Programme 
Experience & 
qualifications 
Coordinator. 
Qualification: 
•  Graduate  degree 
management 
in 
commerce  and  accountancy/business 
Experience: 
•  3-5 years of experience in financial accounting of Programme/company.     
•  Computer literacy and proficiency in accounting software and use of spread 
sheets. 
•  Good knowledge of accounting. 
•  Working knowledge of audit requirements for financial compliances. 
273 
17. 
Account Assistants – PMU, Provincial and Branch 
Offices 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
Summary of role: 
Account Assistants – PMU, Provincial and Branch Offices 
Accounts Officer 
n/a 
PMU 
Ensuring overall financial management, administration and reporting of the 
programme in line with the financing agreement. 
Mode of contract: 
At Provincial and Branch officers - to be deputed by the ADBL   
Main 
responsibilities 
At PMU – to be recruited for programme duration 
•  Checking supporting documents of the Programme expenditures and 
advance. 
•  Preparing payment and adjustment vouchers.  
•  Maintaining the Programme accounts as per requirement of the 
Programme. 
•  Preparing monthly bank reconciliation statements of the designated and 
Programme bank accounts. 
•  Preparing monthly financial report with the actual and budgeted figures for 
each activity and the variance thereof. 
•  Making timely payment of expenditures incurred for Programme activities 
and advances. 
•  Following up with the implementation partners and Programme staff to 
ensure that they submit their monthly statements within the stipulated 
time. 
•  Preparing the financial statements in the format required for preparation of 
the withdrawal application for submission to PMU.  
•  Providing accounts, statements and other documents as may be required 
by the Statutory/ Internal Auditor to ensure the timely completion of their 
assignment. 
•  Maintaining the record of fixed assets, contract register and contract 
monitoring forms. 
•  Conduct physical verification of fixed assets. 
•  Performing such functions as may be delegated by the Account Officers. 
Experience & 
qualifications 
Qualification: 
•  Post-graduate degree in Commerce and Accounting/business management 
Experience: 
•  1-2 years of experience in financial accounting of Programme/company. 
274 
•  Computer literacy and proficiency in accounting software and use of spread 
sheets. 
•  Good knowledge of accounting. 
275 
18. 
ToR for Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist (TGIS)   
Programme Coordinator 
Technical supervision/backstopping of Soci-Economic Mobilizers,   
Duty station: 
PIU 
Summary of role: 
Mode of contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
The Targeting, Gender and Inclusion Specialist will be responsible for 
mainstreaming, operationalising and budgeting nutrition, gender, youth, social 
inclusion and targeting across the programme components and activities. 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual 
contract will be extendable up to end of Programme based on satisfactory 
performance in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
• Coordinate and lead the targeting process with appropriate guidance and 
process to reach the vulnerable, poor, women, youth and other priority 
disadvantage groups in the Programme area and ensure their meaningful 
participation and share of benefits from Programme interventions. 
• Monitor progress in such areas and ensure evidence on progress is regularly 
reported to the Programme Director and Steering Committee. 
• Integrate Nutrition, Gender, Youth, Targeting in the M&E system, in the 
AWP/Bs and Progress reports and in the social inclusion/gender strategy of 
VITA  
• Implement the targeting strategy of VITA by identifying implementation 
arrangements, risks and mitigation measures and analyse data to ensure that 
there are no adverse impacts on target groups as a result of programme 
• In close collaboration of the PMU staff, Develop a gender and social inclusion 
strategy, including implementation mechanisms, to ensure  opportunities to 
support gender equality and women’s empowerment and facilitates 
women’s participation in subsequent interventions; for promoting youth 
engagement in project activities and ensuring the benefits reaches the target 
groups.  
• Undertake regular capacity assessment and provide capacity-building for 
staff at the field level, PMU, implementing partners and service providers on 
gender, youth and nutrition 
• Lead the designing and development of comprehensive package of business 
skills training incorporating a) aspects of the Gender action learning system 
(GALS ‘Lite’), b) Financial knowledge- household financing, group financing 
and business financing, c) Business Skills, d) Climate Resilient Agriculture, e) 
Nutrition, f) Farm Diary, and d) Use of calculator, numeracy along with 
simple calculation like multiplication, division, calculation  with pictorial and 
reading text considering pedagogy in coordination with other thematic 
specialists. 
276 
• Coordinate with Socio-Economic mobilization managers  to develop training 
modules /manuals to strengthen capacities of Socio- Economic mobilizers 
along with other sectoral specialists in enhancing knowledge, understanding 
and implementation skill for targeting, gender equality, women 
empowerment and inclusion of poor, youth and marginalized section of the 
production clusters.   
• Work with ADBL SME and Agribusiness Department, Credit Department and 
others to identify and remove obstacles to increased financial inclusion, 
including ability of women, youth, poor and other disadvantaged groups to 
access loans for productive investments as small-scale producers.  
• Coordinate and contribute in design and conduction of Poverty Propensity 
Index (PPI) and simplified Programme- Women Empowerment in Agriculture 
Index (Pro- WEAI) survey in the Programme.   
• Facilitate in implementation of the business skills and GALS lite package and 
facilitate to enhance financial access, production of marketable produce and 
market linkages of the participated small holder farmers. 
• Support Programme Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) team to establish 
gender, youth and inclusion baselines for the M&E system, design of 
farm/enterprise diary and result measurements, and reporting of the 
supported supply chains. 
• Provide strategic support to Programme team for inclusion of poorer and 
vulnerable households' participation in respective Supply chains investment 
proposals and producer organisations  
• Contribute to the knowledge development by generating lessons/cases 
studies in respective Supply chains and facilitate knowledge exchanges on 
targeting, gender and inclusion and others. 
• Responsible for the overall content and the links with other external 
knowledge on targeting, gender and inclusion. 
• Maintain close coordination with other Supply chain leads and other 
specialists and Programme partner to ensure for effective mobilization and 
the services are reached to the poorer, vulnerable and marginalized farmers. 
• Provide technical backstopping support to the socio-economic mobilizers 
and Programme team regarding mobilization, gender, youth, nutrition and 
targeting.     
• Together with M&E and knowledge management staff, establish an M&E 
system that captures data and analyses disaggregated data on gender, 
youth, socio-ethnicity, poverty status, indigenous people etc  
• Provide technical assistance and guidance to field level staff in the 
implementation of gender, youth and nutrition sensitive interventions and 
nutritional challenges in programme  areas 
• Document lessons learnt and achievements in mainstreaming nutrition, 
youth and gender in the programme  
277 
Experience & 
qualifications 
• Serve as a focal point for communication between the programme and 
others working on issues of targeting and social inclusion in government, 
implementing agencies, other development projects and IFAD. 
• Participate in the development of detailed TORs and tender documents of 
national and local service providers to various project components to ensure 
that target groups will be able to participate effectively in all components 
and meet the programme’s targets 
• Analyse opportunities to work with key partners, including in policy 
engagement on nutrition, gender, youth, indigenous people and related 
domains and periodically attend MSPs to progress such policy engagement. 
• Develop localised training materials on the relevance of improved nutrition 
and gender to climate resilient productivity, sustainable value chains and 
livelihoods diversification. On nutrition, this should include a specific 
measures and actions on early childhood nutrition and steps to improve the 
nutritional status of teenage girls. 
• Analyse aspects of administration, security of tenure and delineation of 
ancestral domains; regulatory processes that can improve indigenous 
peoples' capacity to leverage their cultural and biodiversity resources across 
and participation of indigenous peoples' communities in local development, 
local governance and land-use planning and how through project 
interventions these aspects could be enhanced. 
Required 
• At least 10 years work experience in the development sectors and with 
demonstrated results on socio-economic mobilization, gender, youth, 
nutrition and social inclusion issues in agriculture Supply chains.   
• Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders through 
designing training manuals considering pedagogy, delivering training 
advisory skills and facilitate effective socio-economic mobilization.  
• Experiences in capacity building on gender, youth, mobilization, business 
skills and financial access, market linkages.  
• Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and 
entrepreneurial skills;  
• Experience in projects integrating targeting and social inclusion  
considerations across components/activities and M&E;  
• Possesses high quality attributes on leadership, facilitations and coaching. 
• Good spoken and written English.  
• Proven skills in staff and budget management, networking and external 
communication.  
• Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
• Highly motivated and committed to poverty alleviation and gender and 
social inclusion  
Preferences given to 
278 
• Experience in working with projects dealing with agriculture supply chains, 
public private partnership and service market development.  
279 
19. 
ToR for Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Duty station: 
Summary of role: 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Programme Coordinator 
n/a    
PMU 
Under the direct supervision of Programme Coordinator, M&E Specialist is 
responsible for guiding the overall M&E strategy and implementation of related 
activities within the Programme including providing timely and relevant 
information to PIU and Programme stakeholders. S/he is also responsible for 
setting up the M&E systems based on the log-frame and M&E plan and 
ensuring its implementation efficiently and effectively. The PMU M&E specialist 
will work closely with the Heifer M&E team. 
Mode of contract: 
Rolling annual contract with a probation period of six months. The annual 
contract will be extendable up to end of Programme based on satisfactory 
performance in the preceding contract assessed by the Programme. 
Main 
responsibilities 
M&E: 
• Develop and maintain a comprehensive M&E system to be fully described in 
a comprehensive M&E Manual (as part of the PIM), including detailed 
methodologies, tools (standard data collection forms and analysis tables), 
processes and responsibilities for the monitoring of Programme 
implementation (activities, outputs) and the measurement of results 
(outcomes and impact). 
• Help develop and maintain a Management Information System (MIS) for the 
recording of M&E data and the preparation of standard consolidates tables 
for the tracking of activities, outputs and outreach. 
•  Organize periodic field visits in order to verify the quality and validity of 
M&E data submitted by grassroots implementers and partners; and collect 
formal and informal feedback from Programme beneficiaries on their 
satisfaction with Programme activities. 
• Prepare regular analysis on AWPB implementation, Programme performance 
and outcomes and impact. 
• Prepare the TOR for the baseline, mid-term and completion surveys, 
including the description of the proposed survey methodology (sampling 
frame and sample size, draft questionnaire) and provide the appropriate 
guidance to the selected service providers in order to ensure timely and 
reliable survey reports. 
• Design and conduct periodic qualitative outcome surveys, including Annual 
Cluster Tracking Surveys (in close consultation with PMU technical staff) in 
order to collect data and evidence of early outcomes or feedback from 
beneficiaries. 
280 
• Provide the necessary initial training and continuous guidance and technical 
support to all PMU staff and grassroots implementers in charge of data 
collection in order to ensure data quality and reliability. 
• Prepare quarterly, half-yearly and annual progress reports, as well as more 
regular summary performance tables and other dashboards; and prepare 
and update digital maps showing all Programme sites and interventions. 
• Provide inputs for the fine-tuning of the targeting strategy (in particular for 
the definition of adequate selection criteria) and ensure that the M&E 
system will help track targeting and outreach performance (in particular sex-
disaggregated data on the number of beneficiaries, number of youth, 
number of beneficiaries from marginalized groups, types of benefits 
received). 
• Prepare consolidated ORMS tables and other data tables, and regular update 
of Logframe indicators to be submitted annually to IFAD. 
• Identify implementation problems, bottlenecks or delays and inform 
Programme Management about the need for corrective actions.  
Knowledge management: Support the KM Specialist (under Heifer) to: 
▪  Prepare a KM Plan to identify the key topics worthwhile studying during 
implementation (e.g. women and marginalized groups’ participation in 
agriculture, women access to legal land titles, applying climate smart 
agricultural techniques, pro-poor Supply chain, etc.), the key tools and 
processes for the collection of required data, information and evidence, 
and the key tools and processes for the documentation and sharing of 
knowledge, lessons learned and best practices. 
▪  Ensure that lessons learned and best practices are properly identified and 
documented through various means (studies, videos, case studies, print and 
web articles) and that they are regularly shared to the relevant audience 
(Programme partners, policy makers, development partners) through 
appropriate means (including the participation in relevant meetings and 
events). 
▪  Organize and facilitate knowledge sharing workshops and events. 
Required 
▪  University degree (economics, humanities, rural development, or 
equivalent) 
▪  At least 7 years of experience in the operation of M&E systems of 
development Programmes 
▪  Computer literacy, with proficiency in Word, Excel, PowerPoint and data 
management software (Access, SPMS) 
▪  Rigor, intellectual honesty and sense of organization 
▪  Ability to work under pressure and within a multidisciplinary team. 
▪  Strong managerial and communication skills (including conflict resolution). 
▪  Perfect command of English. 
281 
Experience & 
qualifications 
Preferences given to: 
• Experience in working with agriculture Supply chains Programme and data 
management through MIS operations. 
282 
8.4  Annex 13: ESMP Matrix  
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
1) Environmental 
Potential threat to forest and biodiversity resources including: 
Encroachment or expansion 
of agriculture in forest area 
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Potato 
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
% reduction of 
fallow land  in 
municipalities (ha) 
Value chain activities will be 
confined only in agriculture lands. 
To address the shortage of 
agricultural land, project will 
encourage leasing of 
fallow/private cultivable lands.  
I) Meeting with 
farmers to 
identify and 
explore use  of 
abandoned land; 
Explore with 
municipalities, 
forest user 
groups, and 
forest officials on 
encroachment 
management  
O
F
D
/
G
U
F
/
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
p
i
c
i
n
u
M
,
U
M
P
.
l
l
a
u
n
n
a
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
Mainstream activity in 
Comp 1. No incremental 
cost 
(A) Secondary 
sources: Registries 
from municipalities, 
local Forestry Groups 
and/or provincial 
Forestry 
Departments ; (B) 
Primary source: VC 
Cluster surveys. 
e
s
a
B
283 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Excessive harvesting of 
forest products and open 
grazing   
Goats  
Project will encourage stall 
feeding and provision will made 
to plant enough number/area of 
forage and fodder species;  
Carrying capacity assessment for 
Goat value chain prior to cluster 
engagement 
II) Evidence based 
consultation with 
interested 
communities to 
establish credible 
and sustainable 
development  
plans for Goat 
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
(a) % of farmers 
with herds in stall 
feeding system 
 (b) % of 
municipalities with 
acceptable "current 
herd vs maximum 
carrying capacity" 
ratios 
(d) % of farmers 
using feed from 
sustainably 
managed fodder 
and forage sources  
l
a
u
n
n
A
E
F
T
I
o
M
d
n
a
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
p
i
c
i
n
u
m
h
t
i
w
U
M
P
A
T
I
V
Farmers Diaries, 
Farm Diaries, VC 
Cluster surveys, 
Baseline/mid 
term/final impact 
surveys,  
$50,000 for GIS-based 
carrying capacity 
assessment for all 
targeted Goat/dairy 
municipalities 
Via Supply chain 
development facility 
(SDF)  
284 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Increased water pollution 
from agriculture runoff due 
to the use of fertilizers and 
pesticides 
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Potato, Cereal, 
Fish  
Improper solid waste 
management  
Livestock, Fish, 
Wholesale 
market  
i
m
u
d
e
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
Awareness, 
capacity building 
and easy access 
to new practices 
and technologies  
(i) Mulching, right balance of 
organic and inorganic fertilizer; 
(ii) Training and advice on proper 
use of pesticide and fertilizers, 
regular soil testing; (iii) Improved 
fish pond management to keep 
water healthy: restricting use of 
antibiotics and medicines, proper 
aeration keeps the water healthy; 
(iv) Introducing waste water 
management system; (v) 
Enhanced testing and 
enforcement regime for 
pesticides especially at wholesale 
market and strategic location 
Awareness, 
capacity building 
and easy access 
to new practices 
and technologies  
(i) Solid Waste management plan 
mandatory for project supported 
wholesale and satellite market; 
(ii) Work with market 
management board and local 
authorities ; (iii) Recycling and 
reuse of waste generated during 
production to processing 
including use to make bio-
compost ; (iv) Capacitate 
smallholders and micro 
entrepreneurs on sustainable 
waste management by easy and 
effective technologies and better 
hygiene 
285 
(a) Baseline/mid 
term/final impact 
surveys; Farmers' 
diaries (b) Project 
training records 
(i)-(iv) via Supply chain 
development facility e.g. 
training of service 
provider to promote 
practice. 
(a) % farmers using 
efficient water use 
technologies  
(b) Number of 
farmers trained in 
IPM 
(c) Include Water 
Quality parameters 
to be measured 
(d) Include soil 
quality parameters 
to be measured 
s
r
e
v
o
r
p
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
t
e
t
a
v
i
r
p
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
l
a
c
o
l
,
R
E
F
I
E
H
j
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
o
r
p
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
/
e
c
n
i
v
o
r
P
e
s
a
B
)
a
(
Project 
"infrastructure" 
records; Training 
reports; Reports 
from field inspection 
visits by PIU staff 
(a) % of project-
supported markets 
with  a waste 
management plan 
and an efficient 
waste management 
system                                                            
(b) No of capacity 
building events 
organized for 
smallholders and 
micro entrepreneurs 
a
u
n
n
A
l
Minimal incremental 
costs. 
Covered under ‘Supply 
chain development 
facility ’ budget line 
(Comp 1) 
(v) $30,000, financed 
between SDF and 
state/municipal 
government partners 
who have mandate for 
market 
management/food 
safety 
(i)-(ii) Mainstreamed 
within Comp 3.  
Est. $5,000 additional 
capacity building on 
good practice waste mgt 
in markets 
(iiii)-(iv) via Supply chain 
development facility e.g. 
training of service 
provider to promote 
practice. 
Minimal incremental 
costs. 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
(a) % of farmers 
using sound IPM 
practices                                                                  
(b)% of 
municipalities with 
an increase in the 
land area managed 
through IPM 
(A) Secondary 
sources: Registries 
from municipalities, 
local Forestry Groups 
and/or provincial 
Forestry 
Departments ; (B) 
Primary source: VC 
Cluster surveys 
.
Mainstreamed in Comp 
1 via  
i) Business skills training  
ii) Supply chain 
development facility for 
delivery of appropriate 
technical advice to 
farmers. 
No incremental costs. 
Land and soil degradation  
Crops 
Crops, 
Livestock 
Threat (such as chances of 
particular pathogen or pest 
arriving, population declines 
of native species, altering 
key ecosystem process like 
hydrology, nitrogen fixation 
etc) from introduction of 
exotic varieties and breeds 
Social 
Potential increase on the 
workload on women 
(especially from road 
maintenance activities) 
Awareness  
(i) Tillage operation and grazing 
will be controlled in land with 
moderate to steep slopes (50-
300). Conservation terraces will 
be promoted in such lands.; (ii) 
Cultivation will be discouraged in 
land with slope more than 30 
degree (iii) Integrated Pest 
Management approach will be 
promoted to discourage use of 
chemical fertilizers and pesticides 
; (iv) Crop varieties which 
demands excessive use of 
fertilizer and water will be 
discouraged; (v) Landslide prone 
areas will not be selected for any 
kind of value chain. If value chain 
activities are planned proximity 
to such areas, adequate land 
cover practices such as plantation 
will be encouraged.  
Introduction of only 
certified/verified varieties 
i
m
u
d
e
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
j
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
o
r
p
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
/
e
c
n
i
v
o
r
P
U
M
P
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
b
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
a
/
n
(c) hectares of land 
under sustainable 
agricultural land 
management 
Ex ante:  Component 
1 activities to ensure 
that only 
certified/verified 
seeds suppliers are 
supported under the 
various Funds or 
capacity building 
activities. 
Capacity building  
(i) Ensure women’s participation 
from the activities planning 
phase; (ii) Promote awareness of 
smallholders and entrepreneurs 
on work division ; (iii) Ensure that 
women are not over-represented 
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
D
/
e
c
n
i
v
o
r
P
t
i
n
U
t
c
e
o
r
P
j
(a) % of women 
among meetings' 
participants (VC 
meetings, cluster 
meetings, 
municipalities 
:
)
b
(
d
n
a
)
a
(
)
c
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
286 
i
d
m
/
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
n/a 
No incremental cost 
(a) Lists of 
participants in 
meetings or 
awareness raising 
events 
.
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
Mainstreamed in the 
following activities a) 
group 
mentoring/capacity 
development b) 
Business skill training 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
in the maintenance work for the 
newly rehabilitated roads; (iv) 
Ensure women’s participation in 
capacity building events ; (v) 
Develop and implement GESI 
guidelines 
All 
Within high risk communities 
negative social dynamics 
from greater social and 
economic empowerment of 
women  
(i) Implementation of the Heifer 
Corner Stone approach. 
 for highly vulnerable women; (ii)  
Inclusion of a "light GALS" 
module in Business Skills 
curriculum. 
i
h
g
H
o
t
i
m
u
d
e
M
meetings) and 
awareness raising 
events 
(b) % of women 
among project 
training, capacity 
building events and 
exchange visits 
(c) % of women 
beneficiaries with 
increased time 
spent for leisure 
% of highly 
vulnerable women 
among the Heifer 
Corner Stone 
approach/ 
GALS-lite 
beneficiaries 
covering such issues, c) 
the Heifer Corner Stone 
approach. 
No incremental costs 
(b) Training records 
(c) IFAD 
empowerment 
survey as included in 
the COI survey. 
PPI survey; 
Qualitative survey on 
women 
empowerment 
Via 
GALS – budget = 
$550,000 
GALS-lite aspects of 
Business Skills training. 
No incremental costs 
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
U
.
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
d
n
a
287 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
All 
Investment failing: Depletion 
of HH assets and livelihoods' 
base to the point where they 
can no longer recover; 
Indebtedness by loan 
beneficiaries unable to repay 
their loans. 
Limited or less than optimal 
investment on land owned 
by women  
All 
i
m
u
d
e
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
(a) % of farmers 
repaying their loans 
according to agreed 
schedule                (b) 
No of beneficiary 
farmers compelled 
to sell their 
collateral because 
they are unable to 
repay their loans.                 
(i) Affordable investment 
pathways ; (ii) Pre-screening 
suitability of selected 
commodities for poor and 
vulnerable households  
(iii) Critical risk insurance among 
new products and services 
developed by ADBL or partner 
FIs; (iv) Group or municipality or 
supply chain guarantee and 
collateral free loan; (v) Working 
with in groups to improve market 
linkages which reduces selling 
risk; (vi) Link with technical 
service providers; (vii) Business 
skill training; (viii) Encourage 
saving and wealth generation 
practice ; (ix) Better use of 
remittances  
Heifer's Corner Stones based 
approach, sensitization via events 
business and skill development 
training 
Sensitization, 
Capacity building, 
group works  
% of women 
sensitized or 
capacitated via 
trainings  
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
R
E
F
I
E
H
U
M
P
288 
 i-ii: Mainstreamed in 
design. No incremental 
cost. 
iii: NRB promoted 
insurance products – no 
incremental cost.  
New insurance products 
development: via 
concurrent GIZ project 
with ADBL.  
No incremental cost to 
VITA. 
iv: Mainstreamed under 
Comp 2.2 and 
municipality 
engagement under 
Comp 1. 
v-ix: Mainstream Comp 
1 activities. 
No incremental cost 
APR 
No incremental cost 
l
a
u
n
n
A
l
a
u
n
n
A
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Limited participation of 
women due to limited access 
to titled land 
All 
Lack of nutrition 
improvement  
All 
Climate change  
Knowledge share via group 
events and trainings like business 
and skill development training 
Group work 
Gender and nutrition sensitive 
value chains, awareness of 
optimal nutrition practices  
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
R
E
F
I
E
H
,
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I
R
E
F
I
E
H
U
M
P
U
M
P
% of women 
beneficiary  
% of household and 
women reporting 
minimum dietary 
diversity (MDDW) 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; Farmers' 
diaries ; and ADBL 
MIS. 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; Farmers' 
diaries ; and ADBL 
MIS. 
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
.
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
d
n
a
e
n
i
l
i
d
M
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
e
n
i
l
d
n
E
No incremental cost 
No incremental cost 
289 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Flood and landslide  
Vegetable, 
Milk, Fish, 
Cereals    
Drought, water shortage  
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Cereals 
Awareness  
(i) Project will develop the value 
chain location/site selection 
criteria which will exclude 
activities in flood and landslide 
prone areas and encourage to 
use land where farmers are 
traditionally doing farming ; (ii) 
Banks of fish ponds raised to 
prevent flood, farmers will be 
encouraged to use fish-net, store 
tanks; (iii) Provisions of crop, 
livestock and other value chain 
based enterprises insurance  ; (iv) 
Development of sound site 
selection criteria and regular field 
inspection visits by PIU Engineer.     
Awareness  
(i) Improve management 
practices: Small irrigation, water 
efficient technologies, infield 
water harvesting, water 
catchment pond ; (ii) Selection of 
drought tolerant species will be 
encouraged; (iii) Mandatory 
provisions of crop, livestock and 
other value chain based 
enterprises insurance 
i
m
u
d
e
M
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
% of beneficiary 
households with a 
crop or livestock 
insurance   
Include indicators 
for mitigation 
measure (ii), (iii) and 
(iv) 
% of household 
using improved 
water management 
practices  
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys ; Farmers' 
diaries ; and ADBL 
MIS. 
.
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
U
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
Baseline/mid 
term/final impact 
surveys ; Farmers' 
diaries. 
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
i: mainstreamed in 
cluster screening 
process 
ii: Promoted through 
technical advice in 
Business Skills and local 
service provider 
development. Actual 
costs of work paid for by 
beneficiaries as part of 
farm upgrading 
investments 
iii: beneficiaries pay 
insurance premiums, 
some of which is 
subsidized by NRB. 
iv) for infrastructure, 
site verification is 
mainstream part of 
Comp 3 monitoring. No 
incremental costs. 
promoted via Business 
Skill classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Supply chain 
development facility) 
Investment in 
associated equipment/ 
insurance is by 
beneficiaries via private 
investment. 
e
s
a
B
)
a
(
290 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
Change in disease timing and 
outbreaks  
Vegetable, 
Banana, 
Cereals 
Occurrence of wind storms 
Banana, 
Vegetable, 
Cereal 
Heat stress 
Milk  
j
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
o
r
p
e
c
n
i
v
o
r
P
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
U
M
P
(a) % of farmers 
using sound IPM 
practices    
(b) % of beneficiary 
households with a 
crop or livestock 
insurance   
% of beneficiary 
farmers reporting 
an improved access 
to processing 
infrastructure or 
improved storage 
capacity 
,
m
r
e
t
-
d
m
i
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
d
n
a
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
Baseline/mid 
term/final impact 
surveys ; Farmers' 
diaries. 
Baseline/mid 
term/final impact 
surveys 
Promoted via Business 
Skill classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Supply chain 
development facility). 
Specific demo activities 
via SDF 
$30,000 
Promoted via Business 
Skill classes plus local 
service providers 
(through Supply chain 
development facility.) 
Investment in 
equipment/ materials is 
by beneficiaries via 
private investment. 
Promoted via Business 
Skill classes plus local 
service provider 
(through Supply chain 
development facility). 
No incremental cost to 
VITA 
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
w
o
L
w
o
L
Awareness  
(i) Promotion of IPM; (ii) Capacity 
building and awareness events to 
maximize use of bio chemicals 
and fertilizers (iii) Promotion of 
crop, livestock and other value 
chain based enterprises 
insurance 
(i) Wind break plantation ; (ii) 
Improve solid mound to 
strengthen plan; (iii) Additional 
pole for Banana  
Capacity building  
(i) Decrease of milk production in 
heat stress period is natural 
phenomenon. It has been 
reported that the production 
decrease by 30-40% during heat 
stress time. Project will 
encourage increasing investment 
on processing (milk powder, UHT) 
that allows storage to milk supply 
from flush to lean season; (ii) 
Improve  fodder and feeder 
production and feeding practices; 
(iii)  Good monitoring; (iv) 
Promotion of improved 
husbandry practices; (v) 
Promotion of effective animal 
291 
Environmental, social and 
climate Impacts  
Commodities 
as main driver 
of risks  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Risk rating 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & Source 
Responsible 
Institution 
Indicators 
Frequency 
Source of data 
health services and livestock 
insurance 
292 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
1/17
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Moderate
Low
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
High
Moderate
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Budgeting
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Internal Controls
Accounting and financial reporting
External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/17
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
No risk envisaged
Low
No risk envisaged
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Risks stem from the fact that Nepal is a young democracy with a new
federal constitution and new three tier system of government with
elected leaders at each level. The first elections were held in 2017
and the next elections are due in 2022 (2nd year of the programme). 
The inherent level of risk is moderate due to the 2017 elections having
been completed without major incident and resulted in a governments
with substantial majorities which have been functioning for over
almost 3 years at the federal as well as in 7 states. This has provided
much needed political stability. However, the effectiveness of the
constitutional arrangements, including the newly introduced system of
federalism, is to be tested over time and required adjustments made.
In addition, there are still a small number of political groups which are
unwilling to join the mainstream.
Mitigations:
Mitigation is by having ADBL as the LPA, which is an independent
regulated bank and so less susceptible to disruption within
mainstream government ministries alongside internal financing
mechanisms that reduce expose to changes in finance from MoF.
Governance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The inherent governance risks to the programme are moderate
overall stemming from the effectiveness of the new constitutional
arrangements, including the newly introduced system of federalism
and assignment of powers across three tiers of government and that
these systems, checks and balances need to be tested over time and
required adjustments made.
Mitigations:
3/17
Mitigation is via the choice of Lead Programme Agency and Co-
implementing partner. ADBL as the LPA is regulated and supervised
by the Central Bank and therefore less prone to such external
governance risks. Similarly, Heifer Nepal is a part of a well-respected
INGO. Further, the programme works closely with the new state and
local government but is not reliant on them for implementation and
delivery – other than for specific infrastructure sub-project under
Comp 3, where TA will be provided and works supervised.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
There is a risk of political pressure (especially at sub-national level) in
the selection/location of wholesale market infrastructure works under
Component 3. Potential impacts on the programme are likely to be
low and can be mitigated against, given this is only a minor part of the
programme results chain.
Mitigations:
have clear and transparent processes for selection and prioritization of
infrastructure works to be financed, including that they are endorsed
by a majority of participants at the relevant MSPs. 
• for Windows 1 and 2, i.e. wholesale market infrastructure, to only
happen in Year 3 onwards to allow time for both the current high
political pressures to normalize as well as to have the MSPs more
established and able to drive the infrastructure priorities. 
• for Window 3 on small-scale community-level infrastructure, the
programme will support the municipal authorities to develop
productive infrastructure master plans for the sector to increase
alignment with overall strategic priorities in the municipality.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
COVID19 pandemic is likely to have a significant negative impact on
the economy for at least the first 2 years of the programme. In FY
2019, Nepal achieved its third consecutive year of +6% growth for the
first time in more than 50 years. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, GDP
growth was projected to average 6.5% over the medium term. Most
recent World Bank projections (April 2020) are for growth to slow to
2.8% in FY2020 and remain subdued in FY2021 reflecting lower
remittances, trade and tourism, and broader disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 outbreak. Consequently, the fiscal and current account
deficits are likely to increase significantly. Risks to the outlook stem
primarily from a large-scale domestic transmission of COVID-19 and
limited capacity of government to implement emergency relief and
recovery measures.
Mitigations:
Potential negative impacts on the programme are reduced by: 
a) the programme is primarily focussed on higher return food
crops/livestock for local and national market where demand growth is
relatively inelastic with short supply chains, and 
b) central role of private investment which is not primarily reliant on
the fiscal position of the government.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
4/17
There is a specific risk to the programmes potential for scaling-up of
improved agricultural lending in the wider financial sector from the
persistent periodic liquidity constraints, especially for term finance,
which may discourage PFIs from expanding agricultural lending
regardless of the market opportunity. The term liquidity issues is
closely related to the structure of sources of funds in the sector and
prudent term matching requirements.
Mitigations:
Specific mitigation measures on the term liquidity risks are: 
• Wholesale term loans to be made available to partner FIs via the
VITA subsidiary loan under Component 2 
• Continued policy engagement with Nepal Rastra Bank and others on
agriculture finance promotion policies – potentially also including
support to launch innovative wholesale financing instruments including
agriculture bonds and mechanisms to reallocate funds to the sector
from commercial banks not meeting their minimum lending obligations
under the national deprived and priority sector lending policies.
Fragility and Security
No risk envisaged
the project is not in a fragile state.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Overall risks are low as sector strategies and policy framework in both
agricultural and financial sector are highly favourable to the
programme, as seen in the ADS, the deprived/priority sector lending
policies and financial inclusion road map and action plans. The
transfer of substantial powers concerning the agriculture sector to
state and municipal level are also expected to create increasingly
accountable policy frameworks to the needs of rural people..
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation measures are required.
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Policy Development and Implementation
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
5/17
Technical service provision to farmers – There is a risk that
municipalities will develop free services that will undermine the
development of more sustainable market-based services. However,
the risk is small as the municipalities do not have sufficient budget or
human resources to establish or sustain such services – which were
already overstretched under the previous government system and
many are already seeking better alternatives than purely public
services. Municipal authorities are now under increasing pressure
from their resident farmers to provide better services but lack the
human resource and budgets to do so. Experience from HVAP also
suggests that there is a low risk from free public services if properly
managed by the programme. Under HVAP, the programme supported
108 private service providers to serve farmers. This included
collaborations with the predecessors to the current Agriculture
Knowledge Centres and Veterinary Hospitals and Livestock Service
Centres. Ongoing experience from RERP, show that a majority of rural
municipal authorities are actively seeking better alternatives to invest
at this level.
Mitigations:
Based on HVAP and RERP experience, VITA will partner with the
municipal authorities, with technical backstopping from AKCs and
VHLSSC, to develop a pool of local private technical service providers
offering affordable good quality advice and services to local farmers.
The programme will partner with municipal authorities to identify,
training and mentor suitable technical service providers in their
municipality, on a cost sharing basis. Similarly, VITA will partner with
state Ministries of Land Management, Agriculture and Cooperatives
(MoLMACs) to ensure that the AKCs and VHLSSCs, who have more
higher qualified staff, are provide technical backstopping to the
municipalities and local service providers supported by the
municipalities and the programme as per their mandate.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Grants & subsidies – There is a risk that generous or poorly targeted
grants and subsidies from other major programmes may hold back
genuine market-driven investment by smallholders instead hoping to
receive grants, be captured by elites, distort markets as well as
crowding out mainstream finance as credit is replaced by
unsustainable grants. Reforms are already being introduced by GON
to move away from grants and to reform input subsidies – including
developing a Kishan Card to enable direct financial transfers to
farmers (mandated to ADBL).
Mitigations:
6/17
Given VITA is well aligned with GON/MOFs reform agenda in this
area, the mitigation strategy within the programme includes the
following: 
1) Intensive business skills capacity development of producers and
producer groups to empower them to approach their farming as a
business. This provides them with the know-how and confidence for
them to understand and be able to make their own investments in
their farming without relying on grants and subsidies. 
2) ADBL to pro-actively engage with ASDP and LSIP to offer to
provide loan financing to their supported farmers but subject to a
reduced grant contribution from their project, of a target level of not
more than 30%, to reduce market distortion and reduce reliance and
expectations of grants and subsidies. In such circumstance, such
loans could be booked against the term financing provided through
VITA to ADBL. 
3) Pro-active policy engagement (evidence-based) with MOF and
MOALD, as well as at state and municipality level, on the viability of
using affordable loan financing as a credible and inclusive alternative
to matching grants to promote investment in agriculture – both for
working capital and fixed capital investment. 
4) Accelerating development and deployment of the Kishan Card by
ADBL to enable a faster move to direct transfers instead of general
input subsidies (this is the focus of the Nepal RPSF grant proposal) 
5) For PMAMP, active engagement with MOALD to look beyond
grants - for example initially to pilot the use of term loans to finance a
majority of the investments instead of grant. Similarly, working with
MOLMACs to pilot loan financing instead of grants. The emphasis will
be on building the confidence and understanding of
MOALD/MOLMACs that loan financing is a credible, affordable and
more effective alternative to grants. This is also likely to involve
working with municipal and state authorities to pilot the use of
organizational guarantees, e.g. provided by the municipality, for loans
to farmers in their community. ADBL already has provision for such
types of guarantee.
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Rural populations in Nepal have inherent vulnerability to weather-
related environmental conditions such as draughts, floods, landslide,
rainfall and temperature risks.
Mitigations:
Mitigation is by: appropriate screening and site selection for potential
production clusters to avoid production on high risk sites – informed
by local knowledge; pre-engagement carrying capacity assessments –
especially for livestock and MAPs clusters; promotion of water-efficient
production practices as well as investment in small scale irrigation and
multi-use water systems.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
7/17
Inherent climate change risks in Nepal are high and well documented,
being among the most vulnerable countries to climate change. Climate
trends and future projections for Nepal indicate that seasonal
variations in temperature and precipitation will increase, resulting into
more frequent and intensified extreme weather events and likely
impacts such as i) increased incidences of new and existing diseases,
pest and insects, especially in higher altitudes; ii) greater variability in
rainfall patterns within the year with increased water demand leading
to higher risks of temporary water shortages for rainfed agricultural
production; iii) increased heat stress to livestock from a small increase
in the number of warm days, especially in the lean season, leads to
reduced milk production and reduced growth in poultry during these
periods. Careful design of the programme can largely mitigate these
risks to the programme.
Mitigations:
Mitigation is by: selection of climate resilient commodities to be
promoted in different locations and agro-climatic condition,; promote
and train small-scale producers and MSMEs on tools to help them
factor in climate change considerations into their investment and
production plans; promotion of climate smart agriculture technologies
and services through strengthening of local support markets and with
partner financial institutions to screening of climate risks in their loan
appraisal and strengthening the capacity of staff in the area of climate
change. VITA will help to reduce climate related risks and impacts by:
improving farmers’ understanding of climate risks to their farm
business (Sub-component 1.1); increase availability and access to
climate resilient technologies and advice to implement climate
adaptation measures (through Support Market Development under
Sub-component 1.2); providing loans to finance climate adaptation
investments (Component 2.1); investing in multi-use water system and
small scale irrigation to reduce the risks from temporary water
shortages, and upgrade farm access roads for year round access to
farms particularly during periods of heavy rain (Component 3). The
programme areas are moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate
change.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
The programme is highly relevant to both the government agenda and
priorities of its target groups. It is a scaling-up of best practice from
within the country that achieved strong impacts.
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation required.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Technical design risks are generally low as VITA is principally a
scaling-up programme of proven best practice from within Nepal
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation required.
8/17
Risk:
Moderate
Low
A specific technical risk to Component 2 stems from the financial
sector’s heavy reliance on collateral-based lending, potentially limiting
ability for otherwise credit worthy clients to access investment loans.
Mitigations:
Mitigation relating to the wider use of loans by smallholder includes: 
Promotion by ADBL and partner FIs of non-collateral lending for small
loans up to NRP200,000, as per NRB regulations, especially linked to
livestock and crops guarantees e.g. from the Deposit and Credit
Guarantee Fund; A focus on commodities where production can be
started with small initial investments as a first step on affordable
investment pathways below this level of NRP200,000 for collateral
free loans; Piloting and promotion of institutional guarantees from
municipal authorities and producer groups for their farmers, especially
for youth; Promotion of value chains financing instruments, where
appropriate to the specific supply chain, with ADBL and other PFI as
the financing partner within these arrangements. This also includes
working with NRB, as necessary, on appropriate regulations, guidance
and policies for the expansion of such financing instruments.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Inherent institutional capacity risks are high in Nepal, as evident in the
recent country programme performance. If not addressed both in
design and implementation, these create significant risks of
substantial delays in programme delivery.
Substantial
Substantial
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Mitigations:
9/17
Substantial measures have been incorporated into the design to
mitigate these, but the effectiveness of these measure must be
continuously monitored by GON and IFAD, especially in the early
years of implementation, with close implementation support. 
Mitigation is via the planned programme implementation
arrangements and choice of partners by involving ADBL and Heifer as
lead partners, as well as by creating State Programme Coordination
Forums and Municipal Coordination Forum in each state and
municipality to coordinate among stakeholders. 
The programme adopts a simple implementation structure, with one
LPA overseeing all components. The choice of ADBL as the LPA
reduces institutional capacity risks due to its large and capable agri-
business staff, with almost 500 staff with both an agricultural and
finance background and a focus on agriculture as a business. In
addition, in Nepal, the existence of substantial experience and
domestic cadres familiar with the specific approaches should further
reduce the start-up and operational risks if ADBL can draw on this
practical experience and capacity. The implementation partnership
with Heifer will bring valuable additional capacity, especially on
market-oriented socio-economic mobilization and producer group
development. 
Internally, ADBL currently have a strong senior management team
under a recently appointed CEO which should provide stability during
the critical first 3 years as will mainstreaming VITA in ADBL
structures. This senior management team has been closely involved
in all aspects of VITA design. 
In addition, there are around USD 2 million of institutional capacity
building programmes planned for ADBL and programme partners
across the three Components.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Specific capacity risks within ADBL are into two areas: 
• Component 2: The programme requires the upgrading of systems
and processes required for ADBL’s operational capacity to cost-
effectively extend its coverage and outreach to larger numbers of
small-scale producer in more remote areas. The risks here could be
substantial if there are large delays in upgrading the required systems
and processes, as without these systems it will be difficult for the
ADBL branches to adequately serve the required numbers of
programme beneficiaries. 
• Component 3, ADBL itself does not have in-house experience of
administering an infrastructure finance facility, though there is
available capacity in the market in Nepal.
Mitigations:
Component 2: Mitigation for delays in the upgrading of ADBL systems
and processes is through the early commencement of such upgrading
plans, prior to programme effectiveness – as they also form part of
ADBL’s own strategic development plans. VITA includes a substantial
capacity building programme of around $1.5 million in Sub-component
2.2 to address these and other risks. In addition, IFAD is expected to
approve an Rural Poor Stimulus Facility in Q3 2020 to accelerate this
upgrading activity – both for automatic loan processing and the
development and deployment of a Kishan Card and App. 
Component 3 management risk mitigation will be by the PMU
contracting a small team of infrastructure professionals to manage this
facility and close supervision by IFAD of procurement and technical
aspects of the Component implementation.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
10/17
Coordination within and between the three tiers of government has
emerged as a critical issue across multiple sectors. The risk is that this
may create disjointed policies and public investment programmes
between the three tiers – with potential gaps, duplications or
contradictions. 
While VITA implementation is not within these three tiers of
government, it may be impacted by a lack of coordination within the
government itself.
Mitigations:
The choice of ADBL as the LPA substantially reduces the
programmes direct exposure to these risks – as it is a parastatal
institution with a manadate to work equally with all branches of
government. ADBL regional and branch managers have good working
relationship with government officials in their area, not least as ADBL
has long been an important partner for agriculture development. Heifer
also brings strong networks in many locations, especially with
municipal governments. 
Additional mitigation measure for coordination risks include:
establishing a State Programme Coordination Forum in each state to
coordinate among programme stakeholders within the state and
similar Municipality coordination forum in each municipality; signing
MoUs between ADBL and each State and municipal government for
collaboration on the programme, setting out expected contributions
and roles; routine participation of relevant government staff in the
MSPs at corridor and hub level for each commodity, and; providing
capacity building training to state and municipality staff on key
programme approaches for inclusive supply chain development to
raise understanding.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
M&E risks are moderate as the LPA is a regulated nationwide
commercial bank with sound data collection, management and
reporting systems and a strong IT department. Additional programme
specific data and MIS tools will build on best practice from HVAP and
RERP already available in the country programme.
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation measures are required.
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
11/17
• The bank has not implemented the IFAD funded project. 
• The bank has qualified professional accountants in the Finance and
Account Department in the Head Office. Other bank staff in the Head
Office, provincial and branch offices have adequate academic
qualification and experienced in the maintaining accounts. 
• The existing staff of the bank will be deputed for the project and one
finance assistant will be recruited for the PMU. 
• The existing staff do not have experience on IFAD funded projects
but they can be trained for accounting and reporting requirement of
the IFAD. 
• There are written job description of each accounts staff.
Mitigations:
• One finance assistant with required qualification for the PMU will be
recruited. 
• The accounts staff required for the project will be deputed and they
will be made accountable for the project with clear written job
description and accountability lines. 
• Training will be provided to the finance staff to maintain accounts
and prepare AWPB, withdrawal application and financial statements
as per requirement of IFAD. 
• Project implementation manual (PIM) will be developed for effective
financial management with clear procedures and controls,
responsibilities of the project finance staff.
Budgeting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
• Budget is prepared by the respective cost centers and draft budget of
each province is finalized in the workshop with consultation of
province chief, branch managers and representatives of the head
office. The consolidated budget of the ADBL is finalized in the head
office under coordinator of Chief Executive Officer among the Deputy
General Managers and Department Chiefs. 
• Staff are not aware about the IFAD format of AWPB. 
• Budget is being finalized by end of June but the AWPB is to be
submitted to IFAD and entered in the Line Ministry Budget Information
System (LMBIS) by 15 May. 
• There is no periodic review of the budget performance.
Mitigations:
• Separate budget heads for the loan and grant to the ADBL will be in
the federal budget. The loan budget will be in the financing budget of
the MoF. 
• The budgeting process of the ADBL and government will be followed
while the AWPB will be prepared in the format specified by the IFAD. 
• The arrangement will be made to prepare and submit the AWPB 60
days before start of the fiscal year. 
• Preparation of periodic statement of budget with actual.
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
12/17
• ADBL has implemented one ADB funded project having imprest fund
but does not have experience in preparing withdrawal application. 
• Foreign currency exchange risk is borne by the government. 
• The ADBL does not value and account counterpart funds. 
• The ADBL did not have experience in implementing such projects as
it provides loan to the borrower for their projects.
Mitigations:
• The designated bank account will be opened for the grant in USD.
Two separate project accounts for loan and grant will be opened in the
ADBL in Nepalese currency. The advance of USD 10 million will be
provided for loan to the loan project account and amount as specified
will be transferred from designated account to the grant project
account. 
• The designated bank account and projects bank accounts will be
maintained on imprest system. 
• The counterpart funds received in cash or kind valued at the
prevailing market price will be accounted separately to monitor
counterpart funds and project expenditures. 
• IFAD loan disbursement handbook and PIM developed for the
project specify disbursement procedure, requirement and interval of
submission of WA. 
• Training will be imparted to finance on disbursement procedures.
Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
• There are no segregation of duties in D class branch office. 
• The same person prepares the bank reconciliation in the branch
offices due to only two staff. 
• Internal audit of the proposed project will have to be conducted.
Mitigations:
• Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be prepared explaining the
financial management system and segregating of duties. 
• Segregation of duties as far as possible. 
• Detailed control activities will be explained in the PIM which includes
good transaction trail, competent project staff, segregation of duties,
physical protection of assets, and timely progress and performance
reporting
• Internal audit department will conduct internal audit of the project
expenditures and compliance with the financial policies and legal
covenants on quarterly basis. 
• PMU should take actions on internal audit findings and
recommendations as instructed by the Audit Committee..
Accounting and financial reporting
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
13/17
Accounting Systems, Policies & Procedures 
• There are no accounting field in the chart of accounts for
components, disbursement categories, and sources of funds. 
• There is no accounting manual there are Payment Procedures and
Financial Administration Bylaws for financial management. 
• All invoices and supporting documents are not defaced with PAID
stamp in few offices. 
• There is no separate fixed assets accounting system. The fixed
assets register is maintained in excel spreadsheet up to date and
tallied with the fixed assets register on annual basis. 
• Beneficiaries contribution are not accounted.
Reporting and monitoring 
• ADBL does not have practice of reporting expenses based on
categories, components and funding sources. 
• The financial statements are not generated in the required format by
the software.
Mitigations:
• The existing chart of accounts will be customized to record
components, disbursement categories, and sources of funds. 
• The policy of accounting counterpart funds received in cash and kind
will be developed to report total cost of each project activity and total
project expenses. 
• Training will be provided to the project staff in project accounting
policies and procedures. 
• PIM will specify detail reporting and monitoring requirements and
templates for preparing financial statements in the format consistent
with IFAD reporting requirements. 
• Accounting fields will be incorporated in the existing chart of account
to report expenses based on components, disbursement categories,
and sources of funds. 
• PMU staff are to be trained for financial monitoring and oversight on
implementing agencies.
External Audit
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
External Audit 
• Independent Chartered Accountant firms recommended by the
Office of the Auditor General (OAG) and appointed by the annual
general meeting (AGM) conduct audit of the ADBL. 
• Audit of the ADL is being conducted within 6 months but the AGM
used to be held after 6 months. 
• The audit reports were qualified for unreconciled amounts in inter-
branch account. 
• The auditors have issued disclaimer of opinion due to non-
compliance with all provision of the Nepal financial reporting
Standards in FY 2015/16 and 2016/17.
Mitigations:
• A Chartered Accountant firms appointed for the ADBL will be hired
for the project to conduct external audit. 
• Specific requirement of IFAD will be communicated to external
auditors to deliver adequate audit report. 
• Conduct audit for submission of audit report to IFAD within 6 months
after the end of each fiscal year. 
• Implementation of auditor’s recommendations.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
14/17
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the Borrower’s regulatory and institutional capacity and
practices (including compliance with the laws) are inadequate to
conduct the procurement in a manner that optimizes value for money
with integrity.
Mitigations:
1). Review of procurement plans and ensure the use of competitive
procurement method. 
2). Project to prepare General Procurement Notice - on start of project
and disclose GPN in public websites. 
3). Procurement information and monitoring information to be
publically available in project website.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements
(including the handling of complaints regarding, for example, SH/SEA
and fraud and corruption) are inadequate to safeguard the integrity of
project procurement and contract execution, leading to the unintended
use of funds, misprocurement, SH/SEA, and/or execution of project
procurements outside of the required time, cost and quality
requirements.
Mitigations:
1). Established IFAD prior review and post review requirement relative
to risk in LTB. 
2). TA to support the review of technical deliverable and contract
management and administration. 
3). Maintain records and promote reporting of allegation to IFAD 
4). Gather occasional feedback on project procurement staff (risk that
specific skill enables the individuals to ''rent seek'' to manipulate
results of evaluation service provider and consultancy contracts)
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the implementing agency does not have sound
processes, procedures, systems and personnel in place for the
administration, supervision and management of contracts resulting in
adverse impacts to the development outcomes of the project.
Mitigations:
1). Manage the recruitment and selection of a procurement officer 
2). Support specialist through Technical Assistance (intermittent) -
external consultant
Public Procurement Processes
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
The risk that procurement processes and market structures (methods,
planning, bidding, contract award and contract management) are
inefficient and/or anti-competitive, resulting in the misuse of project
funds or sub-optimal implementation of the project and achievement of
its objectives.
15/17
Mitigations:
1). Issue Letter to the Borrower to mitigate risk 
2). Review and approve PP Plans based on IFAD new format 
3). Monitor performance indicators through NOTUS and ICP Contract
Monitoring 
4). Monitor performance and risk through periodic project supervision
and independent audit report 
5). Review and update PIM to address controls weakness based on
mitigation measure identified in the PRM
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
There is a risk that excessive production of livestock and collection of
MAPS, especially in the hills, may expand to unsustainable levels
damaging local biodiversity.
Mitigations:
Mitigation will include pre-screening of all potential clusters/locations
for these commodities including a carry capacity assessment at the
municipality or ward level to confirm sustainable capacity and not
promote production beyond this level. 
Secondly, improved production systems will be widely promoted – 
• for livestock this includes an exclusive focus on stall-based
production systems with planting of additional fodder and forage crops
(and ceasing open-grazing) and promotion of more productive herd
(by improvement in genetics) to help increase production without
corresponding increases in herd size 
• for MAPS via the domestication of production of previously wild
gathered species (e.g. as with timur under HVAP).
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
No risk envisaged
no risk
Cultural Heritage
no risk enviaged
Indigenous People
no risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Labour and Working Conditions
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged.
16/17
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
There are no envisaged risks of significant negative impacts on
community health and safety. In fact, the programme expects to have
several positive impacts – through the promotion of IPM and reduced
use of pesticides as well as through greater availability of high
nutrition value foods in households and communities, which are a key
driver of health.
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation measures are required.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Physical and Economic Resettlement
No risk envisaged
Low
Low
Low
Low
no risk envisaged.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
There is a low risk of the programme significantly increasing
greenhouse gas production. In the case of cattle, the programme
focus is to improve the productivity of the dairy cattle and specifically
not to increase herd size. In fact, gains in productivity are expected to
contribute to an overall reduction in herd – as less productive animal
are removed from the herd. Furthermore, reduction in open grazing
and damage to forest land through the promotion of stall-based
production for goats, should reduce pressure on forests leading to
some recovery.
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation measures are required
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Rural populations in Nepal face inherent climate variability from the
monsoon-based climate and geography of the country. As a result,
they have developed a high adaptive capacity. Compared to this
inherent variability, expected climate change impacts of the 25 year
programme impact horizon are modest.
Mitigations:
To reduce exposure to the inherent risks, the programme will apply
appropriate production site selection alongside promotion of
production technologies that reduce exposure to increased variability
in rainfall – including poly-tunnels, mulching, water-efficient production
practice as well as investment in multi-use and small scale irrigation.
Stakeholders
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
17/17
Risk:
Low
Low
Engagement and coordination risks are low as the programme widely
uses the open multi-stakeholder platform processes proven to be
highly effective at stakeholder engage in HVAP and other projects.
Moderate
Moderate
Mitigations:
No additional mitigation measures are required.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
There is a risk that complaints and grievances, both legitimate and
vexatious, if not appropriately handled could delay programme
delivery – especially through delays to recruitment and key
procurements – for example if cases are referred to the Commission
for Investigation of Abuse of Authority (CIAA) .
Mitigations:
Consistent with prevailing laws and regulations, the programme will
establish a grievance process for programme beneficiaries and
stakeholders to be monitored by the Programme Steering Committee. 
The programme will also maintain a high degree of transparency in all
aspects of its operation, regularly publishing information on its
activities. 
Finally, by minimizing the use of direct grants and subsidies to
individuals, POs and businesses, the programme reduces the
incentives for vexatious complaints and other disputes related to the
allocation of resources.
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Sustainability  of  benefits  within  the  supported  supply  chains  can  be 
approached at three different levels: the individual farm, the producer group/cooperative 
and  the  supply  chain.  The  exit  strategy  and  its  success  is  closely  linked  to  results 
achieved at each of these levels. In total, the combination of the programme impact on 
farmers, producer organizations and the whole supply chain, as well as the private sector 
focus of the programme, is expected to ensure favourable results on sustainability of the 
programme benefits.  
Farm level. At the small-scale farmer level, the programme will support a portfolio 
of  crops  and  livestock  that  both  have  market  demand  and  are  suitable  to  local  agro-
ecological  zones  and  climatic  conditions.  Environmental  management,  resource  use 
efficiency  and  climatic  adaptation  will  be  enhanced  in  the  messages  and  investment 
support to farmers. At the same time the long-term approach to mentoring and training 
in business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve small-scale producers’ 
potential  to  sustain  the  benefits  from  programme  interventions  even  when  programme 
support ends.  
Producer  organization  level.  A  key  focus,  and  significant  resources  of  the 
programme,  is  on  building  the  capacity  of  producer  organization  to  become  successful 
and  reliable  actors  in  their  local  supply  chains.  The  PO  will  receive  focused  capacity 
building  and  training  as  well  as  sustained  mentoring  over  a  3-4  year  period.  The 
objective is that all producer groups in supported clusters should graduate to being fully 
independent,  financially  robust  and  self-managing  within  four  years  of  programme 
engagement. Success in this area will be a decisive factor for the whole sustainability of 
programme results and benefits. Heifer have a proven track record in this area and will 
be leading these activities.  
Supply  chain  level  (including  support  markets).  Where  the  supply  chains  have 
achieved genuine competitiveness, they are highly likely to continue – as the producers 
and businesses will be making money. In addition, where the producers and businesses 
have  established  regular  processes  of  mutually  beneficial  dialogue  and  networking, 
including via the MSPs, then such process are likely to be continued by their members in 
some  form.  Key  service  providers  that  also  profit  from  these  processes,  such  as  the 
banks  and  FIs,  are  also  expected  to  have  an  interest  in  supporting  the  continuation  of 
the  MSP-type  functions  in  the  supply  chain  to  help  sustain  competitiveness  and 
continued  investment  and  growth.  As  such,  VITA  will  seek  to  have  the  primary  actors, 
particular the leaders of producer groups, their agribusiness partners as well as leading 
financial  service  providers,  take-over  the  routine  organization  and 
agricultural 
management of the MSP from the third year of MSP operation onwards. There will then 
be  a  period  with  the  primary  actors  leading  and  some  backstopping  by  the  VITA  team, 
that  be  gradually  be  phased  out  before  the  end  of  the  programme.  In  established 
clusters and supply chains such functions may have minimal costs and be readily taken 
on by the supply chain actors themselves. 
Similarly,  VITA  is  expected  to  result  in  a  better  balancing  of  public  and  private 
sector  led  delivery  of  agricultural  services  to  increase  their  sustainability  and  relevance 
to producers.  
The  programme  will  invest  in  a  range  of  public  and  productive  infrastructure. 
Arrangements for management, operation and maintenance of these will be a mandatory 
requirement  prior  to  approval  of  each  sub-project.  These  will  follow  established  best 
practice  in  the  country  –  including  the  market  management  committee  arrangements 
seen in Bulbule wholesale market in Surkhet (supported by HVAP) recently recognized as 
one  of  the  two  best  run  markets  in  the  country.  For  community-level  irrigation  this  will 
follow best practices, for example those of ADB’s Community Irrigation Project. 
Scaling-up strategy after programme completion focuses on three dimensions: 
In  terms  of  systemic  improvements  in  access  to  financial  services  for  agriculture, 
three elements are central to the exit strategy:  
Improvement in the quality of loan demand, from the side of small-scale producers and SME, 
through the widespread business skill training, is to be done a sufficient scale within the three focus 
states such that it start to become the norm, with a large pool of producers and business skills 
trainers in their communities to share experience and knowledge with others to replicate these 
practices. It is also anticipated the municipal authorities are highly likely to want to hire the trained 
business skill facilitators to provide similar training to others people living in the municipality – 
especially youth and other priority groups. 
Nepal
Value chains for Inclusive Transformation of Agriculture
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
25 November - 17 December 2019
Document Date:
19/07/2020
Project No.
2000002697
Report No.
5455-NP
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/2
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$74,265,000
N/A
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$74,265,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
2/2
The VITA programme will produce gender transformative outcomes as it strengthens women’s agency and economic empowerment by supporting them to take leading
roles in their supply chains and facilitating a combination of efficient production technology and methods (such as labor saving technologies including drip irrigation,
mulching, stall feeding), easy access to credit and other financial services, market access, a comprehensive package of financial and business skills (covers business
skills, financial knowledge, aspects of the Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) – ‘GALS’-lite; nutrition and balanced diet, climate change).
Nutrition
Nutrition promotion will be mainstreamed through a comprehensive packages such as promoting availability and utilization of knowledge on nutritious food through
GALS “lite” as well as increased access to high nutrient value foods through a focus on the supply chains for such items.
Youth
VITA is youth sensitive and will work with older adults and community leaders to take action towards providing better opportunities for their young adult children –
especially those under 25 years - for example, local arrangements to increase opportunities to rent land for production and the provision of institutional guarantees from
the municipality to facilitate access to finance for investment. VITA is attracting youth to agriculture through many measures such as identification and promotion of
successful young producers as role models for modern farming, especially young women, use of social media and other channels to specifically market opportunities to
youth, support mechanisms to address youth’s limited access to land and finance for production.
 No social inclusion themes
