Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises Project in 
the Niger Delta of Nigeria (LIFE-ND) 
Project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  1 November 2017 
Project No. 
Report No: 
2000001043 
4674-NG 
West and Central Africa 
Programme Management Department 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II 
Project description 
A. 
Project area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Components and outcomes 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III  Project implementation 
A. 
Approach 
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning   
D. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
VI  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A. 
B. 
Project costs 
Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
vii 
xiii 
1 
1 
3 
5 
5 
9 
10 
19 
24 
24 
26 
28 
28 
30 
33 
34 
37 
37 
38 
39 
40 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Percentage of value chain participants making at least 50 percent annual profit on their cost of 
production or processing 
Figure 2: The incubation process in LIFE-ND 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Basic facts about the Niger Delta states 
Table 2: Level of Risk, Challenges and Opportunities facing young males and females in the Niger Delta Region 
Table 3: Enterprise outreach projections 
Table 4: Key commodities and benchmark enterprise scale for support by LIFE-ND 
Table 5: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Year (USD) 
Table 6: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Expenditure Account (USD) 
Table 7: Programme Financing Plan by Component (US$'000) 
Table 8: Programme Financing Plan by Disbursement Account (US$'000) 
i 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12: 
Appendix 13: 
Appendix 14: 
Delta 
Appendix 15: 
Appendix 16: 
Appendix 17: 
Appendix 18: 
region   
Country and rural context background 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Detailed project description 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Financial management and disbursement 
Procurement 
Project cost and financing 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Draft project implementation manual 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Contents of the Project Life File 
43 
52 
60 
66 
92 
128 
132 
142 
146 
150 
162 
170 
172 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) Review for LIFE Niger 
Youth and women models 
Participating state selection 
Nutrition mainstreaming in LIFE-ND 
173 
195 
199 
201 
Expectations of NDDC on the impact of LIFE on youth restiveness in the Niger Delta 
211 
ii 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$ 1.0 
= 
= 
Nigerian Niara 
N$ 305 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
ADP 
AfDB 
AWPB 
BDS 
BoA 
BPP 
CADA 
CASP 
CBO 
CBN 
CDD 
CBNRMP 
CPE 
CSOs 
DFID 
EIRR 
ESMP 
FIRR 
FGN 
FO 
FMARD 
FMF 
GALS 
GHG 
IITA 
IPSAS 
KMC 
LGA 
LGLO 
LIFE-ND 
M&E 
MFI 
MoU 
MSMEDF 
MTR 
N$ 
NDDC 
NIRSAL 
NPSC 
Agricultural Development Programmes 
African Development Bank 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business Development Service 
Bank of Agriculture 
Board of Public Procurement 
Commodity Apex Development Association 
Climate Change Adaptation and Agribusiness 
Support Programme 
Community-Based Organisation 
Central Bank of Nigeria 
Community-Driven Development 
Community Based Natural Resource 
Management Programme 
Country Programme Evaluation 
Civil Society Organisations 
Department for International Development 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Financial Internal Rate of Return 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Farmers’ Organisation 
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development 
Federal Ministry of Finance 
Gender Action Learning System 
Greenhouse Gases 
International Institution for Tropical Agriculture 
International Public Sector Accounting Standard 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
Local Government Area 
Local Government Liaison Office 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises 
Project in the Niger Delta of Nigeria 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Microfinance Institution 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Micro Small and Medium Enterprise 
Development Fund 
Mid-Term Review 
Nigerian Niara 
Niger Delta Development Commission 
Nigerian Incentive Based Risk Sharing System for 
Agricultural Lending 
National Project Steering Committee 
iv 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
NRCRI 
O&M 
PCO 
PEFA 
PDR 
PCR 
PPA 
PPP 
RB-COSOP 
RIMS 
ROCC 
RPCO 
RUFIN 
RTSC 
SECAP 
SMEDAN 
SPCO 
SSC 
TSC 
VCDP 
VSCGs 
YEAP 
National Root Crop Research 
Operation and Maintenance 
Project Coordination Office 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Project Design Report 
Project Completion Report 
Public Procurement Act 
Public-Private Partnership 
Results-Based Country Strategic Opportunities 
Programme 
Results and Impact Management System 
Rural Outreach Coordination Committees 
Regional Project Coordination Office 
Rural Finance Institution Building Project 
Regional Technical Steering Committee 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
Agency of Nigeria 
State Project Coordination Office 
State Steering Committee 
Technical Support Committee 
Value Chain Development Project 
Village Saving and Credit Groups 
Youth Employment in Agriculture Programme 
v 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Map of the project area 
vi 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Executive Summary1 
Country and rural development context 
1.  Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, has 42 percent of the youth and 36 percent of the women 
either unemployed or underemployed. The particular issue of youth underemployment in the rural 
areas  -  estimated  at  23.5  percent  -  requires  redress  to  alleviate  poverty  both  now  and  into  the 
future. Oil exports which account for 95 percent of export earnings and 70 percent of government 
revenue,  have  been  declining  since  2014  due  to  reduced  oil  production  caused  by  falling 
international  prices,  and  increasing  sabotage  of  oil  infrastructure  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  by 
restive youth. As a result of these issues and policy uncertainty, the overall GDP growth rate has 
steadily decreased from 6.7 percent in 2014 to negative 1.8 percent in 2016. Thus, Nigeria is in 
recession.  This  situation  has  posed  major  challenges  to  public  finance  and  the  ability  of  the 
government to  implement some of its programmes since 2015.  Agriculture  which contributed 21 
percent  to  the  GDP  in  2015  remains  underdeveloped.  Nigeria's  production  of  food  has  not  kept 
pace with population growth and the costly importation of food has resulted in rise  in food prices 
placing pressure on the poor.  
2.  Rural poverty. Nigeria is predominantly a rural economy with over 60 percent of the population 
living in rural areas, 90 percent of whom are engaged in subsistence farming. Rural poverty was 
estimated at 44.9 percent in 2013 against an urban poverty incidence of 12.6 percent. Inadequate 
access  to  land,  untitled  agricultural  land  which  limits  users  from  investments  in  productivity 
enhancements,  private  sector  exclusion,  and  lack  of  initial  capital  and  reliable  market  outlets 
discourage youth and women from engaging in agriculture to improve their livelihood. Smallholder 
productivity is often less than 70 percent of the potential and is declining due to soil exhaustion, 
low  uptake  of  technology,  poor  agricultural  practices  and  low  participation  of  private  sector  in 
extension  services.  Resulting  from  those  factors,  there  are  low  production  and  supporting 
services, as well as contraction of raw material supply to industries and consequent lack of jobs. 
Especially,  rural  youth  and  women  face  limited  alternative  employment  opportunities  and  weak 
governance which contributes to higher rural poverty.  
3.  Policy  and  institutional  framework.  Nigeria  has  initiated  several  key  strategies  against  these 
formidable challenges. Since 2010, the Federal Government has recognized the need to diversify 
export earnings and alter its economic growth strategy. The Vision 20:20 Road Map emphasised 
a  diversified  private  sector-led  economy,  agricultural  growth,  and  employment  creation.  The 
development agenda of the current  administration,  building  on  Vision  20:20,  is  focusing on anti-
corruption, economic recovery, employment creation and security. Aligned to Vision 20:20 are the 
agricultural  sector  policy,  Green  Alternative  Roadmap  for  Agriculture,  and  the  Strategic 
Framework  for  Youth  Employment  and  Job  Creation  of  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and 
Rural  Development.  The  Green  Alternative  prioritizes  four  pillars:  food  security,  job  creation, 
import  substitution  and  economic  diversification  using  a  decentralized  coordination  framework, 
while  the  Strategic  Framework  for  Youth  Employment  and  Job  Creation  emphasizes  youth 
employment  in  agriculture.  Nigeria  also  has  coherent  policies  for  youth  and  gender  inclusion, 
improved  nutrition,  and  promotion  of  rural  financial  inclusion,  to  which  the  design  of  this  project 
aligns. 
1  Mission  composition:  Ben  Odoemena,  Country  Programme  Officer,  ICO  IFAD,  supported  by  Rich  Pelrine,  Lead 
Regional  Economist  WCA  IFAD,  and  Tom  Anyonge,  Lead  Adviser  PTA  IFAD;  Other  IFAD  staff:  Mikael  Anderson, 
Institutions 
Finance  and  Expenditure  Management  Specialist;  Elizabeth  Ssendiwala,  Targeting,  Gender  and 
Development;  Amaka  Odenigbo,  Nutrition  Mainstreaming;  Steven  Jonckheere,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation;  Oussama 
Ameziane,  COSTAB:  IFAD  consultants:  Samuel  Eremie,  Programme  Management  Specialist  and  Team  Leader; 
Swandip  Sinha,  Financial  Inclusion  Specialist;  Jones  Lemchi,  Enterprise  Development/Analyst;  Molokwu  Christopher, 
Economist/EFA  Specialist;  Mayowa  Fasona,  SECAP  specialist; Amath  Sene  Pathe,  Lead  Environment    and  Climate, 
WCA  IFAD;  Jeroen  de  Zeeuw,  ESMF  consultant;  Several  Government  officials  including:  Keke  Bongos-Ikwue,  LIFE 
Desk  FMARD;  O.O.  Oyebanji,  Technology  Generation,  FMARD;  Vera  Onyeka,  Innovation,  KM  and  Communication, 
FMARD;  Sanni  Abiodun  Fatai,  Infrastructure  Engineer,  FMARD;  Sugra  Mahmood,  Deputy  Director  of  Extension, 
FMARDand Marcel Eshiogu, Programme Management, NDDC.     
vii 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
4.  The Niger Delta region. The priority agricultural commodities in the region are cassava, plantain 
and  rice,  with  fish,  cocoa,  oil  palm  and  poultry  also  featuring  prominently  in  some  states.  The 
region’s rural economy is driven by small and medium enterprises, but poor access to land, credit 
and  reliable  market  outlets  are  a  big  challenge  for  youth  and  women  inclusion.  Farm  land  is 
fragmented  and  average  landholding  per  family  is  less  than  two  hectares.  Though  youth  may 
have  gone  to  school,  decent  jobs  are  not  plentiful,  and  youth  normally  lack  start-up  capital 
necessary  to  begin  enterprises.    The  few  rural  enterprises  that  exist  show  potential  to  create 
meaningful  jobs  and  employment  for  youth.  Absolute  poverty  incidence  ranges  from  45  to  65 
percent  in  the  Niger  Delta  states.  Malnutrition  is  prevalent  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  with  5.3 
percent acute malnutrition, 12 percent underweight children, 20 percent stunting among children 
under five years of age, and 4 percent acute malnutrition among women of reproductive age (15-
49  years).  Household  level  food  insecurity  affects  88  percent  of  crop  farm  households  in  the 
region.  Rising  temperatures  due  to  climate  change  are  projected  to  result  in  increased,  higher 
intensity rainfall, as well as earlier rains in the Niger Delta region which could worsen soil erosion. 
The sea level rise as a result of rising temperature is expected to increase flooding which could 
negatively affect agriculture, coastal infrastructure, coastal ecosystems, and human settlements. 
Rationale  
5.  The  Livelihood  Improvement  Family  Enterprises  Project  for  the  Niger  Delta  (LIFE-ND)  directly 
supports Nigeria's agricultural policy and the Strategic Framework for Youth Employment and Job 
Creation.  This  Strategic  Framework  addresses  the  large  and  growing  number  of  restless 
unemployed youth, especially in rural areas. Nigeria's highest potential for decent job creation in 
agriculture  is  in  the  south,  including  the  Niger  Delta,  where  small  agribusinesses  have 
demonstrated  remarkable  success  under  the  now  concluded,  IFAD-financed  Community  Based 
Natural  Resource  Management  Programme  (CBNRMP).    Under  CBNRMP  youth  engaged  in 
agriculture  based  on  high  market  demand,  untapped  opportunities  to  produce  and  market 
profitable  commodities,  and  high  private  sector  interest  in  sectoral  development.  The  LIFE-ND 
project  will  develop  the  supply  of  skilled  youth  labour  using  the  incubator  model  piloted  by 
CBNRMP  where successful rural  agribusinesses  were facilitated to mentor neighboring  youth to 
produce greater volumes, leading to higher  value enterprises and community incomes, and jobs 
for  the  youth.  The  project  will  also  address  the  pronounced  gender  gap  in  access  by  women  to 
land, productive assets, technology, finance, and markets. This design of LIFE-ND further builds 
on  the  successes  of  IFAD-assisted  Value  Chain  Development  Project  (VCDP)  that  continues  to 
create  sustainable  stakeholders'  platforms  which  link  rural  smallholders  to  private  off-takers;  as 
well as, the IFAD-assisted Rural Finance Institution Building Project (RUFIN) that developed rural 
finance institutions and promoted local level savings to raise investment funds. 
6.  The  LIFE-ND  Project  Concept  Note  was  approved  alongside  the  2016-2021  Results  Based 
Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Programme  (RB-COSOP)  by  the  IFAD  Executive  Board  in 
December 2016. The goal of the RB-COSOP is “a rural economy in which the targeted population 
can  derive  prosperity  and  equal  benefit  from  economic  growth”.  This  goal  is  supported  by  two 
strategic objectives: (i) the sustainable, climate-resilient economic and financial inclusion of young 
people  in  profitable  agribusiness;  and  (ii)  strengthened  institutions  at  the  state  and  community 
levels to work with private actors in key value chains. The RB-COSOP targets poor families, the 
majority of them are unemployed youth and women, living in rural and peri-urban areas. The RB-
COSOP  also  recommended  a  more  focused  project  intervention  in  a  smaller  number  of  states 
where  commitment  to  IFAD  projects  is  high.  LIFE-ND  targets  the  RB-COSOP's  first  Strategic 
Objective  of  inclusion  of  young  people  in  profitable  agribusiness.  The  project  is  aligned  to  the 
national  LIFE  programme  which  is  being  designed  to  cover  the  entire  nation.  LIFE-ND  will 
leverage  partnerships  with  other  ongoing  interventions  for  agribusiness  development  for  youth 
supported by agencies, including African Development Bank (AfDB)  investments (particularly the 
proposed  ENABLE  Youth  Programme),  Department  for  International  Development  (DFID)  and 
International  Institute  of  Tropical  Agriculture  (IITA)  youth  in  agriculture  project.  The  LIFE-ND 
serves  as  a  flexible  framework  for  the  implementation  of  the  national  LIFE  Programme  in  the 
remaining 30 States of Nigeria following the request of the FMARD. 
viii 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Project area and target group 
7.  LIFE-ND  will  be  implemented  in  the  nine  Niger  Delta  states  (Abia,  Akwa  Ibom,  Bayelsa,  Cross 
River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo and Rivers), as with the predecessor CBNRMP, but IFAD financing 
will focus on six of the states in line with the recommendations of the 2015 Country Programme 
Evaluation (CPE). The CPE noted  that the  attempt to cover many states under  one  project  was 
inefficient, diluted quality of outreach within each state, and compromised results. The Niger Delta 
Development Commission (NDDC) which has a mandate for the development of the region, and 
had  co-financed  the  predecessor  IFAD-assisted  CBNRMP,  is  partnering  with  IFAD  and  the 
Federal Government to finance the implementation of LIFE-ND in the remaining three states. The 
selection  criteria  for  the  six  states  for  IFAD  financing  included:  (i)  clear  focus  on  poverty, 
community  development  and  smallholder  agriculture;  and  (ii)  demonstrated  commitment  and 
political  will (as expressed  in the  level of participation in the former CBNRMP) to support a joint 
programme with IFAD (see Appendix 16 for details). On the basis of these criteria the government 
participants  in  IFAD's  Design  mission  recommended  for  IFAD  financing  to  cover  Abia,  Bayelsa, 
Cross River, Delta, Edo and Ondo states. In each state, LIFE-ND will cover 10 Local Government 
Areas  (LGAs)  and  10  communities  per  LGA  based  on  defined  criteria.  Overall,  the  project  will 
work in 60 LGAs and 600 communities across the six states. Consideration will be given to high 
performing states for adding two LGAs during the Midterm Review (MTR) of the project. 
8.  Target group.  LIFE-ND will be implemented in the Niger Delta Region covering the nine states. 
In  the  six  states  covered  by  IFAD,  LIFE-ND  will  primarily  target  25,500  youth  and  women 
beneficiaries as Apprentices that will come out of the Incubation System with their own profitable 
enterprises  and  decent  jobs,  and  eventually  serve  as  Incubators  themselves.  It  will  also  target 
about  600  established  and  potential  enterprise  Incubators  as  a  pathway  for  job  creation  and 
economic empowerment of the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will be youth aged 18 to 35 years 
and women headed households with children under the age of 15.  Overall, the project will target 
50  percent  male  and  50  percent  female  participation.  The  beneficiaries  will  be  selected  at  the 
village  level  based  on  the  criteria  highlighted  in  Box  1  in  the  main  text,  while  Incubators  will  be 
identified  on  the  basis  of  their  involvement  in  market  linkage  activities;  adoption  of  out-grower 
model; experience in the incubation of new enterprises; and technical, financial, managerial and 
infrastructure capacity to provide enterprise incubation services to apprentices. 
9.  Gender targeting. Given that women have relatively poor access to land, inputs, and agricultural 
credit to improve their production, productivity, income and livelihood; LIFE-ND will facilitate their 
grouping into enterprise clusters to leverage services from input suppliers and organized produce 
buyers.  LIFE-ND  targeting  strategy  will  include:  (i)  promotion  of  enterprises  responsive  to 
women's  livelihoods  such  as  production,  processing  and  marketing  of  vegetables,  fish,  poultry, 
and  honey,  for  income,  household  food  security  and  nutrition;  (ii)  time,  venue  and  environment 
friendly events for women's participation; (iii) self-targeting of women’s only groups; (iv) provision 
of  at  least  50  percent  of  leadership  positions  for  women  in  commodity  associations,  and  30 
percent  of  women  in  the  project  management  team;  and,  (v)  promotion  of  the  use  of  Gender 
Action Learning System (GALS). 
Development objective and impact indicators  
10.  The overall  goal  of  LIFE-ND is  to  realize  a  transformed  rural  economy  in  which  the  rural 
population  can  derive  prosperity  and  equal  benefit.  The project  development  objective is 
to enhance  income,  food  security  and  job  creation  for  rural  youth  and  women  through  agri-
enterprise  development  on  a  sustainable  basis  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  of  Nigeria.  The 
achievement of the project objective at the end of the project life will be measured by the following 
indicators:    (i)  at  least  25,500  direct  beneficiaries  of  youth  and  women  agri-enterprises  directly 
strengthened  or  created  resulting  in  profitable  agribusiness  and  related  paid  services  providing 
stable  income  for  enhanced  food  security  and  sustainable  livelihood;  (ii)  50  percent  increase  in 
volume of produce by direct beneficiaries; (iii) 50 percent increase in volume of marketed produce 
by  direct  beneficiaries;  (iv)  25  percent  value  addition 
through  processed 
produce/products;  (v)  50  percent  increase  in  profit  is  realized  by  direct  beneficiaries  engaged  in 
agri-enterprises; (vi) 80 percent of direct beneficiaries (20,400) have increased their food security; 
(vii) 80 percent of direct beneficiaries (20,400) have increased their assets by at least 50 percent; 
(viii)  50  percent  of  rural  institutions  promoting  youth-based  profitable  agri-enterprises  supported 
is  realized 
ix 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
and  strengthened;  (ix)  80  percent  of  direct  beneficiaries  (20,400)  practicing  improved  product 
handling and marketing practices; (x) beneficiaries able to access to at least 30,000 ha of land for 
agribusiness; and (xi) 10,000 beneficiaries are using improved technologies. 
Components and outcomes 
11.  The table below summarises the expected outcomes from the two components of LIFE-ND.  
Component 
1. Enhancement of 
economic opportunities 
for rural youth and women 
2. Project management 
and coordination 
Outcome 
  Market driven rural business incubators are strengthened  
  Production, productivity and marketing of agro-entrepreneurs are 
improved through public-private producer partnership (PPP) 
models 
  Market participation and profitability of beneficiaries enhanced 
through sustainable enterprises, improved market 
infrastructure, access to financial services, access to land as 
well as use of improved technologies 
  Increased ease of beneficiaries doing agribusiness 
  Efficiently and effectively managed project achieving results with 
communication and knowledge management integrated in all 
aspects of operations 
12.  Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth and women aims at 
facilitating  the  establishment  of  profitable  agribusiness  by  beneficiaries.  It  is  supported  by  four 
mutually reinforcing subcomponents.  
13.  Subcomponent  1.1:  Support  to  rural  agribusiness  incubation  will  generate  about  25,500  agri-
enterprises through the incubation system.  
14.  Subcomponent  1.2:  Support  to  rural  agribusiness  production  and  marketing  infrastructure  will 
support the demand-driven development of about 30,000 ha of land, a variety of production and 
processing facilities, and the construction of farm roads and bridges to facilitate market access.    
15.  Subcomponent  1.3:  Promotion  of  financial  services  for  rural  agribusiness  will  support  enterprise 
development through: (i) savings promotion, (ii) payment systems and (iii) cashless credit in off-
taker pre-financing arrangements.  Other systems currently under development including Bank of 
Agriculture's credit facility and the Nigeria Insurance Risk-based Agricultural Lending Micro Small 
and  Medium  Enterprise  Development  Fund  will  be  reviewed,  based  on  their  effectiveness  for 
possible inclusion in LIFE-ND during midterm review. 
16.  Subcomponent 1.4: Institutional strengthening and knowledge management will support capacity 
building of rural institutions, including the Commodity Apex Development Associations (CADA) of 
the  CBNRMP  and  technical  assistance  to  the  state  level  Agriculture  Development  Projects 
(ADPs)  for  inclusive  pluralistic  extension  delivery  services,  up-scaling  of  the  commodity  alliance 
forum of the VCDP, support to stakeholders and CSOs to effectively monitor LIFE activities.  
Project implementation  
17.  The  FMARD  is  the  lead  implementation  agency  while  NDDC  is  an  implementing  partner  to  the 
FMARD.  There  will  be  four  tiers  of  management  coordination:  (i)  National  Level  Project 
Coordination Office that serves as liaison to FMARD's Project Coordination Unit located in Abuja; 
(ii) Regional Project Coordination Office (RPCO) located in Port Harcourt and responsible for the 
overall  management,  coordination  and  supervision  of  LIFE-ND  activities  for  the  Niger  Delta 
Region;  (iii)  State  Project  Coordination  Offices  (SPCO),  located  in  each  participating  state  and 
responsible  for  coordination  and  supervision  of  LIFE-ND  activities  in  the  respective  states;  (iv) 
Local  Government  Liaison  Offices  (LGLO)  located  in  the  participating  LGAs  and  responsible  for 
facilitation of community involvement, data collection and dissemination to the state and regional 
offices.    On  behalf  of  the  Federal  Government,  the  project  will  receive  oversight  and  guidance 
x 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
from the National  Project Steering Committee (NPSC) under the facilitation of the National LIFE 
Programme.  At  the  Regional  Level,  there  will  be  the  Regional  Technical  Steering  Committee 
(RTSC) to clear the Annual Work Programme and Budget (AWPB). At the state level, there will be 
a State Steering Committee (SSC) to provide oversight on behalf of the state government and to 
clear State AWPBs. 
18.  Actual  implementation  of  the  LIFE-ND  activities  at  the  field/community  level  will  by  the  private 
sector  through  competitive  engagement.  The  Local  Government  Liaison  Office  will  be  deeply 
involved  in  sensitization  and  mobilization  of  youth  and  women  in  the  project.  The  officers  in  the 
region  are  designated  as  Coordinators  while  those  in  the  states  are  designated  Officers.  Their 
level  are  called  Liaison  Officers.  Two-phased 
counterparts  at 
implementation 
three  years  with  25 
to 
incubators/established  enterprises  per  state,  while  the  second  phase  will  run  from  four  years  to 
six  years  with  additional  75  Incubators  per  state  building  on  the  experiences  of  the  first  phase 
(making it 100 Incubators per state). Beneficiaries will be identified through a call for expression of 
interest, which will be screened by a committee to be managed by competitively engaged service 
providers in partnership with locally-trusted NGOs. 
is  envisaged:  First  phase  will  run 
local  government 
from  one 
the 
Project costs and financing   
19.  LIFE-ND is planned with a financing gap of six years.  Thus the programme has both a first phase 
(covered by the targets set out in this document) of six years, with parallel finance from NDDC in 
three additional Niger Delta state, and then an additional six years to be financed in the future by 
other partners and/or an additional IFAD loan.  Total programme costs to be incurred during the 
12-year implementation period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are 
estimated at US$ 130.015 million. Base costs amount to US$ 121.747 million. Estimated physical 
contingencies  amount  to  US$  1.805  million;  price  contingencies  are  estimated  at  US$  6.463 
million.  The  estimated  foreign  exchange  element  of  project  costs  is  US$  19.795  million 
representing approximately 15 per cent of total project costs. Duties and taxes are equivalent  to 
US$  3.057  million  (two  per  cent  of  total  project  costs).  Investment  costs  US$  111.587  million  - 
account for 86 per cent of base costs; total recurrent costs are estimated at US$  10.161 million. 
Programme coordination  and  Management (Component  2) costs amount  to  US$  21.508 million, 
representing 16 per cent of total project costs.   
20.  The  IFAD  loan  will  finance  civil  works,  vehicles,  equipment  and  materials,  technical  assistance, 
training, studies and  workshops and  part  of operating costs. The loan  will co-finance production 
and  processing  equipment/inputs  with  beneficiaries  in  the  form  of  a  seed  capital  arrangement. 
The IFAD loan will not finance any taxes and duties. IFAD will provide a liaison staff to strengthen 
the  National  System  of  the  LIFE  Programme  and  integrate  the  achievement  of  LIFE-ND  in  the 
national  system  under  Component  2.  The  Federal  and  State  Finance  will  cover  overhead  costs 
including  salaries  of  directly  engaged  staff,  office  accommodation  at  the  state  level,  as  well  as, 
taxes and utilities. 
Summary benefits and economic analysis  
21.  Over the six years of implementation, LIFE-ND is expected to generate the following quantifiable 
benefits:  (i)  at  least  25,500  enterprises  representing  25,500  new  paid  jobs;  (ii)  projected  annual 
incomes accruing to the beneficiaries ranging from US$ 527 (N$ 160,700) for cassava production 
to  US$  6,669  (N$  2,034,060)  for  oil  palm  production;  and  (iii)  yield  increments  ranging  from  30 
percent per processor for rice milling to 60 percent for cassava tubers processing. Other benefits 
expected from the project include a more inclusive rural economy, improved food security,  more 
environmentally-friendly  and  climate-smart  agricultural  production  methods,  import  substitution 
xi 
 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Components by Financiers(US$ '000)FederalStateIFAD Loan 1IFAD Loan 2NDDCGovernmentGovernmentsTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth 1. Sub-Component 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 27 87450.514 33926.012 49622.65220.9--55 23042.52. Sub-Component 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses 17 20141.69 68623.410 46225.31 5443.72 4585.941 35131.83. Sub-Component 1.3: Financial inclusion support for agri-enterprises 2 52643.91 42224.71 59427.72083.6--5 7504.44. Sub-Component 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 2 78445.11 56925.41 59425.82293.7--6 1764.8Subtotal 50 38446.427 01624.926 14624.12 5032.32 4582.3108 50783.5B. Component 2: Project management and coordination 9 61644.75 06623.63 85417.95532.62 41911.221 50816.5Total PROJECT COSTS 60 00046.132 08124.730 00023.13 0572.44 8773.8130 015100.0 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
and  conservation  of  scarce  foreign  exchange,  tax  revenues  to  government,  market  levies  and 
payments on produce, increased revenues for input and equipment suppliers, and reduced youth 
delinquency.  
22.  The estimated overall financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) for the LIFE project is 43%; with a 
NPV  of  NGN  53,646,174,700  or  USD  175,889,100;  and  incremental  net  benefit  of  NGN 
15,148,983,800  or  USD  49,668.800,  assuming  an  opportunity  cost  of  capital  of  14%.  The 
estimated  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  for  the  LIFE  project  is  35%;  with  a 
NPV  of  NGN  31,758,741,400;  or  USD  104,120,000;  and  incremental  net  benefit  of  NGN 
13,089,456,900 or USD 42,916,300, assuming an opportunity cost of capital of 14%.  
23.  Sensitivity tests indicate that the estimated EIRR for the LIFE project is stable given a variety of 
assumptions.  Enterprise  models  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  output  price,  investment  and 
operating  costs.  A  10%  drop  in  the  output  prices  reduces  the  project  EIRR  to  25%,  and  a  10% 
increase in investment cost reduces the project EIRR to 30%. Finally, a 10% increase in operating 
costs reduces the project EIRR to 29%. 
Sustainability 
24.  Sustainability of LIFE-ND is facilitated, among others, through: (i) existing institutional framework 
of  the  FMARD,  the  lead  implementing  agency,  the  NDDC’s  Directorate  of  Agriculture  (co-
implementing agency), state ministries of agriculture and their Agricultural Development Projects 
(ADPs), 
(beneficiary  organization),  commodity  apex 
organizations; (ii) PPP arrangement to enhance market participation of beneficiaries; (iii) linkage 
with  service  markets  (input  dealers,  financial  institutions,  produce  off-takers,  equipment 
fabricators, NGOs and CSOs); (iv) emphasis on profitable enterprises; and (v)  addressing issues 
affecting social inclusion, environment and climate change. 
the  youth  agribusiness  network 
xii 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Logical Framework 
Narrative Summary 
OUTREACH 
GOAL 
Transformation of the rural 
economy in which all the rural 
population can derive prosperity 
and equal benefit 
DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 
Income, food security and job 
creation for rural youth and women 
through agri-enterprise 
development are enhanced on a 
sustainable basis.  
OUTCOMES 
Performance Indicators (where 
applicable all data will be 
disaggregated by gender and 
age status as applicable) 
 Targets  
 Baseline  
 Mid-Term 
(Y3)  
 End of 
Project  
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Frequency of 
Verification 
Responsibility 
Assumptions 
Number of households 
benefiting from services 
supported of facilitated by the 
project 
Percent  reduction in rural  
households living below the 
poverty line  in the targeted 
village areas 
               -    
    7 500  
   26 100  
Baseline 
Data 
           -    
50% 
Improved household assets 
ownership index (CI) 
Baseline 
Data 
           -    
20% 
Reduction in the number of 
households experiencing food 
insecurity in participating 
village areas 
Baseline 
Data 
           -    
60% 
• Project Implementation 
is not delayed 
• Effective M&E system is 
in place 
• Militancy allows 
implementation 
• Up to 600 incubation 
centres are established 
and willing to mentor 
apprentices 
• Youth are willing to 
effectively participate in 
LIFE  
• Institutions are 
strengthened 
• Government policy 
supports land acquisition, 
feeder roads, and private 
sector inclusion 
Progress Reports 
Impact 
Assessment 
Studies 
Progress Reports 
Impact 
Assessment 
Studies 
National Statistics 
Progress Reports 
Impact 
Assessment 
Studies 
National Statistics 
Progress Reports 
Impact 
Assessment 
Studies 
National Statistics 
Annually 
PCOs 
FMARD 
End of Project 
PCOs 
FMARD 
End of Project 
PCOs 
FMARD 
End of Project 
PCOs 
FMARD 
Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 
Outcome 1:Establishment of 
Sustainable Economic Enterprises 
Percentage of supported 
enterprises operating profitably 
after two production cycles of 
 N/A  
85% 
85%  Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
xiii 
• Implementing agencies 
have adequate capacity 
• Suitable enterprises to 
 Targets  
 Baseline  
 Mid-Term 
(Y3)  
 End of 
Project  
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Frequency of 
Verification 
Responsibility 
Assumptions 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Narrative Summary 
Performance Indicators (where 
applicable all data will be 
disaggregated by gender and 
age status as applicable) 
operation  
Number of new jobs created 
(CI) 
 N/A  
    7 500  
   25 500  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
Subcomponent 1.2: Production and Marketing Infrastructure Support to Agribusinesses 
Outcome 2: Agribusiness-driven 
infrastructure for improved access 
to market and sustainably managed 
by beneficiaries is realized 
Percentage of households 
reporting improved physical 
access to markets, processing 
and storage facilities (CI) 
Subcomponent 1.3: Financial Inclusion Support for Agri-Enterprises 
Outcome 3: Enhanced access to 
financial services for beneficiaries 
and their organizations 
Amount of credit leveraged for 
supported agribusinesses 
Percentage of persons 
supported by the project 
reporting using financial 
services (CI) 
Subcomponent 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 
Outcome 4: Rural institutions are 
able to identify and address 
infrastructure, policy and 
regulatory challenges 
Number of existing/new laws, 
regulations policies or 
strategies proposed to policy 
makers for approval, 
ratification or amendment (CI) 
OUTPUTS 
Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 
Output 1.1 : Rural Agribusiness 
Incubation networked and 
supported 
Number of rural enterprises 
accessing business 
development services (CI) 
 N/A  
85% 
85%  Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
           -    
 US$ 2 M  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
85% 
85%  Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
           -    
             6  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
    7 500  
   25 500  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
xiv 
serve as incubators are 
available in the project 
area 
• Training is demand 
driven 
•  Bulk lands are available 
and owners are willing to 
lease them to the youth 
• Adequate Operation 
and Maintenance of 
infrastructure is ensured 
by users 
•   Availability of financial 
service providers in the 
target locations 
•  Banks, willing to lend at 
affordable cost to 
beneficiaries 
•   State policy on 
agriculture and extension 
is reviewed to 
incorporate private 
section inclusion and  
•  ADPs are open to 
change 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Narrative Summary 
Performance Indicators (where 
applicable all data will be 
disaggregated by gender and 
age status as applicable) 
Number of people trained in 
Income Generating Activities 
(CI) 
Number of rural producers 
accessing production inputs 
and/or technological packages 
(CI)  
 Targets  
 Baseline  
 Mid-Term 
(Y3)  
 End of 
Project  
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Frequency of 
Verification 
Responsibility 
Assumptions 
 N/A  
    7 500  
   25 500  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
    7 500  
   25 500  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
Subcomponent 1.2: Production and Marketing Infrastructure Support to Agribusinesses 
Output 1.2a: Establishment and 
improvement of feeder roads 
Output 1.2b: Land development for 
Agricultural Production 
Number kilometers of road 
constructed, rehabilitated or 
upgraded (CI) 
Number of hectares of land 
developed for agricultural 
production 
Number of market, processing 
or storage facilities constructed 
or rehabilitated (CI) 
Output 1.2c: 
Establishment/Provision of 
production and processing facilities 
Subcomponent 1.3: Financial Inclusion Support for Agri-Enterprises 
 N/A  
         60  
        180  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
    6 000  
   30 000  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
         60  
        120  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
Output 1.3a: Increased Savings and 
internal capital accumulation 
among individuals and groups in 
the project area 
Number of persons in rural 
areas trained in financial 
literacy and/or use of financial 
products and services (CI) 
Subcomponent 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 
Output 1.4a: Capacity Building of 
Rural Institutions. 
Output 1.4b: Platforms for policy 
dialogue established 
Number of Rural Institutions 
supported by the project (CI) 
Number of functioning multi-
stakeholder platforms 
supported (CI) 
 N/A  
    7 500  
   25 500  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
       300  
        600  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
 N/A  
            3  
             6  
Progress Reports 
Annually 
PCOs 
xv 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1.  With 182 million people, Nigeria is Africa's most populous country. Nigeria's population grows at 
3  percent  per  year2  which  effectively  doubles  the  country's  population  each  23  years  and 
results in a large youth population (59 percent of the population is under 35). Women comprise 
49.5  percent  of  the  total  population.  Nigeria  ranked  152  out  of  188  countries  in  the  Human 
Development Index (HDI) in 20153.  About 42 percent of youth and 36 percent of women were 
either unemployed or underemployed4. Since 2005, over 20 million youth entered the country’s 
labour market, and youth unemployment which rose to 56 percent by 2011 remains critical. The 
particular  issue  of  underemployment  of  youth  in  rural  areas  -  estimated  at  23.5  percent  - 
requires redress to alleviate poverty and prevent conflict both now and into the future. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Nigeria  is  Africa's  largest  exporter  of  oil,  and  this  sector  accounts  for  95  percent  of  export 
earnings and 70 percent of government revenue. Since 2014 oil production has declined 40 per 
cent  following  falling  international  prices,  and  increasing  sabotage  of  oil  infrastructure  in  the 
Niger Delta by restive youth which has further reduced oil's contribution to the economy5. As a 
result  of  these  issues  and  policy  uncertainty,  the  overall  GDP  growth  rate  has  steadily 
decreased  from  6.7  percent  in  2014  to  negative  1.8  percent  in  2016.  Thus,  Nigeria  is  in 
recession.  This  situation  has  posed  major  challenges  to  the  country’s  trade  balance,  public 
finance at all levels of government, and the ability of the government to implement some of its 
programmes  since  2015.  Nigeria’s  GDP  is,  nonetheless,  the  largest  in Africa  and  from  2014 
Nigeria  has  been  categorized  as  a  Middle 
Income  Country.  Nigeria  has  strong 
telecommunications, real estate, manufacturing, construction and entertainment sectors.   
Agriculture contributed 21 percent to the GDP in 20156, but remains underdeveloped.  Nigeria's 
production  of  food  has  not  kept  pace  with  population  growth  and  the  nation  has met  this  gap 
with food importation. The current recession and decline in terms of trade has resulted in a rise 
of food prices placing pressure on the nation's poor.  
Nigeria is predominantly a rural economy with over 60 percent of the population living in rural 
areas. As estimated in 2013, rural poverty  was 44.9 percent  while the urban poverty rate  was 
12.6  percent7.  Agriculture  is  the  livelihood  of  90  percent  of  rural  people,  most  of  whom  are 
subsistence smallholder farmers. Only 46 percent of the arable land is cultivated. Investments 
in  productivity  enhancements  are  constrained  because  approximately  95  percent  of  the 
agricultural land is untitled, limiting users from accessing finance or investing in improvements. 
Inadequate  access  to  land  and  land  tenure  insecurity,  private  sector  exclusion,  lack  of  initial 
capital  and  reliable  market  outlets  feed  a  perception  of  agriculture  as  a  poverty  activity.  This 
perception  discourages  youth  and  women  from  engaging  in  agriculture  to  improve  their 
livelihood8. This perception is further based on a reality where smallholder productivity is often 
less  than  70  percent  of  the  potential  and  declining  due  to  low  uptake  of  technology,  poor 
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators data, 2015 
3 The country’s HDI of 0.527 is only just above the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. However, when the value is 
discounted for inequality, the HDI falls below the Sub-Saharan average (0.328 compared to 0.355) (UNDP Human 
Development Report, 2016). 
4 National Bureau of Statistics, Unemployment/Underemployment Watch Q1 2016, May 2016 
5 World Bank, Nigeria Economic Report, November 2015  
6 World Bank, World Development Indicators data, 2015 
7 IFAD, Nigeria Country Programme Evaluation, 2015 
8 The FGN and the National Assembly are currently pursuing the amendment of the Land Use Act (1978) to improve on 
the thorny issue of land ownership and insecurity for the generality of smallholder farmers/producers, especially aimed 
at enhancing their land transactions, mortgages/sub-leases and use of land as collateral for loans. 
1 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
agricultural  practices,  overgrazing  and  deforestation.  Disease,  particularly  HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria also exacerbate rural productivity. 
Beyond agricultural production, rural youth and women also face limited alternative employment 
opportunities.  Weak  governance  contributes  to  higher  rural  poverty,  notably  in  terms  of 
inefficient local administration, corruption and inadequate involvement of the poorer segment of 
the society in political and resource allocation processes.  
Against  these  formidable  challenges,  Nigeria  has  initiated  several  key  strategies.  Overall,  the 
Federal Government has since 2010 recognized the need to diversify export earnings and alter 
its economic growth strategy.  The Vision 20:20 Road Map which emphasised a private sector-
led  economy,  diversification  of  the  economy,  agricultural  growth  and  employment  creation, 
clearly outlined the strategy and actions for implementing comprehensive power sector reforms 
to expand supply, open the door to private investment and address some of the chronic sector 
issues  hampering  improvement  of  service  delivery.  The  development  agenda  of  the  current 
administration,  building  on  Vision  20:20,  is  focusing  on  anti-corruption,  economic  recovery, 
employment creation and security. The government recently responded to the current recession 
and ailing  economy  with  a focused economic recovery  plan,  which re-emphasised agricultural 
transformation following the value chain and private sector participation pathway. 
Aligned  to  Vision  20:20  and  explicitly  relevant  to  this  Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  are  the 
Green Alternative Roadmap for Agriculture and the Strategic Framework for Youth Employment 
and  Job  Creation  in  Nigeria.  The  Green  Alternative  prioritizes  four  pillars:    food  security,  job 
creation,  import  substitution  and  economic  diversification.  Effectively,  the  policy  seeks  to 
commercialize existing diverse agriculture and to create rural jobs. It foresees decentralization 
of  agricultural  development  authority  from  federal  to  state  level  with  the  Federal  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD) engaging in coordination and quality control with 
projects meant to be implemented by state and local administrations. The Strategic Framework 
for  Youth  Employment  and  Job  Creation  emphasizes  that  the  greatest  opportunity  for  youth 
employment  is  found  in  agriculture  and  particularly  in  southern  Nigeria  -  including  the  Niger 
Delta9.  Employment  creation  should  be  driven  by  opportunities  for  food  production,  import 
substitution and cash commodity exports.  Beyond these strategies, Nigeria has extensive and 
coherent policies for youth and gender inclusion, improved nutrition, promotion of rural financial 
inclusion and others. This document firmly aligns to these strategies and policies. 
In  preparing  for  the  design  of  this  project,  the  Niger  Delta  Development  Commission  (NDDC) 
kindly sponsored baseline research to identify high priority crops to be supported in the Niger 
Delta. The research was technically assisted by IFAD. The research sampled the various value 
chain  actors  from  input  supply  through  processing  in  four  representative  states  to  prioritize 
investments  on  a  commodity  basis.  Commodities  were  rated  on  the  basis  of  the  greatest 
potential for sustainably increasing market share and returning a relatively good income to rural 
youth and women.  As such, production and other activities that yielded a minimum net income 
of US$ 5 daily and a minimum return on cost of 50 percent per annum (demonstrating capacity 
to support financing on current terms) were considered viable. Overall, in the Niger Delta, the 
priorities  are  broadly  cassava,  plantain  and  rice.  In  specific  states  cocoa,  fish,  oil  palm  and 
poultry also figure prominently.  
Several  key  aspects  define  rural  poverty  in  the  Niger  Delta  that  this  project  design  has  taken 
into  careful  consideration.  Rural  poverty  incidence  varies  according  to  the  education  and 
gender  of  the  household  head,  size  of  the  family  as  well  as  the  extent  of  youth  and  women 
involvement in agribusiness. Larger households (with 20 or more persons) headed by persons 
with little or no formal education tend to have the highest poverty incidence, depth and severity. 
Farmers  are  fragmented  and  average  landholding  per  family  is  less  than  two  hectares.  The 
majority  of  the  rural  poor  are  youth  and  women.  Culturally,  youth  and  women  are  unable  to 
9 Office of the Vice President, Federal Republic of Nigeria, March 2016. 
2 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
access  land  and  agricultural  water,  while  only  a  few  are  able  to  access  production  credit. 
Farmers  are  not  connected  to  institutional  markets  or  reliable  market  outlets  leading  to 
postharvest losses of over 40 percent of their produce. Few value addition enterprises exist to 
create meaningful jobs and employment for youth and women.  
10.  With specific reference to women and inequality in gender relations, access to land is extremely 
difficult  and  culturally  defined.  Women  usually  obtain  user-rights  on  a  small  portion  of  land 
through  their  husbands  and  other  male  relatives.  Over  80  percent  of  women  in  rural  areas 
make a living from small-scale agricultural enterprises. 
11.  Malnutrition in its different forms is prevalent in the Niger Delta region. The south-south zone of 
Nigeria, comprising of six states in the Niger Delta, had 5.3 percent of acute malnutrition, 12.3 
percent underweight  and 20 percent stunting (chronic malnutrition) among children  under five 
years  of  age10.  Among  the  women  of  reproductive  age  (15-49  years),  acute  malnutrition 
prevalence was reported at 4.1 percent. These malnourished women and adolescent girls face 
giving birth to stunted children, increased susceptibility to infections, slow recovery from illness, 
and a heightened risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Household level food insecurity affects 
87.8 percent of crop farm households in the Niger Delta while 12.2 percent are marginally food 
secure.  Only  33.2  percent  of  children  (6-23  months)  are  fed  appropriately  based  on  the 
minimum dietary diversity.  Any intervention in agriculture in the Niger Delta needs to prioritize 
nutrition  training  and  awareness  campaign  to  contribute  to  the  consumption  of  diverse,  safe 
nutritious food. 
12.  Temperatures in Nigeria have been on the increase in the last five decades.  Future projections 
suggest an increasing temperature and therefore a warmer climate. Ongoing trends and future 
projections further suggest increased rainfall, earlier rains and higher intensity rain in the Niger 
Delta, while the rest of the country may experience a decline in rainfall. The negative impacts of 
flooding are expected to increase due to sea level rise adversely affecting agriculture, coastal 
infrastructure,  human  health,  coastal  ecosystems,  human  settlements  and  the  economy.  The 
expected  heavy  rainfall  events  will  worsen  soil  erosion  that  is  already  having  catastrophic 
consequences  such  as  increase  in  the  number  of  reported  severe  landslides  and  floods. The 
coastline  that  already  experiences  sea  surges  and  tidal  waves  is  expected  to  be  adversely 
affected by accelerated sea level rise, anticipated to be 0.5 – 1.0m this century. About 35 to 75 
percent of the highly-productive delta could be lost based on this projected rise in sea level11. 
Increases  in  frequencies  of  floods,  droughts,  accelerated  erosion,  which  adversely  impacts 
wetlands and mangroves and sea water intrusion into freshwater resources puts further strain 
on limited resources and the livelihoods of populations in low-lying coastal zones.   
13.  Adaptation  strategies  to  increase  the  resilience  of  coastal  communities  beyond  physical 
infrastructure  investments  include:  afforestation  efforts  in  mangrove  forests,  introducing  salt-
tolerant crops and fish species and early warning systems for floods. However, further focus is 
required  on  diversifying  livelihoods;  adopting  drought-tolerant  and  early  maturing  varieties  of 
crops;  efficient  weather  forecasting;  re-vegetating  degraded  areas;  expanding  and  optimizing 
irrigation  infrastructures;  sustainable  land  management;  and  increasing  as  well  as  upgrading 
storage facilities.  Investments in the southern regions should incorporate measures to address 
floods and minimise their potential negative impacts particularly with regards to livelihoods and 
infrastructure. 
B.  Rationale 
14. 
LIFE-ND's  Project  Concept  Note  was  approved  alongside  the  Nigeria  Results-Based  Country 
Strategic  Opportunities  Programme  (RB-COSOP)  by  the  IFAD  Executive  Board  in  December 
2016. It directly supports Nigeria's Green Alternative Roadmap for Agriculture and the Strategic 
10 National Nutrition and Health Survey (NNHS) 2015. The Nutrition and Health Situation in Nigeria November 2015 
11 Nigeria, Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), 2015 
3 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Framework  for Youth  Employment  and  Job  Creation  in  Nigeria12.  Government's  strategies  are 
motivated by the waste of potential combined with the growing restlessness of an estimated 22 
million unemployed youth—and particularly those in rural areas.  There is a network of migrant 
returnees  who  need  economic  opportunities  to  improve  their  livelihood.  Further,  this  unused, 
economically  excluded,  frustrated  supply  of  young  labour  exists  in  the  face  of  enormous 
demand defined by the reality that Nigeria's agricultural output is a fraction of its potential while 
the  country  faces  increasing  food  import  costs.  Nigeria's  highest  potential  for  job  creation  in 
agriculture  is  in  the  south  -  including  the  Niger  Delta  -  where  land  is  available,  small 
agribusinesses  have  demonstrated  remarkable  success  under  the  IFAD  funded  Community 
Based  Natural  Resource  Management  Programme  (CBNRMP),  and  market  demand  for 
agricultural  commodities  is  high.  The  LIFE-ND  will  develop  the  supply  of  youth  and  women 
skilled labour to match the existing demand for agricultural commodities in the Niger Delta and 
beyond. LIFE-ND will further prioritize female youth based on the broader rationale that in the 
rural areas of the Niger Delta, there is a pronounced gender gap in access to land, productive 
assets, technology, finance, and markets, which to date are mediated by the male members of 
the household. 
15.  The  recently  concluded  Community  Based  Natural  Resource  Management  Programme 
(CBNRMP)  piloted  an  Incubator  Model  where  successful  rural  agribusinesses  producing  and 
trading  in  commodities  -  for  which  markets  were  obvious  and  demand  was  high  -  were 
facilitated to mentor neighboring youth to produce greater volumes leading to higher enterprise 
and community incomes. As noted above, based on this successful model, the NDDC funded a 
baseline  survey  in  early  2017  to  identify  potential  commodities  that  -  once  targeted  with  the 
Incubator  Model  -  could  employ  large  numbers  of  youth  and  poor  women.  The  priority  Niger 
Delta wide commodities are cassava, plantain and rice. In specific states cocoa, fish, oil palm 
and  poultry  also  figure  prominently.  Based  on  the  Federal  Government's  strategies  in 
combination with the CBNRMP's Incubator Model; NDDC's baseline results, confidence in the 
Incubator Model and estimated US$  30 million in parallel finance to IFAD's estimated US$ 60 
million; this design is similarly confident that this is a correct approach for the circumstances.  
16. 
17. 
LIFE-ND  builds  on  successes  and  lessons  from  the  Rural  Financial  Institutions  Building 
Programme  (RUFIN)  and  the  Value  Chain  Development  Programme  (VCDP).  Specifically, 
LIFE-ND  applies  RUFIN's  successful  logic  and  tools  of  promoting  local  level  savings  to 
capitalize  rural  communities  once  income  is  earned.  LIFE-ND  also  benefits  from  the  superb 
experience  and  methods  from  VCDP  of  linking  clusters  of  rural  smallholders  to  sophisticated 
private off-takers in a mutually beneficial and durable business relationship—including transfer 
of  technology,  access  to  markets  and  setting  of  standards—as  has  been  done  with  Olam 
International and others. 
LIFE-ND targets the COSOP strategic objective of “sustainable, climate-resilient, economic and 
financial inclusion of young people (and women) in profitable agribusiness”. The goal of LIFE is 
a  transformed  and  prosperous  rural  economy.  The  major  objective  of  LIFE-ND  is  increased 
income  and  employment  for  rural  youth  and  women;  the  secondary  objective  is  import 
substitution through  profitable  agribusiness for  youth  and  women. LIFE-ND's approach further 
integrates  lessons  learned  from  other  agribusiness  development  interventions  including:  (i) 
targeting  based  on  commodity  opportunities  versus  simple  geographical  targeting  criteria  of 
poverty  incidence,  social  conflict,  environmental  degradation  and  climate  change  which  in 
previous projects sometimes  failed to ensure high performance; (ii) focussing  IFAD support to 
fewer  but  better-performing  states,  since  the  low  counterpart  fund  contributions  (and  low 
12  Beyond  LIFE-ND  the  2016-2021  RB-COSOP  approved  an  additional  financing  to  the  Value  Chain  Development 
Programme  (VCDP)  in  the  northern  and  middle  zones.  Complementing  these  investments  is  the  Climate  Change 
Adaptation and Agribusiness Support Programme (CASP) which is currently being implemented in the north. Thus the 
three investments are in line with IFAD country strategy for a balanced portfolio among Nigeria's geographical zones.  
4 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
perceived  ownership  of  the  investments)  by  some  states  and  Local  Government  Authorities 
(LGAs)  hampered  implementation  in  previous  projects.  States  to  be  supported  have  been 
selected  using  criteria  that  include  tangible  commitment  and  political  will  to  support  joint 
programmes for community development and smallholder agribusiness. LIFE-ND will also build 
on  IFAD's  efforts  toward  gender  equity  and  includes  gender  responsive  activities/enterprises, 
promotion of joint decision-making at the village and household levels, use of the Gender Action 
Learning System (GALS), and targets at least 50 percent of leadership positions in enterprise 
and farmer groups to be held by women. 
18. 
LIFE-ND  aligns  to the  planned FMARD Nigeria  LIFE  programme which is meant to target  the 
entire nation. LIFE-ND will also leverage partnerships with other ongoing agribusiness for youth 
development  interventions  supported  by  agencies  including  the  African  Development  Bank 
(AfDB)  investments  (particularly  the  proposed  ENABLE  Youth  Programme),  Department  for 
International Development (DFID) and International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA).  
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
19. 
LIFE-ND will be implemented in the nine Niger Delta states (Abia, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross 
River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo and Rivers), as with the predecessor CBNRMP, but IFAD support 
will be focussed on six of the nine states in line with the recommendations of the 2015 Country 
Programme  Evaluation  (CPE)13.  The  CPE  had  noted  that  the  attempt  to  cover  many  states 
under  one  project  was  inefficient,  diluted  quality  of  outreach,  and  compromised  results. 
CBNRMP targeted only a few Local Government Areas (LGAs) and communities in each of the 
nine  Niger  Delta  states.  Due  to  long  distances  between  participating  LGAs,  high  overhead 
costs—up  to  20  percent  of  project  cost—were  incurred  in  coordinating  and  monitoring  project 
activities. By limiting IFAD loan proceeds to six states, the LIFE-ND can attain greater statewide 
outreach for better results. The NDDC which has a mandate for the development of the entire 
Niger  Delta  region  is  partnering  with  IFAD  and  the  Federal  Government  to  finance  the 
implementation of LIFE-ND in the remaining three states.  
20.  During the first design mission, the team from Nigeria's  government applied agreed criteria to 
select the six states for IFAD financing. The criteria are:  (i) clear focus on poverty, community 
development and smallholder agriculture; and (ii) demonstrated commitment and political will—
as  demonstrated  by  the  level  of  participation  in  the  former  CBNRMP—to  support  a  joint 
programme  with  IFAD.  On  the  basis  of  the  above  criteria,  IFAD  financing  will  cover,  Abia, 
Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo and Ondo states (see Appendix 16 for further detail). NDDC 
financing  will  cover  Akwa  Ibom,  Imo  and  River  states.  In  each  state,  LIFE-ND  will  cover  10 
LGAs and 10 communities per LGA based on the: (i) dominance of the priority commodities; (ii) 
willingness of community  youth and  women  to participate  in the project; (iii) poverty  level; (iv) 
availability  of an active  youth  in agriculture group; and (v) presence of strong  agri-enterprises 
who will act as agribusiness incubator for the LIFE-ND.  Accordingly, the project will work in 60 
LGAs  and  600  communities  across  the  six  states.  Consideration  will  be  given  to  high 
performing states for additional two LGAs during the midterm review (MTR) of the project. 
21.  The  Niger  Delta  region  with  an  estimated  population  of  36.5  million  in  201114  cover  110,624 
km2, or about  12 percent of Nigeria’s total area. The region  has the largest  deposit of oil and 
gas minerals on  which the country’s economy depends. Table 1 provides some basic data on 
the Niger Delta states. Beyond mineral resources, the delta also has the largest concentration 
of rain forest, aquatic resources and biodiversity in Nigeria and is a major producer of roots and 
tubers,  bananas,  vegetables,  maize  and  tree  crops  such  as  cocoa,  oil  palm,  nuts  and  fruits. 
However, despite the abundant resources, the region  is underdeveloped, insecure and fragile. 
13 IFAD, Nigeria Country Programme Evaluation, 2015 
14 National Bureau of Statistics: Annual Abstracts of Statistics, 2012. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library 
5 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Youth  restiveness  has  increased  since  2015,  in  the  form  of  social  conflict,  kidnapping  for 
ransom, rape, armed robbery and other social vices. It is widely accepted that this increase is 
due to lack of jobs and decent means of livelihood for youth, caused mainly by exclusion and 
poor governance, but exacerbated by low productivity and environmental degradation from the 
oil exploitation activities. 
Table 1: Basic facts about the Niger Delta states 
Population (projected 2011)* 
No. 
of 
LGAs 
17 
31 
8 
18 
25 
18 
27 
18 
23 
185 
774 
Land 
area 
(km2) 
4,900 
6,900 
9,059 
21,787 
17,108 
19,187 
5,288 
15,820 
10,575 
110,624 
909,890 
State 
Abia 
Akwa Ibom 
Bayelsa 
Cross 
River 
Delta 
Edo 
Imo 
Ondo 
Rivers 
Region 
Nigeria 
No.  
(million) 
3.257 
4.625 
1.970 
3.344 
4.826 
3.701 
4.609 
4.021 
6.162 
36.515 
183.600**   
Of which 
women 
(%) 
Density 
(per 
km2) 
50.4 
49.2 
48.7 
49.1 
49.7 
50.1 
49.7 
49.6 
48.6 
664.6 
670.3 
217.5 
153.5 
282.1 
192.9 
871.6 
254.2 
582.7 
330.1 
201.8 
Unemployment 
rate (%)* 
2007 
2011 
25.1 
18.0 
21.9 
32.8 
22.9 
14.8 
28.3 
6.7 
66.4 
26.3 
12.7 
11.2 
18.4 
23.9 
18.2 
27.2 
35.2 
26.1 
12.5 
25.5 
22.0 
23.9 
Poverty rate (%) 
Food  Absolute 
(Income) 
57.4 
53.7 
47.0 
52.9 
30.5 
35.6 
23.3 
46.4 
42.8 
39.4 
33.3 
36.1 
26.3 
63.3 
65.6 
50.5 
45.7 
50.4 
Note: 
*NBS, Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. Available at  http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library 
  **NBS, Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library 
Theory of Change  
22. 
LIFE-ND is based on a Theory of Change that was developed in consultation with government, 
civil  society,  project  beneficiaries,  international  development  partners  and  other  stakeholders 
during the process of elaborating the RB-COSOP in 2016.  The Theory of Change was further 
validated  during  the  first  Design  mission.    The  Theory  is  presented  in  tabular  form  on  the 
following page. 
6 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Problem 
Causes 
Effects 
Intervention 
Impact 
Objective 
and 
Technical 
Skills  
No 
technical 
and 
enterprise 
skills 
Sub-optimal 
technology 
result in toil 
for low  yield 
low 
and 
profit 
Weak 
market 
demand 
information 
leads 
poor 
choices  of 
enterprises 
to 
Agriculture 
Limitations 
Low 
business 
outreach 
Low 
production 
and 
productivity 
Low 
technology 
uptake 
Weak 
incentives 
to organize 
Access 
Resources 
to 
Food 
deficiency 
Youth fail to  
access decent 
employment in 
the rural Niger 
Delta 
Inadequate 
to 
capital 
engage 
in 
agribusiness 
Poor  
contracts, 
payment 
systems  for 
rural 
enterprises 
Poor  access 
to  land  and 
unfavorable 
terms 
Climate  change 
discourages 
activity 
Participation 
Limited 
voice  with 
and 
state 
local 
institutions 
Image 
problems 
with 
agriculture 
high 
levels 
Food 
insecurity 
and 
food cost 
Low 
of nutrition 
Weak 
market 
demand 
information 
leads 
poor 
choices  of 
enterprises 
to 
Social 
Concerns 
No income 
Youth 
restiveness 
Rural 
exodus 
Stagnant 
rural 
economy 
7 
Scaling up 
incubator 
model 
Linking new 
enterprises 
to existing 
enterprises 
to higher 
level 
markets 
Building 
capacity of 
youth: 
entrepreneur 
skills, 
organization 
Capacity 
building for 
research and 
extension 
(public-
private/civil 
society) 
Climate 
smart 
technology 
transfer and 
green jobs 
Systems for 
savings and 
payments 
Access to 
assets 
including 
land 
Scalable 
model for 
Growth in 
sustainable 
rural 
enterprises 
Better 
organized 
value chains 
Increases in 
the volume 
and value of 
marketed 
quality food 
Job growth 
and increase 
in self-
employment 
Reduction of 
crime, 
militancy and 
migration 
Enhance 
food 
income, 
and 
security 
job 
creation 
for  rural  youth 
and 
women 
through  agri-
enterprise 
development 
on 
sustainable 
basis 
Niger Delta 
the 
in 
a 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Target group  
23. 
24. 
LIFE-ND's primary target group will be unemployed and underemployed youth (aged 18-35) as 
well as  women headed  households  with children under the age of 15  willing to  engage  in  the 
production, processing and marketing of the selected commodities in their communities. Youth 
have poor access to land, input and agricultural credit to improve their production, productivity, 
income and livelihood.  
and 
LIFE-ND  will  primarily  target  25,500  youth 
target  600 
It  will  also 
and  women. 
established 
enterprise 
potential 
incubators  as  an  entry  point  and  a  pathway 
for job creation and economic empowerment 
of the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will be 
selected  at  the  village  level  based  on  the 
criteria  highlighted  in  Box  1. As  described  in 
detail  in  Component  1,  Enterprise  Targeting 
will be guided by criteria including: (i) level of 
return  on  investment;  (ii)  potential  for  job 
creation;  and  (iii)  government  priority. Two  opportunity  commodities  will  be  targeted  based  on 
nutrition  inclusion,  income  and  potential  for  employment  creation.  By  geographical  targeting, 
LIFE targets to work in the nine states of the Niger Delta Region of Nigeria, with IFAD financing 
covering six states and NDDC financing covering three states with parallel financing.  
Table 2: Level of Risk, Challenges and Opportunities facing young males and females in the Niger Delta Region 
Social 
Group 
Individual 
Household 
Leader 
Risks 
Victimization, 
Migration, 
Low level 
crime 
Victimization 
Women 
Challenges 
Unemployment, 
Social Exclusion, 
Land access, 
Limited skills 
Underemployment, 
Limited skills, 
Limited free time 
Migration, 
Low level 
crime 
Victimization, 
Migration, 
Low level 
crime 
Unemployment, 
Underemployment, 
Access to 
resources 
Unemployment, 
Social Exclusion, 
Limited skills, 
Access to 
resources 
Graduate 
Non-
Graduate 
Opportunities 
Apprenticeship, 
Access to land 
and finance, 
Service jobs 
Service jobs, 
Access to 
finance 
Roles as 
incubators, 
Access to 
growth 
markets, land 
and finance 
Apprenticeship, 
Access to land 
and finance, 
Service jobs 
Risks 
Challenges 
Men 
Migration, 
Criminality, 
Militancy 
Migration, 
Criminality, 
Militancy 
Unemployment, 
Land access, 
Limited skills 
Underemployment, 
Limited skills 
Migration, 
Criminality, 
Militancy 
Unemployment, 
Underemployment, 
Access to 
resources 
Opportunities 
Apprenticeship, 
Access to land 
and finance, 
Service jobs 
Service jobs, 
Access to 
finance 
Roles as 
incubators, 
Access to 
growth 
markets, land 
and finance 
Migration, 
Criminality, 
Militancy 
Unemployment, 
Limited skills, 
Access to 
resources 
Apprenticeship, 
Access to land 
and finance, 
Service jobs 
25.  The  Incubators  and  potential  Incubators  will  be  directly  targeted  as  the  catalyst  for  enterprise 
establishment  by  beneficiaries  and  the  main  source  for  primary/decent  jobs  creation.  While 
LIFE-ND's  beneficiaries  are  youth  and  women,  there  is  no  requirement  for  an  enterprise  to 
serve as an Incubator.  As such, some Incubators in the project's first years will be established 
enterprises  owned  by  older  people;  some 
from  successful 
apprenticeships,  and,  obviously,  owners  of  Incubators  may  age  as  they  provide  formation  for 
waves of Apprentices. LIFE-ND aims at using 600 Incubator Enterprises, comprised of 100 per 
state  during  the  six  year  duration.  LIFE-ND  targets  enable  a  total  of  25,500  youth  and  poor 
women to have decent jobs by its completion. Identification of Incubators will be based on the 
following criteria: (i) ongoing operations in the specific value chains prioritized for the particular 
state;  (ii)  clear  linkage  from  the  business  operation  to  higher  value  and  higher  volume  off-
takers; (iii) clear linkage from the business operation to reliable service and input suppliers; (iv) 
Incubators  will 
result 
8 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
physical premises for the business with a location in proximity to a reliable all weather road; (v) 
annual  sales  revenue  of  at  least  US$  15,000;  and  (vi)  willingness  to  mentor  others.  The 
Apprentices  will  be  trained  in  business  planning,  business  management  and  produce 
marketing, and qualifying Apprentices will be provided a capital stimulation grant to assist them 
to start-up their business for up to two production cycles.  
26.  Gender  Strategy:  For  effective  women  inclusion,  LIFE-ND  targeting  strategy  will  promote 
women  favourable  enterprises  such  as  vegetable,  fish,  poultry,  honey  production,  processing 
and  marketing  for  income  that  also  supports  household  food  security  and  nutrition. There  will 
also  be  provision  to  expand  the  commodities  supported  in  each  state  to  include  opportunity 
commodity/enterprises, which fall within the range of women friendly enterprises.  Strategies to 
realize this will include: (i) events appropriate to women's time and venue constraints; (ii) self-
targeting of women’s only groups; (iii) provision of 50 percent slot for women in each benefiting 
community;  (iv)  ensuring  that  women  hold  at  least  50  percent  of  leadership  positions  in 
commodity associations; (v) engagement of a minimum of 30 percent of women in the project 
management team, among others. LIFE-ND will also adopt and promote the use of the Gender 
Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  that  has  been  successfully  used  by  the  RUFIN  programme.  
Finally, nutrition activities on homestead vegetable  production  or related commodity  will target 
women groups. 
to 
increase 
is  proven 
impacts  when  mainstreamed 
27.  To be very specific, GALS is one of the most comprehensive of the household methodologies. 
It  is  an  innovative  approach  aimed  at  ensuring  gender  equality  and  social  inclusion.  The 
methodology 
to  agricultural/rural 
development  operations.  Household  methodologies  are  participatory  approaches  used  to 
promote equitable intra-household relations, fair division of labour and shared decision-making 
processes. Experiences with the methodology in RUFIN have demonstrated deeper and more 
sustainable  improvements  in  rural  livelihoods  through  ownership,  high  quality  of  beneficiary 
participation, empowerment, and sustainability plan, among others. In RUFIN, the use of GALS 
improved  household  income  management  and  women  capacity  to  effectively  access  and  use 
financial  resources  for  their  agricultural  production.  LIFE-ND  will  build  on  this  experience  to 
improve women involvement in agriculture.  
28.  Strategic  Collaboration:  LIFE-ND  will  target  engagements  with  institutions  such  as  IITA, 
Cassava Harvest Plus, African Rice, EU, FAO, UNIDO, USAID, and DFID who are working on 
various  youth  programmes or have demonstrated  strong result/competence in  Nigeria's Youth 
in Agribusiness Initiative. For instance, LIFE-ND will engage closely with IITA to leverage on its 
Onne  Station  to  create  decent  jobs  for  many  youth  and  women  through  its  programme  in 
Banana/Plantain, Cassava, and Fish enterprises. It will also engage with FAO to learn from the 
FAO-assisted Youth Employment in Agriculture Programme (YEAP), which was implemented by 
the  Department  of  Extension  of  the  FMARD  for  rural  youth  and  women.  In  addition,  LIFE-ND 
will target to benefit from the USAID promoted Agricultural Enterprise Curriculum Training of the 
USAID-funded  MARKETS  project,  which  was  designed  to  attract  youth  in  agriculture.  It  will 
build on the performance of African Rice in developing and empowering youth in VCDP.  LIFE-
ND  will  target  the  activities  of  Cassava  Harvest  Plus  in  nutrition  mainstreaming  to  specifically 
target women beneficiaries.  
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
29.  The overall  goal  of  LIFE-ND  is  to  realize  a  transformed  rural  economy  in  which  the  rural 
population can derive prosperity and equal benefit. The goal and purpose are aligned with the 
RB-COSOP  Results  Management  Framework.  The project  development  objective is 
to enhance  income,  food  security  and  job  creation  for  rural  youth  and  women  through  agri-
enterprise development on a sustainable basis in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria. This feeds 
directly  into  the  RB-COSOP’s  Strategic  Objective  (SO)  1,  which  is  to  promote  sustainable, 
climate  resilient,  economic  and  financial  inclusion  of  youth  and  poor  women  in  profitable 
9 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
agribusiness.  LIFE-ND  will  also  feed  into  SO  2,  strengthened  institutions  at  state  and 
community level to work with private actors in key value chains. The RB-COSOP is aligned to 
the  Green  Alternative  (Government  Agricultural  Policy),  which  emphasizes  four  pillars:  food 
security, job creation, import substitution and economic diversification. The achievement of the 
project  objective  at  the  end  of  the  project  life  will  be  measured  by  the  following  indicators, 
among others:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
At  least  80  percent  direct  beneficiaries  (20,400)  have  increased  their  food  security 
(reduction in length of lean/hungry season, increased number of meals a day, increased 
food diversity and quality) by at least 50 percent. 
At  least  80  percent  of  direct  beneficiaries  (20,400)  have  increased  their  assets 
(measured by an increased assets ownership index, based on additional assets  - RIMS 
indicator) by at least 50 percent.  
At least 25,500 youth or women owned agri-enterprises representing decent and gainful 
jobs are created, profitable and strengthened .  
At  least  25,500  direct  LIFE-ND  beneficiary  households  (the  same  as  iii  above)  have 
stable income for enhanced food security and sustainable livelihood. 
At  least  50  percent  increase  in  volume  of  produce  by  beneficiary  agri-entrepreneurs  is 
realized and also marketed. 
At least 50 percent of rural institutions promoting youth-based profitable agri-enterprises 
supported and strengthened. 
C.  Components and outcomes  
30.  The  project  has  two  components:  (i)  a  technical  component  titled, Enhancement  of  economic 
opportunities  for  the  rural  youth  and  poor  women;  and  (ii)  Project  management  and 
coordination. 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth and poor women– US$ 
52 million. 
31.  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  facilitate  the  establishment  of  profitable  agribusiness  by 
beneficiaries,  indicated  by  the  number  of  paid  jobs,  youth  and  poor  women's  ownership  of 
agribusinesses,  increased  capacity  to  handle  and  operate  business,  and  improved  market 
participation and access. The expected outcomes of Component 1 are:  
  Market driven rural business incubators are strengthened;  
  Production,  productivity  and marketing  of  agro-entrepreneurs  are  improved  through  public-
private partnership (PPP) models; 
  Market  access,  participation  and  profitability  of  beneficiaries  and  market  actors  enhanced 
through sustainable enterprises and improved market infrastructure; and 
Increased ease of beneficiaries doing agribusiness.  
 
32.  Component  1  is  supported  by  four  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents:  (i)  support  to 
agribusiness incubation; (ii) support to agribusiness production and marketing infrastructure; (iii) 
promotion of financial service for rural agribusiness; and (iv) institutional strengthening. 
33.  Subcomponent  1.1:  Support  to  Rural Agribusiness  Incubation. The  expected  outcome  of 
this  subcomponent  is  25,500  sustainable  profitable  agri-enterprises  are  realized.  The 
subcomponent  will  facilitate  the  emergence  of  strong  agribusiness  Incubators  and  market 
linkages using PPP models. It  will  use: (i)  600 established rural profitable agribusinesses that 
have backward integration with the rural producers to develop and proliferate new enterprises; 
and  (ii)  large  off-takers  (market  makers  with  national  and  export  market  linkages)  to  increase 
market size for produce from the Incubators. There will be three levels of assistance: (i) market 
linkage  assistance  for  Incubators  and  smallholder  producers;  (ii)  technical  assistance  to  the 
Incubator, Apprentices  and  Smallholder  Producers  in  the  project  catchment;  and  (iii)  capacity 
10 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
building  assistance  to  strengthen  rural  enterprises  through  the  provision  of  seed  capital  for 
equipment and services support. Enterprises emerging from the system will continue to receive 
technical  assistance  to  sustain  their  profitability.  Some  of  the  new  generation  enterprises    will 
subsequently develop into Incubators to scale up the project's on jobs creation.  
34.  The baseline survey conducted prior to design identified seven priority  commodities based on 
their profitability; potential to create jobs for beneficiaries; household food security and nutrition; 
capacity  for  import  substitution;  as  well  as,  potential  to  service  industrial  demand  for  raw 
materials.  The  commodities  in  order  of  profitability  are  cassava,  plantain,  rice,  fish,  oil  palm, 
cocoa and poultry as explained in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Percentage of value chain participants making at least 50 percent annual profit on their cost of 
production or processing.  
35. 
Implementation:  Each  State  Project  Coordination  Office  (SPCO)  will  select  four  out  of  the 
seven  commodities,  in  consultation  with  the  State  Government  and  IFAD.  The  commodity 
selection will be guided by criteria including: (i) level of return on investment; (ii) potential for job 
creation;  and  (iii)  government  priority.  In  each  state,  LIFE-ND  may  also  select  two  additional 
opportunity  commodities  -  from  or  outside  the  list  of  seven  commodities.  This  will  allow  the 
selection  of  those  local  commodities  that  might  emerge  to  offer  high  employment  creation 
opportunity, income generation potential, better opportunities for women or improved nutrition. 
The  priority  commodities  will  be  evaluated  on  the  nutrition  gaps  and  opportunities  along  the 
food supply chain to improve efficiency of value addition and access to nutritious food products. 
Given the current post-harvest loss rates range up to 60 percent in Nigeria for perishable crops, 
LIFE-ND  will  seek  to  reduce  such  losses  through  gender  responsive  and  nutrition-sensitive, 
time-  and  energy-saving  technologies  across  production  and  processing.  The  aim  is  to 
eradicate  food  waste,  improve  nutritional  value  and  quality,  mitigate  any  unintended  adverse 
impact  on  women,  and  child  feeding  and  caregiving  practices.  Approaches  to  these 
commodities will follow the prevailing logic of the project. 
36.  Selection  of  Incubators:  Identification  will  be  based  on  the  following  criteria:  (i)  ongoing 
operations in the specific value chains prioritized for the particular state; (ii) clear linkage from 
the business operation to higher value and higher volume off-takers; (iii) clear linkage from the 
business  operation  to  reliable  service  and  input  suppliers;  (iv)  physical  premises  for  the 
business with a location in proximity to a reliable all weather road; (v) annual sales revenue of 
at least US$ 15,000; and (vi) willingness to mentor others. This identification should result in, at 
least, 200 potential Incubators in each state. From these 200 potential Incubators, 100 will be 
selected  as  participating  Incubators.  After  compiling  the  long  list,  selection  will  based  on 
ranking: (i)  percent of product sold to market; (ii) value of annual credit to the business; and (iii) 
number  of  years  in  agribusiness.  Final  determination  of  Incubators  will  be  based  mostly  by 
choosing the top 100 potential Incubators according to these criteria; with some few exceptions 
to  ensure  that  more  than  a  single  commodity  is  included  in  each  state  and  that  multiple 
communities benefit within each state. 
37.  Phasing and outreach: LIFE-ND will be implemented in two phases.  
  Phase  1  (prior  to  midterm)  covers  the  first  three  years.  During  this  phase,  LIFE-ND  will 
launch the  project on a  limited scale by selecting 25 Incubators  per state each of which 
will incubate five Apprentices per year for three years to maturity as Entrepreneurs. This 
is expected to generate 1,500 paid jobs in phase 1.  Phase  1  Incubators  will continue to 
11 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
generate  enterprises  throughout  the  life  of  the  project  and  are  expected  to  add  another 
6,000 jobs.  
  Phase  2  (post  midterm)  will  capitalise  on  the  lessons  learned  during  phase  1.  LIFE-ND 
will upscale the model to include an additional 75 Incubators per state each generating 10 
Enterprises per year. This will lead to an additional 18,000 paid jobs.  
38.  The selection of Phase 1 Incubators will be based on the criteria stated in this PDR. In Phase 2, 
the selection criteria may be refined based on the lessons learned from Phase 1. During Phase 
1,  the  main  objectives  are:  (i)  assisting  selected  Incubators  to  develop  a  simple  and  effective 
business  plan  with 
the  assistance  of  established  service  providers—including  other 
incubators15;  (ii)  effectively  selecting  Apprentices  to  participate  in  the  project;  and  (iii) 
completing the first cycle of Apprentice graduation on a limited scale. Meeting these objectives 
will  limit  the  number  of  Apprentices  to  five  for  each  Incubator.  By  Phase  2,  based  on  the 
experiences of Phase 1,  ten Apprentices will be selected for each Incubator. A total  of 25,500 
enterprises,  which  represent  paid  jobs,  will  be  generated  during  the  life  of  the  project.  The 
outreach projections from the two phases are presented in Table 3.  
Table 3: Enterprise outreach projections  
Incubators 
per 
state 
25 
25 
75 
Phases 
Phase 1 
Phase 2* 
Phase 2 
  Total enterprises generated  
Number 
of 
states 
6 
6 
6 
Total 
number of  
incubators 
150 
150 
450 
Apprentices 
per 
incubator 
5 
10 
10 
Enterprises 
per 
year 
750 
1,500 
4,500 
Active 
project 
life 
2 
4 
4 
Enterprise 
LOP 
targets 
1,500 
6,000 
18,000 
25,500  
Note: * The 25 incubators from phase 1 which will continue to participate in phase 2 
39.  The full detailed description of the Incubator Model is covered in working paper 2. The working 
paper  discusses:  (i)  The  selection  process  for  Incubators;  (ii)  The  selection  process  for 
Apprentices;  (iii)  The  standard  financial  support  for  Incubators;  (iv)  The  standard  support 
package  for Apprentices;  (v) The  business  model  for  linking  hosting  communities,  Incubators, 
Apprentices;  (vi)  The  Apprenticeship  model;  (vii)  Monitoring  progress;  and  (viii)  Resolving 
issues among communities, Incubators and Apprentices. 
40.  Selection of Apprentices:  Apprentices will originate from the communities where the Incubators 
have  been  selected.  Each  Incubator  will  support  ten  eligible  Apprentices  for  two  business 
cycles  of  the  Incubator's  enterprise.  The  selection  of  Apprentices  will  begin  with  the 
identification of eligible candidates. Eligibility is based on the following: 
a.  Being  among  LIFE-ND's  target  group  that  includes  men  and  women  between  the 
ages of 18 and 35; or women with children under the age of 15 years;   
b.  Being a citizen or resident in the nine states of the Niger Delta; 
c.  Being ready, willing and able to undertake apprenticeship in the particular enterprise; 
d.  Being  willing to agree to sell a  prescribed portion of their  output  to the Incubator as 
part of developing and maintaining the mentoring relationship; 
e.  Being  considered  unemployed  or  grossly  underemployed;  and  disadvantaged  by  a 
minuted meeting of the local community—as determined by a representative womens' 
community group. 
41.  Building on the CBNRMP  experience, LIFE-ND  will engage a service provider to assist in the 
first two screenings of applicants in consultation with the Incubators and other key stakeholders 
15 Building on the technical, financial and infrastructural gaps identified during the Incubator selection process, a service 
provider will be engaged by the project to support the Incubators to develop their business plans. The business plans 
will specify financial growth projections that will further justify their capacity to absorb Apprentices. 
12 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
42. 
such as community based organisations, women's groups and trusted civil society entities, and 
LGA  representatives.  The  final  decision  on  the  selection  of  Apprentices  will  rest  with  the 
Incubator based on his/her confidence that the candidate has the tangible commitment to learn 
and replicate the business.  
Incubation  process:  Apprentices  will  receive  10  days  business  planning  and  management 
training  by  established  business  development  service  providers,  identified  by  LIFE-ND,  to 
provide  them  with  entrepreneurial  knowledge  and  skills.  The  business  orientation  training  will 
take place with both the Apprentices and their Incubator.  It will cover the business cycle of the 
particular  Incubator,  cash  management  (including  managing  savings  for  later  re-investment) 
and topics in agricultural entrepreneurship.  By the end of this training course the Apprentices 
will  have a  practical,  written guide (or business  plan) to guide their actual operations  with the 
Incubator  for  the  next  two  business  cycles,  and  beyond  following  their  graduation.  The 
Apprentice  will  start-up  an  enterprise,  supported  with  modest  seed  capital  from  LIFE-ND,—
which will be paid back following the first sales cycle. The Apprentice will remain attached to the 
Incubator for an agreed period not exceeding two production cycles. During these two cycles, 
some  of  the  cash  earned  by  the Apprentice  will  be  used  to  capitalize  a  new  business  to  be 
attached  to  the  Incubators'  business.  This  will:  (i)  attract  more  and  larger  buyers  as  the  rural 
supply  of  uniform  goods  is  increased;  (ii)  formalize  the  rural  economy;  and  (iii)  generally 
improve the structure of the value chain to underpin other development. An enterprise module 
is a minimum economic scale of agri-investment that allows a net profitability of at least US$ 5 
per day per capita, as indicated in Table 4. 
Table 4: Key commodities and benchmark enterprise scale for support by LIFE-ND 
Commodity16 
Unit of Enterprise  
Hectare 
Cassava 
Hectare 
Rice 
Hectare 
Plantain 
Oil Palm Rehabilitation  Hectare 
Hectares 
Cocoa Rehabilitation 
Hectares 
Vegetable 
Number of fingerlings 
Fishery 
Number of day old chicks 
Poultry (broiler/layer) 
Number of pigs –  12 Sow, 3 Boar 
Piggery 
(4 :1 ratio ) 
Number of hives 
Beekeeping 
Minimum Scale of 
Investment 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1,500 
500 
15  
60 
43.  Table  4  is  based  on  actual  baseline 
data  that  reflect  actual  enterprises  in 
their  own  context.  To  further  clarify, 
two  cash  flow  models  are  presented 
for the most expensive investments—
piggery and fishery to better orient the 
reader  on  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
these enterprises. 
16 In the case of tree crops, the model is restricted to rehabilitation of existing plantations as it is not possible to realize 
the establishment and maturity of these enterprises in under four years, which represent the most active period of the 
LIFE-ND Project. 
13 
InvestmentCycle 1Cycle 2Cycle 3Concrete Pen(600 000)   Wieners(60 000)     Other(50 000)     OperationsCosts(250 000)   (250 000)   (250 000)   Expected Sales2 800 000 2 800 000 2 800 000 Gross Cashflow 1 840 000 2 550 000 2 550 000 Losses10%(184 000)   (255 000)   (255 000)   PaymentsIncubator, Sundry 25%(460 000)   (637 500)   (637 500)   Net Cashflow1 196 000 1 657 500 1 657 500 Piggery 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
receive 
44.  The  Incubators  will  be  paid  a  service  charge  of  not  more  than  N$  equivalent  of  US$250  per 
Apprentice  to  cover  the  costs  of  training  and  extension  services  to  the Apprentice.  Given  the 
labour-intensive  nature  of  the  short  duration  enterprises,  Apprentices  engaged  in  such 
the  N$ 
enterprises  will 
equivalent  of  US$  25  per  month  for 
six  months  while  those  engaged  in 
long  duration  enterprises  will  receive 
50  percent  of  this  allowance  for  12 
months. The project will provide US$ 
220 per Apprentice as seed capital to 
the  Incubators  to  invest  in  the  initial 
financing needs of the business to be 
started by the Apprentice attached to 
the Incubator.   
income, 
thus  generating 
45.  The Apprentice will graduate from the 
Incubator facility after two  production 
cycles  and  when the  produce  is sold 
for 
the 
capital for the Apprentice to set up an independent enterprise. Any gap in this capital for starting 
the new enterprise will be financed by the Incubator through a cashless credit facility,  with the 
Incubator  being  repaid  in  trade  as  the  Incubator  will  assume  the  role  of  an  off-taker  to  the 
Apprentice's  new  Independent  Enterprise.  The  Incubator  will  continue  to  provide  marketing 
through  re-negotiated  off-taker  contracts.  The 
support 
Independent  Enterprises  can  serve  as  village  resource  persons  supporting  the  project  to 
facilitate  mobilisation  of  unemployed  Youth  and  poor  women  and  engagement  as  new 
Apprentices. 
Independent  Enterprise 
the 
to 
46.  Financial Support to Apprentices: based on the minimum economic scale to enable a return 
on investment of about US$5/day per Enterprise, Apprentices will receive two types of financial 
support; one which must be reimbursed and one which is a stipend during the Apprenticeship 
period. Each Apprentice will receive US$ 1,250 as working capital to cover their first production 
cycle. This money will be used for inputs and services needed to produce the animals or crops 
for  sale. At  the  time  of  selling,  the  Incubator  will  deduct  this  US$  1,250  from  the Apprentices 
sales  revenue  and  return  this  sum  to  the  Commodity Apex  Development Association  (CADA) 
established  under  CBNRMP  or  other  concerned  community  institution  such  as  the  IITA 
supported  Youth  in  Agriculture  Network,  where  CADAs  are  not  in  place.  From  the  second 
production  cycle  forward,  the Apprentice  will  be  expected  to  self-finance  working  capital  from 
his/her retained revenues. For short duration enterprises (with business cycles of less than six 
months),  Apprentices  will  receive  the  Naira  equivalent  of  US$  25  per  month  for  six  months; 
while  those  Apprentices  engaged  in  long  duration  enterprises  (greater  than  six  months)  will 
receive the Naira equivalent of US$ 12.5 per month for 12 months.   
47.  Subcomponent 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses. 
The expected outcome of this subcomponent is agribusiness-driven infrastructure for improved 
access  to  market  is  realized  and  sustainably  managed  by  beneficiaries.  The  subcomponent 
aims to improve profitability of agri-enterprises, connect agribusinesses to the market (improved 
market  access)  and  improve  market  participation  of  beneficiaries.  In  this  regard,  the 
subcomponent  will  support  three  categories  of  infrastructure  activity,  namely:  (i)  land 
development (involving securing, development and parceling of small contiguous farm land); (ii) 
feeder  roads  and  culverts/small  bridges  establishment/rehabilitation;  and  (iii)  farm-level 
production  and  processing  structures/facilities/equipment  including  provision  of  water  points 
and  sanitation  facility  and  fish  production  facilities  like  collapsible  tanks. This  will  be  achieved 
through  collaboration  with  NDDC,  relevant  ministries  and  agencies  of  the  federal  and  state 
governments and local communities.  
14 
InvestmentCycle 1Cycle 2Cycle 3Concrete Pond(200 000)   Netting(12 000)     OperationsCosts(675 000)   (675 000)   (675 000)   Expected Sales1 800 000 1 800 000 1 800 000 Gross Cashflow 913 000     1 125 000 1 125 000 Losses5%(45 650)     (56 250)     (56 250)     PaymentsIncubator, Sundry 25%(228 250)   (281 250)   (281 250)   Net Cashflow639 100     787 500     787 500     Fishery  
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
48.  Establishment and improvement of feeder roads. The project will establish or rehabilitate a 
market-connecting  road  for  easy  evacuation  of  farm  produce  from  the  small  contiguous  farm 
lands,  which  may  be  provided  by  the  government,  the  community  or  willing  individuals,  and 
developed/parcelling to beneficiaries by LIFE-ND. In this regard, LIFE-ND targets to establish or 
rehabilitate 180 km (30 km per state) market connecting feeder roads at an average of 7.5 km 
per feeder road using the federal government standard for feeder roads. Selection of roads for 
construction  or  rehabilitation  will  prioritize  incubator  sites  where  road  access  to  a  primary 
market  is  a  critical  deficiency.  Once  these  roads  have  been  addressed,  the  project  will  then 
consider  roads  linking  incubators  to  additional  markets,  if  funds  are  remaining.  In  addition, 
LIFE-ND will establish up to 120 climate-resilient small bridges/culverts for effective water/flood 
channelling. This will link the activities of the Incubators and farmer organizations described in 
Sub-component 1.1 to the market. For the sustainability of the feeder road infrastructure, LIFE-
ND will support the establishment of a beneficiary-based road maintenance strategy by helping 
them  to  form  Operation  and  Maintenance  (O&M)  committees  to  ensure  sustainability  of  the 
infrastructure. 
49.  Land development. LIFE-ND will promote and upscale the land acquisition and development 
initiatives  of  VCDP,  presently  being  adopted  by  Edo  and  Bayelsa  states  in  the  Niger  Delta 
Region,  to  ready  agricultural  land  for  the  beneficiaries  for  production.  LIFE-ND  investment  in 
land  development  will  include  stumping,  harrowing,  ploughing,  levelling,  drainage  provision, 
water  provision,  tree  planting  and  parceling  for  Incubator  models  that  are  focusing  on  crop 
production (rice, cassava, etc.) as their enterprise. About 30,000 ha of farm lands at the rate of 
5,000  ha  per  state  will  be  established.  to  support  Incubators  that  require  land  for  crop  and 
horticulture  farming,  while  Incubator  models  that  do  not  require  large  amounts  of  land  (fish 
farming in tanks, beekeeping, etc.) will operate on smaller areas.  From the 5,000 ha per state, 
1,000  ha  will  be  secured  and  developed  for  the  Incubation  Process  while  4,000  ha  will  be 
secured  and  developed  for  graduating Apprentices  who  are  engaged  in  crops.  Distribution  of 
this land will be managed at the LGA level.  The 1,000 ha per state will support an estimated 
ten Enterprise Incubators of 100 ha each that will be assigned to 45 Apprentices—that is 10 ha 
for the Incubator and 2 ha per Apprentice. Apprentices will be allowed to stay for two production 
cycles under the mentorship of the Incubator before graduating as an Independent Enterprise. 
New  Apprentices  will  replace  those  that  graduate.  At  his/her  request,  the  Independent 
Enterprise  will  be  provided  2  to  3  ha  of  land  to  continue  his/her  business  for  up  to  five  years 
from  the  4,000  ha.    As  noted  in  Subcomponent  1.1,  the  Independent  Enterprise  will  remain 
linked to the Incubator in a marketing relationship, while at this point, the other services of the 
government, extension, etc., will also support the Independent Enterprise. An agreement to be 
facilitated by LIFE-ND will be signed between the Incubators and land owners for a period not 
less than 20 years for the security and sustainability of investment.  
fish 
tanks, 
fish  earthen/concrete  ponds, 
50.  Production  and  processing  structures.  Consistent  with  Subcomponent  1.1,  LIFE-ND  will 
facilitate  the  provision  of  production  and  processing  facilities  including  production  structures 
such  as  collapsible 
livestock  production 
pens/chambers, water boreholes, mini-landing jetties (for boats picking up commodities on the 
creeks),  small-scale  irrigation  schemes,  etc.,  as  well  as  processing  facilities.  The  project  will 
provide a standard weighing scale in each production and processing site to encourage the use 
of standard weighting scales by farmers and avoid conflicts that could occur between farmers 
and  off-takers  at  the  point  of  produce  sales.  About  60  standard  weighing  scales  will  be 
provided,  10  per  state.  Similarly,  about  60  water  points  will  be  provided  at  the  rate  of  10  per 
state.  LIFE-ND  will  support  the  formation  and  strengthening  of  water  users’  committees  to 
oversee the water boreholes and water points for sustainability.  
51. 
Implementation: Land will be supplied by the government or community or individual while the 
project will be responsible for development, including parceling/distribution of the farm plots to 
the  beneficiaries  through  a  competent  service  provider.  LIFE-ND  project  will  also:  (i)  facilitate 
the provision of water points through a competent service provider, (ii) facilitate the provision of 
15 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
production  structures  through  a  seed  capital  arrangement  or  the  service  charge  of  the 
Incubator;  and  (iii)  for  land  acquisition,  encourage  a  leasing  agreement  with  the  land  owners 
(government,  community,  individual),  which  will  define  the  period  of  the  lease.  The  LIFE-ND 
project  expects  that  the  tenure  should  not  be  less  than  20  years  after  which  the  lease 
agreement  could  be  renewed  for  a  certain  period.  For  individually  owned  land,  the  lease 
agreement would define the compensation to the landlord. Such agreement should be validated 
by  the  traditional  leader  of  the  community,  who  will  also  witness  the  signing.  For  government 
land, an MoU will be developed between the relevant government ministry or agency and LIFE-
ND to be witnessed by a serving parliamentarian, either at the state or national level. LIFE-ND 
will  develop  a  detailed  strategy  for  land  acquisition  and  distribution  as  well  as  the  terms  of 
engagement with the land owners during the first year of implementation.  
52.  The project may also invest in other market facilitating infrastructure such as cooling facilities, 
warehouses,  and  commodity  aggregation/collection  centres  to  improve  market  access  and 
profitability  of  the  agri-enterprises.  The  opportunities  for  investment  in  these  areas  will  be 
identified  in  consultation  with  the  farmer  groups,  Incubators  and  the  new  Independent 
Enterprises,  where  applicable.  Detailed  feasibility  studies  will  be  conducted  including  analysis 
of  the  environmental  impact  of  the  infrastructure  interventions.  In  the  case  of  production 
activities within each developed bulk land, a PPP implementation model will be adopted. 
53.  Physical implementation will be by service providers engaged competitively by the State Project 
Coordination Office (SPCO) with the Regional Project Coordination Office (RPCO) providing an 
oversight  responsibility.  The  SPCO  will  use  private  sector  contractors  selected  through  an 
identified procurement process to provide production and market infrastructure after a thorough 
assessment of their feasibility, viability and environmental sustainability. Their provision will be 
contingent upon the establishment of a maintenance structure by the benefiting community or 
commodity members or entrepreneurs. 
54.  Environmental  and  social  safeguards  will  be  required  for  each  infrastructure,  including  tree 
planting and drainages within the processing and aggregation hubs where necessary. Portable 
water  and  toilet  facilities  are  to  be  provided  especially  within  mini-bulk  lands,  processing 
clusters, and aggregation centres. Safe effluent and refuse disposal systems will be  provided, 
including  channelling  of  excess  water  from  boreholes  and  rain  water  to  avoid  breeding  of 
mosquito and other harmful insects. 
55.  Subcomponent  1.3:  Financial  inclusion  support  for  agri-enterprises.  The  expected 
outcome from this subcomponent is that access to finance for agribusiness development in the 
rural communities is enhanced. The subcomponent will facilitate access to finance through: (i) 
savings  promotion,  (ii)  payment  systems  (iii)  cashless  credit  in  off-taker  pre-financing 
arrangements  and  (ii)  investment  insurance  through  the  Nigerian  Agricultural  Insurance 
Corporation  (NAIC)  facility.  Other  systems  currently  under  development  including  Bank  of 
Agriculture's  credit  facility  and  the  Nigeria  Insurance  Risk-based  Agricultural  Lending  Micro 
Small and Medium Enterprise Development Fund will be reviewed, based on their effectiveness 
for possible inclusion in LIFE-ND during midterm review.  
56.  Savings  Promotion. Lack of investment capital is  a  major challenge  among the target group 
which  hampers  their  establishment  of  enterprises  and  their  ability  to  leverage  loan  finance. 
Based  on  lessons  learned  from  the  IFAD  supported  RUFIN,  LIFE-ND  will  assist  the 
development  of  a  savings  culture  and  internal  capital  accumulation  among  individuals  and 
groups  in  the  project  areas.  LIFE-ND  will  initially  demonstrate  such  models  in  the  project 
communities and train a set of  beneficiary promoters to champion and replicate these models 
within  and  around  the  villages  based  on  service  fees  from  the  community.  The  further 
development of promoters as agents of financial suppliers in the rural areas will be supported. 
16 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
The  Rural  Outreach  Coordination  Committees  (ROCC)  approach,  piloted  under  RUFIN17,  will 
be  used  as  the  main  platform  for  promoting  and  championing  the  adoption  of  these 
interventions  by  financial  suppliers.  The  ROCC  will  also  be  used  to  promote  beneficiary 
financing policies, products and delivery methodologies amongst the financial suppliers.  
57.  Payment  Systems. Adoption  of  digital  financial  solutions  will  be  promoted  for  improving  rural 
outreach  and  for  developing  appropriate  payment  services  towards  efficient  transaction 
between  value  chain  actors.  Based  on  innovations  in  the  telecommunications  and  banking 
sectors  resulting  in  over  20  service  providers,  LIFE-ND  will  support  the  development  of 
competitive options to send and receive and store electronically cash for credit and payments 
among value chain actors. 
58.  Off-taker  pre-financing.  Building  on  the  experiences  of  VCDP,  the  project  will  facilitate  the 
formation  of  a  Commodity Alliance  Forum  (CAF)  in  the  benefitting  communities  as  a  platform 
including  the  public  sector,  private  sector,  and  smallholder  producers.  The  CAF  will  network 
large  off-takers  (as  VCDP  has  done  with  rice  producers  and  Olam  International)  with 
aggregators, input suppliers, producers and public officials.  This platform will pragmatically link 
producers to a sure market; identify producers' needs for inputs and services; and organize the 
local businesses to work in harmony.  Based on this harmonization, large off-takers will be able 
to provide credit in kind by paying input and service providers to assist producers to maximize 
their  yields under contract  with the  off-takers.  Thus a system of cashless credit  will be put in 
place  whereby  large  players  can  finance  the  producers  through  the  value  chain  and  recover 
their investment from the producers' delivery of food commodities. 
59.  Options  to  be  explored  at  Mid-Term.    Several  efforts  are  currently  underway  in  the  rural 
finance  space  which,  though  promising,  are  not  yet  assured  of  success  or  sustainability.  
Among  these  are  two:    (i)  Bank  of Agriculture  (BoA)  credit  facility  to  finance  support  services 
and  microenterprises  which  seeks  to  support  service  entrepreneurs  such  as  spraying  service 
providers,  mechanised  service  providers,  agro-dealers  and  others  with  at  single  digit  interest 
rate, minimal guarantee requirements and flexible repayment duration depending on the nature 
of  the  enterprise.  (ii)  The  Nigerian  Incentive  Based  Risk  Sharing  System  for  Agricultural 
Lending  (NIRSAL)  to  direct  agro-financing  to  project  supported  agri-enterprises  through 
financial suppliers in the project area. Based on their need, the suppliers will be connected to 
the  NIRSAL  guarantee  scheme,  which  will  enable  them  to  receive  Micro  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise Development Fund (MSMEDF) refinancing from CBN at two percent interest and 10 
percent collateral deposit. These funds will be on-lent to enterprises at single digit interest rate 
and flexible repayment terms. As these two mechanisms are not yet smoothly functioning, seek 
to intervene in the market at rates of interest below inflation and are bureaucratically complex, 
LIFE-ND will evaluate at mid-term the degree to which they are functioning and available in the 
six  targeted  states  and  determine  if  partnership  established  through  fee  payments  to  the 
facilities is warranted. 
60.  Subcomponent  1.4:  Rural  Institution  Strengthening.  The  expected  outcome  from  this 
subcomponent  is increased capacity  of rural  institutions to  identify  and address  infrastructure, 
policy  and  regulatory  challenges. This  subcomponent  will  target  public  and  private  institutions 
such  as:  (i)  rural  institutions  [Farmers’  Organisations  (FOs),  Community  Based  Organisations 
(CBOs), Incubators, CADAs etc.]; and (ii) state ADPs. Rural institutions will be empowered with 
skills, knowledge and technical support. ADPs will be linked to LIFE-ND to improve the capacity 
of  the  state  public  extension  system  to  adopt  inclusive  extension  delivery  system  as 
appropriate.  Furthermore,  LIFE-ND  will  facilitate  the  establishment  and/or  strengthening  of  at 
17 As a part of RUFIN's sustainability plan, the Central Bank committed to the establishment of a ROCC in each state to 
strengthen the outreach of financiers. Each ROCC is headed by the CBN and includes representatives from the 
National Association of Microfinance Banks (NAMB), Association of Non-bank Microfinance Institutions of Nigeria 
(ANMFIN), State Department of Cooperatives (SDC), Bank of Agriculture (BoA), the Small and Medium Enterprise 
Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) and the State Ministry of Agriculture. The purpose of the ROCC is to 
promote rural outreach of financial institutions operating in the state through different available models. 
17 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
least  six  youth  advocacy  platforms  which  will  serve  to  promote  the  image  of  agriculture  as  a 
business among rural  youth within and outside  the Niger Delta region and to stimulate further 
private sector investment. 
61.  Capacity Building of Rural Institutions and development of Community Action Plans: The 
RPCO  with  support  from  a  qualified  service  provider  the  conduct  a  participatory  mapping 
exercise  to  situate  institutions  and  assess  capacity  needs  to  develop  a  short  to  mid-term 
capacity  building  plan  for  each  selected  institution  to  assist  in  orientating  beneficiaries  in 
agribusiness  development.  Based  on  capacity  building  plans,  training  curricula  will  be 
developed/compiled  where  available  the  involvement  of  recognised  research/training  centres 
and/or  universities  will  be  sought.  Areas  of  training  will  include  planning,  monitoring  and 
funds/financial  management  and 
evaluation,  knowledge  management,  policy  dialogue, 
governance, procurement, group dynamics, nutrition knowledge, conflict mitigation, gender and 
climate change mainstreaming. The LIFE-ND will also expand this effort to include learning and 
knowledge  sharing  through  south-south  triangular  cooperation.  LIFE-ND  will  also  employ 
approaches to encourage beneficiaries to be proactive in rural institution development. As such, 
youth  and  poor  women  may  attend  study  tours  to  learn  from  successful  examples  of 
empowerment.    The  effectiveness  of  trainings  will  be  demonstrated  through  rural  institution 
action plans and annual reporting by institutions.  
62. 
If  necessary,  support  would  be  provided  to  market-oriented  organizational  forms  to  enable 
graduating youth entrepreneur, apprentices to benefit from economies of scale in engaging with 
input  and  output  players  and  Local  Government. The  needs  of  the  entrepreneurs/apprentices 
will shape the organizational form to be supported, while the likelihood for them to benefit either 
from  existing  framework  through  CADAs,  the  emerging  CAFs  or  the  establishment  of  new 
aggregation  entities  will  be  considered.  Where  capacity  is  available,  the  existing  farmers’ 
organisations may be  used to facilitate graduated  youth to expose them to good agribusiness 
practices. Any aggregation option (such as a group of apprentices or graduated youth) will be 
business-oriented  and  have  the  purpose  of  addressing  constraints  related  to  smallholder 
production  and  barriers  to  creating  linkages  to  markets.  The  aim,  therefore  will  be  to  support 
any aggregation option they choose themselves that enable them become efficient and help to 
reduce  transaction costs. Organizational capacity building  will focus on building social capital 
coupled  with  mainstreaming  the  business  thinking  in  the  aggregation  process  and  help  them 
come together to do things that contribute to higher profitability and to move away from running 
operations  that  are  solely   dependent  on  government  or  donor  contributions.   They  will  be 
facilitated to define how they do business with their customers based on a better understanding 
of  buyers’  needs,  so  that  they  can  begin  to  prioritize  activities  that  respond  to  reducing 
transaction costs and boosting profitability.  
63.  Support  to  Public  Extension  System:  LIFE-ND  will  improve  the  capacity  of  the  state  public 
extension  system  (ADPs  and  departments  of  extension)  to  adopt  inclusive  extension  delivery 
system as appropriate. Such systems may include; NGOs, CSOs and private sector extension 
delivery. In this context, LIFE-ND will provide technical assistance to the ADPs (and their state 
ministry  of  agriculture)  to  become  regulators  to  ensure  high  quality  extension  delivery  by  the 
private  sector,  as  well  as  initiate  new  approaches  to  be  up-scaled  by  the  private  sector. 
Consistent with the current Federal Government policy on extension, LIFE-ND will also support 
the establishment of a total of 60 one-stop-shop extension platforms; one in each participating 
local  government.  The  output  of  this  activity  will  be  measured  in  terms  of  number  of  farmers 
receiving improved extension services. 
64.  Knowledge Sharing Platform: It is anticipated that significant knowledge will be generated at 
the  various  institutions  level. This  knowledge  will  be  harnessed,  packaged  and  shared  by  the 
PCOs  under  Component  2  to  enable  stakeholders  address  policy  issues  relevant  to  the 
inclusion of  youth and poor women in agriculture in their communities. Policy dialogue by the 
institutions  will  address  issues  including:  (i)  insecurity  of  investments,  (ii)  double  taxation,  (iii) 
18 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
access to financial services, (iv) produce quality and standardization involving use of standard 
weight and measure. The project will support the establishment of periodic knowledge sharing 
events  for  stakeholders  to  discuss  useful  outcomes,  lessons  and  challenges  and  have  the 
opportunity  to  network  and  create  partnerships.  The  stakeholders  will  broadly  include: 
neighbouring  communities,  traditional  institutions,  schools  and  colleges,  state  institutions, 
national  institutions,  other  development  partners,  and  interested  parties  in  the  region. 
Contribution  to  or  co-funding  of  relevant  discussion  fora  will  be  part  of  the    strategy  to 
achievement good the objective of knowledge sharing in the project. 
Component 2: Project management and coordination  
65.  The  expected  outcome  of  this  component  is:  an  efficiently  and  effectively  managed  project 
achieving results with communication and knowledge management integrated in all aspects of 
operations.  Building  on  the  experience  of  CBNRMP,  project  implementation  will  remain 
decentralized to the community  through the participation of the private sector,  LGA, state and 
federal levels. The RPCO will be located at the NDDC Headquarters.  
66.  Project  support  at  the  RPCO  and  SPCO  will  provide  for  staff,  vehicles,  office  equipment  and 
supplies,  and  operational  costs.  Staffing  levels  at  the  RPCO  and  SPCO  will  be  kept  to  the 
barest minimum while technical assistance will be used in relevant fields as needed. At the LGA 
level, support  will be for operational costs through the SPCO, but activities relating to M&E in 
terms of data collection and rendition will be funded directed by the RPCO.  
67. 
It  is  foreseen  that  LIFE-ND  (and  VCDP)  will  be  managed  under  a  national  level  PMU 
responsible  for  liaison  with  FMARD's  Project  Coordination  Unit,  M&E  and  procurement.    In 
order to facilitate quick and orderly effectiveness of LIFE-ND, the project will for its first year be 
managed under, the Coordinator and Financial Controller of VCDP which will allow LIFE-ND to 
rapidly  enter  into  force  and  quickly  begin  addressing  recruitment  and  procurement  with  loan 
proceeds.   At  the  start  of  the  project's  second  year,  the  National  Level  PMU  will  assume  its 
limited function and both the hired Coordinator for LIFE-ND and ongoing Coordinator for VCDP 
will  resume  full  responsibilities  of  managing  their  respective  projects.    LIFE-ND,  VCDP  and 
CASP will then benefit from centralized procurement, centralized M&E and centralized reporting 
to Government by the national level PMU. 
68. 
LIFE-ND  will  also  provide for technical  assistance support to  the  national LIFE Programme at 
its Abuja office to facilitate the integration of the achievement of LIFE-ND in the national system 
that will include other development projects. In this context, the Abuja National Office is also a 
window for scaling up the activities of LIFE-ND to Nigeria's other 30 states. 
69.  The  project  will  provide  for  training  and  workshops,  studies  and  reviews,  including  monitoring 
and  supervision,  beneficiary  and  impact  assessments.  Further  details  on  this  component  are 
available under the section “Organizational framework”. 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
70.  Based  on  the  findings  of  the  two  CPEs  in  2008  and  2015,  the  RB-COSOP,  internal  portfolio 
completion report, and project completion reports of past IFAD-assisted projects, the design of 
LIFE-ND  has  incorporated  the  following  key  lessons  that  are  relevant  to  the  project.  These 
lessons are categorized into: (i) targeting, (ii) enterprise development approaches and models, 
(iii) social and environmental management, and (iv) project management. 
Lessons on targeting  
19 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
71.  Spreading  resources  thin  diminishes  impact.  For  CBNRMP,  resources  were  spread  thinly 
across  the  nine  states  of  the  Niger  Delta  region  resulting  in  inefficiencies,  diluted  quality  of 
outreach, and limited overall project impact. Due to the long distances between the participating 
LGAs, large transaction costs (overhead cost up to 20 percent of project cost) were incurred in 
coordinating  and  monitoring  of  project  activities. 
In  line  with  the  COSOP  and  CPE 
recommendations,  LIFE-ND  will  limit  IFAD  loan  proceeds  to  six  states  and  aim  at  statewide 
coverage  in  these  states,  starting  with  10  LGAs  per  state  and  increasing  the  number  upon  a 
review of performance at the midterm review. Since poverty levels are similar in the nine Niger 
Delta states,  the six IFAD-supported states  were selected using  the following criteria:  (i) clear 
government  focus  on  community  development  and  smallholder  agriculture;  (ii)  willingness  to 
work with the private sector; and (iii) demonstrated commitment and political will (as expressed 
in the level of participation in former CBNRMP) to support a joint project with IFAD. Within each 
state,  the  first  10  LGAs  will  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  dominance  of  the  priority 
commodities  in  their  domain.  Villages  for  intervention  will  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  the 
willingness of community members to participate in the project.  
72.  Commodity and enterprise targeting are critical for good performance results. Unlike the 
CBNRMP  that  supported  an  unlimited  number  of  commodities  and  their  associated  agri-
enterprises,  LIFE-ND  will  emphasise  the  top  four  state  government  priority  commodities  with 
specific consideration to their level of: (i) return on investment; (ii) potential to create jobs for the 
beneficiaries;  (iii)  food  and  nutrition  security;  (iv)  capacity  for  import  substitution;  (v)  industrial 
demand;  and  (vi)  availability  of  private  sector  players  to  drive  production  and  offer  reliable 
market outlet. 
73.  Effective  targeting  of  youth  and  women  could  yield  better  results.  Overall,  Nigerian 
projects have recorded high participation of women and to a  lesser extent youth. The process, 
however,  lacked  a  clear  targeting  strategy  to  create  learning  that  could  be  scaled  up.  For  50 
percent of the project beneficiaries, LIFE-ND will continue the protocol for women including: (i) 
promotion  of  women  responsive  enterprises;  (ii)  direct  targeting  of  women  only  groups;  (iii) 
organizing  time  and  venue  friendly  events  for  greater  women  participation;  (iv)  affirmative 
provision of: (a) at least 50 percent of leadership positions in commodity associations held by 
women, (b) engagement of a minimum of 35 percent women in the project coordination teams 
at  the  regional  and  state  levels;  and  (c)  use  of  the  GALS  successfully  applied  by  the  RUFIN 
programme. As  the  major  issue  being  addressed  by  the  project  is  youth  restiveness—crime, 
migration, militancy—and these are primarily social ills affected young men—50 percent of the 
beneficiaries  will  be  young  men.    To  support  this  approach,  LIFE-ND  will  also  draw  from  the 
experience  of  the  IITA  youth  agri-preneurs  and  FAO-YEAP,  to  target  youth  and  promote 
entrepreneurship skills in them through an enterprise incubation.   
Lessons on enterprise development approaches and models  
74.  The CDD approach can be adapted for the promotion of rural agribusiness development. 
The  CBARDP  had  used  the  Community  Driven  Development  (CDD)  approach  to  realize  361 
new Community Development Associations  (CDAs) in northern Nigeria. CBNRMP,  in line  with 
its  renewed  focus  from  2010  on  enhanced  food  security,  job  creation  for  youth  and  poverty 
reduction, adapted the CDD approach in the Niger Delta region into a commodity development 
approach to realize 154 Commodity Apex Development Associations (CADAs). The CADA, an 
umbrella  association  to  support  the  enterprise  groups  in  each  community,  supported  the 
establishment  of  viable  agro-enterprises,  leading  to  a  marked  improvement  of  the  incomes 
women and youth. The CADA also streamlined resource flow from CBNRMP to the  enterprise 
groups  in  each  community.  While  both  the  CDA  and  the  CADA  functioned  to:  (i)  prioritize 
community  needs;  (ii)  settle  conflicts;  (iii)  ensure  social  inclusion;  (iv)  build  social  capital;  (v) 
maintain productive infrastructure; (vi) manage financial resources; (vii) act as an entry point for 
development partners and government into rural communities; and (viii) provide a learning and 
knowledge  sharing  platform  for  members  and  non-members.  The  CADA  further  had  a  strong 
20 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
emphasis  on  agribusiness  development.  It  facilitate  the  creation  of  1,800  strong  enterprises 
owned by youth. LIFE-ND will deepen the use of the CADA to facilitate youth and poor women's 
involvement  and  women  inclusion  in  agribusiness,  and  facilitate  access  to  economic 
opportunities. 
75.  Use  of  enterprise  incubation  model.  CBNRMP's  innovative  enterprise  incubation  model 
introduced  youth  to  agribusiness  and  became  a  good  youth-to-youth  mentorship  model  for 
creating  decent  jobs  and  for  sharing  knowledge. At  the  close  of  CBNRMP,  over  1,800  strong 
agri-enterprises  were  reportedly  earning  above  USD  5  per  day.  LIFE-ND  will  adopt  the 
incubation model as the entry point and a key stone to its approach. 
76.  The  private  sector  is  enthusiastic  to  engage  with  smallholder  farmers  if  the  farmers  are 
organized  and  if  there  is  a  credible  process  to  discourage  side-selling  of  produce.  VCDP 
through  the  Commodity Alliance  Platform  (CAPs),  fostered  linkages  between  farmers  and  the 
private  sector,  helping  to  build  trust  between  the  parties.  The  VCDP  has  helped  to  leverage 
finance through cashless credit support from the off-taker. LIFE-ND will deepen on the CAP to 
facilitate  access  to  finance,  technology  and  market  for  the  beneficiaries,  and  in  addition 
engaging with government and community members to secure and develop bulk land of various 
sizes for the beneficiaries. 
77. 
Inadequate  financial  access  inhibits  profitable  agri-enterprise  development.  Enterprise 
development  in  CBNRMP  and  other  IFAD-assisted  projects  has  been  constrained  by  farmers’ 
inadequate access to financial services to procure inputs to produce on an economic scale and 
reach profitable markets. RUFIN facilitated farmers’ increased access to rural financial services 
through  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs),  and  strengthened  the  savings  culture,  recordkeeping 
skills and cohesion of village saving and credit groups (VSCGs). As at 2016, up to N16 billion 
(US$  53.3  million)  was  leveraged  as  internal  saving  mobilization  by  the  RUFIN  facilitated 
savings  and  credit  groups  in  12  states  of  Nigeria.  Unfortunately,  RUFIN’s  focus  was  not 
primarily on enterprise groups and missed the opportunity to show huge impact on job creation. 
Because  of  this  weakness,  most  of  the  enterprise  groups  in  the  CBNRMP  states  struggled 
without guidance and needed to invent their own systems to improve financial access. Learning 
from  this  experience,  LIFE-ND  has  incorporated  a  financial  access  subcomponent  to 
mainstream RUFIN's lessons and facilitate financial access by beneficiaries. 
Lessons on social and environmental management 
78.  Sound technical backstopping is critical for results in natural resource management and 
climate  change  adaptation.  CBNRMP  was  designed  to  address  climate  change  and 
environmental  issues  because  the  region  is  highly  prone  to  flooding  as  the  drainage  basin  of 
the entire country,  and is  associated  with high humidity  induced pests and diseases, pollution 
and retardation of agricultural productivity. There is also effect of coastal erosion and high seas 
rising  in  the  creeks  and  small  island  communities.  However,  little  or  nothing  was  achieved  by 
CBNRMP in this sector due to lack of technical depth in the management team to incorporate 
climate  change  resilience  and  environmental  degradation  mitigation  measures.  LIFE-ND  will 
mainstream  climate  change  adaptation  and  environmental  mitigation  measures  to  promote 
climate change smart agribusiness for the beneficiaries.  
79. 
Insecurity  and  conflict  may  be  mitigated  through  job  creation.  IFAD-assisted  projects  in 
Nigeria  have  been  vulnerable  to  various  forms  of  conflict,  insurgency  or  unrest  –  especially, 
Boko  Haram  in  the  north  east  region,  pastoralist-farmer  conflicts  in  the  middle  belt,  and 
militancy and unrest in the  Niger Delta region. With the activities of the pastoralists spreading 
further southwards, LIFE-ND will undertake a conflict analysis or risk assessment at the start of 
project implementation to provide mitigation strategies against identified potential conflicts. It is 
21 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
expected  that  the  creation  of  decent  paid  jobs  by  the  project  will  help  to  reduce  youth 
restiveness in the Niger Delta region18. 
Lessons on project management   
80.  Lack of a coordination structure constrains policy engagement19. The absence of a well-
structured policy coordination unit within the federal and state ministries of agriculture has been 
a  major  constraint  to  effective  policy  engagement,  dissemination  of  results  to  government 
systems and institutions, up-scaling of successes by the government, and the development of 
strategic partnerships. LIFE-ND, along with all DP investments in Nigerian agriculture, will also 
invest  in  the  central  communication  platform  of  IFAD  supported  programmes,  which  has 
become  an  active  communication  and  knowledge  sharing  pathway  to  scale  up  results. At  the 
state level, LIFE-ND will support the strengthening of the agricultural development programmes 
(ADPs)  for  effective  policy  dialogue  on  extension,  quality  assurance  on  services  provided  to 
beneficiaries, and M&E activities. At the state level, LIFE-ND will be domiciled in the ADP office 
complex  for  better  synergy  with  government  agricultural  initiatives  and  other  development 
partner projects. 
81.  Linking  release  of  IFAD  loan  proceeds  to  counterpart  funding  limits  implementation 
effectiveness.  IFAD  usually  requires  local  counterpart  financing  as  evidence  of  ownership  of 
the project activities. However, linking counterpart fund contributions to the release of IFAD loan 
proceeds  for  field  activities  has  created  an  inefficient  fund  utilization  process,  and  limited 
implementation  effectiveness.  The  Government  of  Nigeria  also  insists  that  payment  of  staff 
salary  is  a  form  of  counterpart  fund  contribution.  The  situation  has  become  worse  now  that 
Nigeria  is  in  a  recession  and  salaries  of  staff  are  in  arrears  in  many  states.  This  lesson  was 
considered in amending the financial agreement for CBNRMP and in the design of the ongoing 
IFAD-assisted VCDP  and  CASP, and is in line  with the practice of the  World Bank  which also 
provides  100  percent  financing  for  all  credit  categories  so  that  government  counterpart 
financing is only used to cover salaries of seconded staff. In  response to the recommendation 
of the Portfolio Completion Report, LIFE-ND will accept that government counterpart financing 
requirements may be limited to salaries of the seconded staff at all levels and operational costs 
like utilities, maintenance and office accommodation at the state level. 
82.  Delay in start-up of projects. Projects in Nigeria experience an average of 30 months delay in 
start-up,  leading  to  redesigns  and  a  reduction  in  the  project  relevance  in  relation  to  the 
objectives.  The  following  measures  will  be  taken  to  resolve  this  challenge:  (i)  National  LIFE 
programme with annual appropriation will ensure the inclusion of the IFAD-assisted LIFE-ND in 
the national borrowing plan; (ii) IFAD has in principle agreed with the government proposal for a 
retroactive financing in the financing agreement to facilitate implementation readiness; and (iii) 
a sufficient number of personnel with private sector experience will be competitively engaged to 
effectively  liaise  with  the  private  sector  and  deliver  on  the  LIFE-ND  investment  targets  using 
performance-based contracts. 
83.  Low  loan  draw-down.  For  most  projects  in  Nigeria,  weak  financial  management  and 
unpredictable  counterpart  funding  from  the  states  and  LGAs  have  disrupted  fund  flow  and 
project  delivery,  leading  to  low  loan  draw-down.  Consequently,  LIFE-ND  will:  (i)  align  with 
Nigeria's  new  Treasury  Single  Account  system  for  fund  monitoring  and  donor  alignment;  (ii) 
strengthen the project’s financial management capacity; (iii) as in other IFAD-assisted projects, 
limit government counterpart funding to overhead costs; and (iv) apply the IFAD loan proceeds 
to  fund  field  activities  100  percent,  pay  the  salaries  of  non-government  staff  at  the 
national/regional/state levels, and the operational allowances of project staff. 
18 See Appendix 18 for a media report on the expectations of NDDC on the impact of LIFE in reducing youth violence. 
19 As FMARD has resolved to improve its coordination role and has requested for the assistance of all development 
partners and their projects, LIFE-ND will support establishing and capacitating a project coordination unit under the 
FMARD, including for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.  
22 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
84.  Partnerships  covered  by  results-based  collaboration  agreements  are  more  effective. 
Many  partnerships  were  established  under  CBNRMP  on  ad  hoc  and  opportunistic  basis. 
Fearing a loss of their jobs,  CBNRMP staff also missed the opportunity to engage extensively 
with  private  extension  providers  early  enough  during  the  period  of  refocusing  on  agriculture. 
The  situation  affected  the  quality  of  service  delivery  until  two  years  to  programme  completion 
when  a  mind-set  change  occurred  among  the  staff.  The  design  of  LIFE-ND  draws  from  this 
experience.    The  design  also  benefits  from:  (i)  the  ongoing  VCDP  where  results-based 
partnership  agreements  are  enabling  stronger  synergies  and  resulting  in  programme  impact, 
especially in the areas of input delivery, financial access, reliable market outlet, economic and 
social empowerment for small farmers, knowledge sharing, leveraging of resources and scaling 
up of proven results; and (ii) the CBRNMP partnership with the Songhai Centre, National Root 
Crop  Research  Institute  (NRCRI),  USAID  funded  MARKETS  II,  and  World  Bank-assisted 
Fadama  III  involving  memorandum  of  understanding  (MoU)  for  accountability.  LIFE-ND  has 
provided  for  a  business  promotion  adviser  in  the  staff  team  to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  the 
private  sector  and  civil  society  organisations  (CSOs)  in  project  implementation.  The  VCDP 
Commodity  Alliance  Forum  (CAF)  is  a  form  of  PPP  where  small  producer  enterprises, 
organized  private  sector  operators,  CSOs,  NGOs,  input  dealers  and  market  operators  come 
together to engage in mutual business. The main market operators, who drives the forum is the 
off-taker  of  farmer  produce.  Engagement  is  guided  by  result  based  MoU  where  obligations  of 
each party and the time frame as well as expected investment results are well defined, where 
LIFE-ND acts as the broker/facilitator.    
Adherence to the SECAP 
85.  Based  on  the  IFAD  guidelines  on  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures  (SECAP),  the  Environment  and  Social  Risk  Category  for  the  LIFE-ND  is  B,  while 
the Climate Risk Category is moderate. 
86.  The  project's  supported  enterprises  are  largely  natural  resources-based  development  which 
may  include  development  of  agro-processing  facilities.  The  environmental  impacts  will  be 
substantially  place-based  and  commodity-specific  across  enterprise  clusters  and  communities 
around  the  Niger  Delta  region,  and  most  of  them  are  readily  remedied  by  appropriate 
preventive  actions  and/or  mitigation  measures  already  proposed  in  the  SECAP.  The  project 
activities may include minimal rehabilitation of rural farm roads. However, as much as possible, 
protected  areas  will  be  avoided  and  development  in  virgin  area  and  wetlands  will  not  be 
undertaken. There is very low risk of impacting physical and cultural resources. The project has 
minimal  risk  of  causing  land  degradation  through  unsustainable  land  preparation  and 
management practices which will be mitigated through awareness and training on sustainable 
land  practices.  There  is  moderate  risk  impact  of  surface  water  resources  from  use  of 
agrochemicals  and  pesticides,  which  is  expected  to  be  mitigated  by  encouraging  use  of 
biodegradable  farm  manure  and  creation  of  a  sustainable  value  chain  in  pesticides  and 
agrochemicals  management  to  create  more  jobs  for  youth  and  poor  women  while  providing 
agrochemical  service  to  the  farmers.  No  economic  displacement  of  marginal  or  indigenous 
population is envisaged. 
87.  The  communities  are  the  second  level  beneficiaries  of  the  project  after  the  Apprentices  and 
incubators. In addition to government land, access to land will be mainly from the government 
and  the  community’s  free-consent  release  of  land  to  the  direct  beneficiaries  (who  are  also 
members  of  the  community).  No  unsustainable  natural  resources  management  in  fisheries, 
forestry  and  significant  increase  in  use  of  agrochemicals  that  exceed  the  carrying  capacity  of 
the  ecosystem  is  envisaged.  Fish  farming  and  aquaculture  business  will  be  in  hand-stocked 
ponds. The project will not significantly increase the risk of erosion and flooding. Generally, the 
project  will  involve  land  use  changes  (agricultural  intensification  and/or  expansion  of  the 
cropping area) and resources that may have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems, and/or 
livelihoods  in  non-sensitive  areas.  Small  dams  and  water  impoundment  in  non-sensitive  and 
23 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
wetland areas may be constructed to complement rainfall to ensure all-year round cropping for 
some crops, with the area to be impacted not exceeding 100 ha. An Environmental and Social 
Analysis to develop an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is required and 
will be undertaken during project preparation or implementation.  
88.  The major climate risks for the project are increasing rainfall and temperature and the possibility 
of some crops and activities contributing to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The impacts will 
be substantially place-based and enterprise-specific. The lower area of the Niger Delta region is 
low-lying and subject to flooding caused by high rainfall and the flow regimes of the River Niger. 
These will be mitigated by avoiding extreme floodplain areas. Late onset and early cessation of 
the rains may affect crops in the derived savanna zone in the upper parts of the  region. These 
will  be  mitigated  by  increased  access  to  climate  information  by  farmers  to  guide  on-farm 
activities. The region has no history of tropical storms and heat waves, and these are not likely. 
The  expected  future  increase  in  both  temperature  (and  its  associated  pest  incidence)  and 
rainfall  (and  its  likely  associated  flooding  impacts)    as  well  as  decline  in  the  rainfall  in  the 
derived  savanna  zone  are  not  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  impact  of  LIFE-ND,  sustainability 
and  cost  over  the  six-year  lifetime. As  much  as  possible,  location  of  agribusiness  in  marginal 
and highly degraded areas will be minimized.  
89.  Weather-related  risks  including  dry  spells  and  floods  may  also  adversely  impact  upon  key 
stages  of  identified  value  chains  in  the  project  (from  production  to  markets).  Investment  in 
institutional  development  and  capacity  building  for  rural  institutions  (such  as  farmer  groups, 
cooperatives)  is  a  key  issue  in  this  project  to  strengthen  climate-resilient  development, 
indigenous  climate  risk  management  capabilities,  and  adopt  green  technologies  such  as 
creating value chains in integrated pesticide and agrochemical management and conversion of 
farm  wastes  to  animal/poultry  feeds.  Policy  dialogue  is  also  being  introduced  to  mainstream 
climate resilience in the agricultural sector. 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
90. 
LIFE-ND  will  be  implemented  over  a  six-year  period  with  IFAD  financing  the  project  in  six 
states.  The NDDC will finance, manage and supervise activities in the remaining three states. 
Thus, all the  nine  Niger Delta states  will be covered  by  the project. Investments  will cover  10 
LGAs per state and 10 communities in each LGA targeted on the basis of poverty level, youth 
unemployment,  community  involvement,  conflict-free  nature,  level  of  agricultural  activities  and 
private sector involvement.  
91.  Through  a  Public-Private  Partnership  (PPP)  arrangement  to  be  driven  by  the  commodity 
alliance  forum  (CAF),  the  project  will  address  the  identified  constraints  that  affect  youth  and 
women  involvement  in  agriculture,  low  production  and  profitability,  and  employment.  LIFE-ND 
will  support:  hands-on  practical  training  on  agribusiness  production;  access  to  resources  for 
production  including  land;  marketing  support  for  enterprises  through  bulk  contracts  with  the 
private sector; and, access to finance and market infrastructure to improve beneficiary market 
participation  in  the  commodity  value  chain  systems.  These  interventions  will  stimulate  the 
development of agribusinesses leading to employment for the beneficiaries at on-farm and off-
farm levels. 
The  incubator  model:  Based  on  the  experience  of  the  IFAD-financed  CBNRMP  which 
successfully  supported  over  6,000  rural  youth  enterprises  and  produced  1,800  string 
enterprises before completion, LIFE-ND will use the incubator model to achieve its objectives of 
enterprise and employment development. Since some of the enterprises created were active in 
training  and  helping  other  farmers  to  establish  their  business,  CBNRMP  coined  the  name  of 
these  enterprises  as  incubator.  LIFE-ND  will  replicate  and  scale  up  the  Incubator  Model  to 
24 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
foster  the  development  of  new  enterprises  through  training,  capacity  building,  backward 
linkages and investments. 
92.  Figure  2 explains the process of incubation.  Broadly: (i)  Applicants from the target group  are 
identified  by  business  development  service  (BDS)  providers  based  on  the  selection  criteria  in 
Box 1; (ii) successful applicants become trainees and undergo a 10-day business planning and 
management  training;  (iii)  successful  trainees  are  seconded  to  willing  incubators  where  they 
become  apprentices  and  undergo  practical  orientation  for  one  to  two  weeks  following  the 
submission  of acceptable business plan by the concerned CADA or Youth Group to LIFE-ND; 
(iv)  following  the  orientation, Apprentices  execute  two  production  and  sales  cycles  under  the 
mentorship of the Incubator; (v) following the two production cycles, the Apprentices start their 
own Enterprises and are  encouraged to agree with their Incubator a number of cycles during 
which they will market their output to the Incubator as their off-taker; (vi) following this process 
new enterprises may themselves become incubators. 
Figure 2: The incubation process in LIFE-ND 
93.  To  strengthen  the  incubator  model  LIFE-ND  will  engage  with  government,  community  or 
individuals to make land available to the beneficiaries for production and marketing.  As a quick-
win,  LIFE-ND  will  secure  farm  settlements  and  warehouse/storage  facilities  from  states  for 
development  for  use  by  the  Incubators  and  Apprentices.  Further,  LIFE-ND  will  engage  with 
market  operators  to  broker  marketing  relationships  with  the  beneficiaries.  Where  appropriate, 
the  arrangement  will  be  guided  by  an  MoU  clearly  defining  the  obligations  of  each  party  and 
responsive to the project performance indicators and project development objective.  
94.  Phasing: LIFE-ND will be implemented in two phases.  Phase 1 will last for three years, up to 
the  midterm  of  the  project.  During  this  phase,  only  25  Incubators  will  be  selected  per  state, 
each of which will incubate five enterprises per year for three years to generate 1,500 paid jobs 
in Phase 1. Phase 1 Incubators will continue to generate enterprises throughout the life of the 
project adding another 6,000 jobs. During Phase 2 (post midterm), the project will capitalize on 
the  lessons  learned  during  Phase  1,  and  upscale  the  model  to  include  an  additional  75 
incubators per state each generating 10 enterprises per year to generate an additional 18,000 
paid jobs. This will give a total of 25,500 direct jobs created in the two phases. This target, as 
well as the number of participating LGAs, will be further reviewed during the midterm.    
95.  Market,  financing  and  institutional  support  for  agri-enterprise  development:  Beyond  the 
incubator  model,  LIFE-ND  will  opportunistically  increase  the  number  of  market  linkages 
between smallholder farmers and  large scale off-takers. In the Niger Delta, commodities  such 
as  cocoa,  fish,  rice,  and  palm  oil  are  already  traded  on  a  large  scale  and  it  may  be  possible, 
without  additional 
to  augment  purchasing  arrangements  and  MOU-based 
agreements between buyers and out-growers to include project beneficiaries. Drawing from the 
successful ongoing VCDP model, the project will support rural out-growers to better supply off-
takers. 
incubation 
96.  The project will facilitate appropriate finance to the incubators, apprentices, related businesses, 
individuals  and  catchment  area  businesses.    This  will  be  achieved  through  various  means 
during  project  implementation,  including:  (i)  savings  promotion,  (ii)  payment  systems  and  (iii) 
cashless  credit  in  off-taker  pre-financing  arrangements.    Other  systems  currently  under 
development including Bank of Agriculture's credit facility and the Nigeria Insurance Risk-based 
25 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Agricultural Lending  Micro  Small and  Medium Enterprise Development Fund  will be reviewed, 
based on their effectiveness for possible inclusion in LIFE-ND during midterm review 
97.  The project will also implement a number of activities at national and state levels to strengthen 
the  capacity  of  relevant  civil  society,  public  and  private  sector  institutions  to:  (i)  improve  the 
policy  framework  for  youth  and  women  producers  and  marketers;  and  (ii)  support  learning, 
knowledge  sharing  and  communication  network  and  activities,  to  incentivise  youth  and  poor 
women to engage in agriculture.  
B.  Organizational framework 
98. 
99. 
LIFE  is  a  FMARD  initiated  national  programme  FMARD  is  making  arrangements  to  put  a 
coordination  structure  in  place.  The  overall  objective  of  the  national  programme,  which  is  to 
revitalize the rural economy through promotion of agribusiness among rural youth and women, 
is  consistent  with  the  first  Strategic  Objective  of  IFAD's  2016  RB-COSOP,  as  agreed  with 
government. IFAD is providing support to the  implementation  of the  national LIFE programme 
with the LIFE-ND in six Niger Delta states, focusing on agri-enterprise development. The NDDC 
is partnering with IFAD to finance LIFE-ND activities in the remaining three Niger Delta states. 
Implementation of the project will be governed by six main principles: (i) alignment, to the extent 
possible, with the Federal Government’s systems and procedures - especially those governing 
public  expenditure  management  and  procurement;  (ii)  performance-based  engagement  of 
private sector Implementation partners; (iii) continuous monitoring of public sector implementing 
partners  and  ensuring  that  their  capacity  is  adequately  strengthened  so  as  to  enable  them  to 
deliver  on  their  mandates;  (iv)  empowerment  of  beneficiaries  to  take  a  leading  role  in  project 
implementation 
(v)  stronger  partnerships  and 
harmonization  with  other  development  partners  and  stakeholders  in  the  sector;  and  (vi) 
facilitation of enterprise creation to generate decent jobs for youth and poor women.  
their  grassroots 
institutions; 
through 
100.  The National LIFE Programme Office (NLPO) based in Abuja will oversee the IFAD-assisted 
LIFE-ND, focusing on policy dialogue, integrating and up-scaling the successes recorded by the 
project  into  the  National  LIFE  Programme,  knowledge  sharing,  and  facilitating  linkage  with 
national institutions including CBN, Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF), SMEDAN etc. IFAD will 
provide some financial resources from the loan proceeds to support a staff position for liaison to 
the NLPO.  
101.  Project  coordination  and  management  will  be  decentralized  to  four  levels:  federal,  regional, 
state,  and  LGA.  At  the  federal  level,  a  National  Steering  Committee  to  be  chaired  by  the 
Honourable  Minister  of  Agriculture  and  composed  of  stakeholders  representatives  which  will 
include  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  FMARD,  Head  of  PCU  (being  created  by  FMARD), 
Directors of Department of Extension and Department of Agriculture in the FMARD, Director of 
Agriculture and Fishery Directorate in the  NDDC, Director and  Deputy  Directors of IER of the 
FMF,  Federal  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and  Budget,  Water  Resources,  Environment  and 
Labour,  CBN,  Representative  of  Youth  Group,  will  provide  oversight  to  the  implementation  of 
the  LIFE-ND  and  approve  the  annual  work  plan  and  budget  (AWPB).  The  National  LIFE 
Programme  Coordinator  will  serve  as  Secretary  to  the  National  Steering  Committee  which  is 
expected to meet once per year. The Regional LIFE-ND will serve as co-secretary. 
102.  At the regional level, a Technical Support Committee (TSC) chaired by the Managing Director 
of  NDDC  will  comprise  the  NDDC  Director  of  Agriculture  and  Fisheries,  NDDC  Director  of 
Planning, National Programme Coordinator of LIFE, Regional  Project Coordinator (who serves 
as  Secretary),  representative  of  FMF,  representatives  of  recognised  youth  and  women 
organisations,  one  representative  from  private  sector  operators  of  the  Commodity  Alliance 
Forum  from  each  participating  state,  as  well  as  relevant  financial  institutions  and  research 
institutions.  The  TSC  will  meet  biannually  to  review  progress  of  project  implementation  and 
26 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
provide guidance for the smooth implementation  of the project activities, or  whenever there is 
an urgent technical issue that requires the attention of the Committee.  
(M&E)  Coordinator,  Knowledge  Management  and  Communication 
103.  The Regional Project Coordination Office (RPCO) housed20 in NDDC Headquarters in  Port 
Harcourt will have direct responsibility for supervision, technical support and coordination of the 
activities  of  the  State  Project  Coordination  Offices  (SPCOs).  Headed  by  the  Regional  Project 
Coordinator (RPC), the RPCO will have the following professional staff: Agribusiness Promotion 
Coordinator,  Rural  Infrastructure  Coordinator,  Rural  Institutions  Coordinator,  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation 
(KMC) 
Coordinator,  Project  Financial  Controller,  Project  Accountant,  Procurement  Coordinator, 
Administration and Logistics Officer, and Project Internal Auditor (who could be seconded from 
the Accountant General’s  Office). In addition, subject matter specialists will  be  hired  when the 
need arises for the following areas relevant for overall project  implementation:  Rural Finance, 
Gender  and  Youth,  Climate  and  Environment,  Nutrition  and  Food  Security,  Sustainable 
Agriculture,  and  Project  Management,  under  the  technical  assistance  category  of  the  project. 
The  professional  staff  of  the  RPCO  shall  be  recruited  on  a  competitive  basis  and  a  suitably 
qualified staff from NDDC’s Directorate of Agriculture and Fisheries will be deployed to work in 
the  RPCO  as  one  of  the  professional  staff  indicated  above.  Such  staff  shall  report  to  the 
Regional  Project  Coordinator.  Each  Key  Staff  (Coordinators)  will  have  an  assistant  to  be 
competitively  recruited.  There  will  be  limited  number  of  support  staff  (like  drivers,  cleaners, 
receptionist, etc.) to be cleared by IFAD based on need. 
104.  At  the  state  level,  a  State  Project  Steering  Committee  chaired  by  the  Honourable 
Commissioner  of  Agriculture  and  composed  of  the  commissioners  of  Finance,  Budget  and 
Planning,  Women  Affairs,  representatives  of  government  agencies  and  departments 
responsible  for  youth  and  women  empowerment,  representatives  of  selected  commodity 
associations  in  the  State,  representatives  of  youth  and  women  organisations,  and  relevant 
financial institutions, will provide oversight function on the project and approve the AWPB at the 
state  level.  In  addition  the  State  Project  Steering  Committee  will  facilitate  the  effective 
participation of relevant actors in the project. 
105.  Each  participating  state  will  have  a  State  Project  Coordination  Office  responsible  for  the 
coordination and supervision of project activities in the state and housed in the ADP. Headed by 
the  State  Project  Coordinator  (SPC),  the  SPCO  will  have  the  following  professional  staff: 
Agribusiness Promotion Officer, Rural Infrastructure Officer, Rural Institution/Gender and Youth 
Officer, M&E Officer, KMC Officer, State Project Accountant, State Finance Officer, Procurement 
Officer, Administration  and  Logistics  Officer,  and  State  Project  Internal Auditor  (who  could  be 
seconded from the Accountant General’s Office). In addition, subject matter specialists will be 
hired when the need arises for the following areas: Rural Finance, Gender and Youth, Climate 
and  Environment,  Nutrition  and  Food  Security,  Sustainable  Agriculture,  and  Project 
Management, under the technical assistance category of the project. Professional staff shall be 
recruited on a competitive  basis and  a suitably qualified staff from NDDC’s state office  will be 
deployed to work in the SPCO as one of the professional staff indicated above. Such staff shall 
report to the State Project Coordinator. Project implementation will be based on service contract 
to the competent and competitively engaged service providers. 
106.  At the LGA level, the project will maintain a Desk Office in the Department of Agriculture. The 
Desk  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  sensitization  and  advocacy  at  the  community  level  under 
the guidance of the SPCO and will also participate in the selection of project beneficiaries.  
107.  At  the  community  level,  the  project  will  strengthen  the  existing  CADAs  through  capacity 
building and promote the formation of new CADAs where they do not exist to promote further 
agribusiness  among  youth  and  women  for  employment  creation.  The  CADAs  will  be 
20 In line with the practice in CBNRMP, NDDC will provide the office accommodation, which could be outside the office 
complex of NDDC. Such office accommodation will be benefiting of a development project. 
27 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
encouraged  to  form  a  federated  CADA  at  the  state  level  from  their  representatives  to  ensure 
strong and viable agribusiness associations. 
108.  The key implementing partners for LIFE include: (a) at the federal level, (i) the Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Lead Implementing Agency; (ii) the Federal Ministry 
of Finance, the  Borrower; and (iii) the Central Bank of Nigeria, for rural finance inclusion; (b) at 
the  regional  level,  (iv)  the  Niger  Delta  Development  Commission,  a  financing  and 
implementing partner with a mandate for the development of the Niger Delta region;  (c) at the 
state  level,  (v)  the  State  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  and  (vi)  the  Agricultural  Development 
Programme;  (d)  at  the  LGA  level,  (vii)  the  Department  of  Agriculture;  and  (e)  at  the 
community level, (viii) the Commodity Apex Development Association, (ix) the incubators, and 
(x)  the  apprentices.  The  PCU  (being  created),  Bank  of  Agriculture,  NIRSAL,  the  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprise  Development  Agency,  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  and 
institutions  within  the  National  Agricultural  Research  System,  are  also  expected  to  play  vital 
support roles. An assessment of each of LIFE's implementing partners is presented in Appendix 
5. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
109.  LIFE will prepare the AWPB in a participatory manner by involving the various actors in priority 
agricultural  commodities  and strategic partners.  Each state will develop an annual  action plan 
with  the  participation  of  strategic  partners  and  service  providers.  These  plans  will  then  be 
consolidated  into  a  single  AWPB,  which  will  be  submitted  for  analysis  and  validation  to  the 
regional  Technical  Support  Committee  and,  then  submitted  for  approval  by  the  National 
Steering Committee.   
110.  Each  AWPB  proposal  will  include:  (i)  a  detailed  description  of  the  activities  planned  for  the 
coming  year, together  with the monitoring  indicators and modalities for implementation; (ii) an 
18-month  procurement  plan;  (iii)  a  disbursement  plan;  and  (iv)  expected  results.  From  the 
second  year  onwards,  the  AWPB  should  include  a  summary  presentation  of  the  results 
obtained and the constraints encountered  during the  previous  year. A flexible  approach to the 
possible  revision  of  the AWPB  during  the  fiscal  year  will  be  adopted  to  take  into  account  the 
recommendations provided by the implementation stakeholders. A timetable for the preparation, 
analysis,  validation,  approval,  implementation  and  review  of  AWPBs  will  be  prepared  by  the 
PMU and approved by the National Steering Committee at its first meeting. 
Monitoring and evaluation  
111.  LIFE-ND  will  develop  an  M&E  system  that  focuses  on  results  and  uses  these  results  for 
decision-making at different levels. This system will be used to provide information that is useful 
to  measure  implementation  progress,  the  outcomes  and  impact  of  project  activities  on  the 
target  population  and  to  steer  the  project.    It  will  incorporate  a  short  list  of  readily  verifiable 
indicators related to IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). The M&E system 
will be based primarily on LIFE-ND logical framework and the indicators will be disaggregated 
as much  as  possible  by  gender  and  age  so  as  to  inform  the  project's  contributions  to  gender 
equity, women's empowerment and youth inclusion. 
112.  LIFE-ND M&E system will be participatory and will involve several steps, including: 
i. 
If  necessary,  technical  assistance  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  project  to  develop  an 
effective  M&E  system  and  build  the  capacity  for  its  implementation.  This  technical 
assistance should help to develop the implementation of LIFE-ND intervention logic. 
ii.  Quantitative  baseline  surveys,  supplemented  by  data  from  strategic  studies  on  key 
project  themes,  including  sector  analysis,  agribusiness  opportunities  for  young  people, 
issues related to gender, rural finance, etc. This baseline situation would also serve as a 
28 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
pre-impact  assessment.  It  will  allow  for  the  development  of  impact  trajectories  that  can 
identify and quantify the effects resulting from project interventions; 
iii.  Ongoing internal M&E of project performance in terms of physical and financial progress 
of  AWPB  activities.  The  collection  of  information  will  be  done  through  a  simple  and 
reliable system, including geographic  information systems (GIS) tools for data collection 
and transmission, to feed a data base and a map with real-time project results, that can 
be shared with project partners and the general public; 
iv.  Participatory self-assessments with project stakeholders, such as service providers; 
v. 
Joint  supervision  missions  by  the  Government  and  IFAD,  twice  a  year,  as  well  as 
missions to support implementation; 
vi.  An internal and external midterm evaluation at the end of the third year of the project; 
vii.  Annual outcome surveys after midterm; 
viii.  A  completion  evaluation  based  on  an  impact  study  during  the  final  year  of  the  project. 
The  impact  study  will  use  mixed  methods,  integrating  participatory,  qualitative  and 
quantitative approaches in order to enhance the reliability of the data and to deepen the 
understanding of the results chain; and 
ix.  At  project  completion,  a  final  mission  to  prepare  a  completion  report  and  organize  a 
closing workshop with project stakeholders. 
113.  LIFE-ND  will  use  participatory  approaches  and  methods,  including  assessments  done  by 
stakeholders,  the  collection  of  oral  testimonials,  participatory  social  mapping,  charts  and 
diagrams of causal relationships, trends and changes, and brainstorming on the strengths and 
weaknesses  of  project  interventions. These  participatory  methods  make  it  possible  to  capture 
the experiences and realities of LIFE-ND direct beneficiaries. They will also help to understand 
how contextual factors are influencing the implementation and outcomes of the project.  
114. 
If  necessary  towards  the  end  of  the  project,  technical  assistance  will  allow  to  develop 
quantitative impact assessment methods with well-structured statistical models to determine the 
magnitude  of  impacts, causal  relationships,  comparisons  with  the  counterfactual  -  what  would 
have  happened  in  the  absence  of  LIFE-ND,  before  and  after,  with  and  without  the  project, 
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households, and positive and negative impact on groups other 
than the direct beneficiaries. These impact assessments will help to better understand LIFE-ND 
impact  on  target  households  and  its  contribution  on  a  larger  scale,  with  direct  and  indirect 
outcomes. 
115.  The regional Project Coordination Office will be responsible for M&E, validation, consolidation, 
data  analysis  and  reporting.  The  project’s  M&E  system  will  be  integrated  with  that  of  the 
FMARD and other partners to ensure sustainability and an effective use.  
116.  The  M&E  system  will  include  social  and  environmental  safeguard  measures  to  support  all 
project  activities,  especially  those  expected  to  have  a  critical  impact.  On  the  basis  of  the 
analysis  and  recommendations  of  the  SECAP  note,  the  project  will  finance  the  preparation  of 
environmental and social management plans.  
Learning and knowledge management 
117.  A knowledge management strategy will be developed by LIFE-ND during the first six months of 
the project and linked to the Knowledge Management Strategy of the FMARD. The strategy will 
aim to create a value chain between  M&E, knowledge and communication  in order to collect, 
process, document, use and distribute on a large scale the data and information generated by 
project activities. Multiple media and new technologies will be used.  
118.  The first step will be to collect in an electronic library all the important documents that provide 
information  on  the  implementation  of  LIFE-ND. The  second  step  will  be  to  make  an  inventory 
and catalogue on an electronic platform of the activities of the beneficiaries, budget, results and 
impacts. The most important information will be compiled and fed into a database that will show 
long-term trends for key indicators. The third step will be to analyze and present the data from 
29 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
the  database  in  a  user-friendly  and  differentiated  form,  according  to  the  needs  of  the  users. 
Graphs and maps will be created to show the evolution of the interventions of the project in the 
intervention area. 
119.  The  dissemination  and  communication  of  the  results  will  be  done  through:  (i)  a  website 
developed  by  LIFE-ND,  which  will  be  able  to  publish  newsletters  four  times  a  year;  (ii) 
interactive  radio  broadcasts:  and  (iii)  exchange  visits  on  knowledge  and  innovations.  The 
results of LIFE-ND will be made available to different partners for use in policy dialogue and the 
design  of  new  projects.  To  this  end,  workshops  and  other  opportunities  for  dialogue  will  be 
organized  and  supported  annually  during  the  presentation  of  LIFE-ND  progress  report.  Good 
practices  and  success  stories  will  also  be  identified,  disseminated  and  scaled  up.  Particular 
attention will be given to the  utilization of local knowledge generated by the project. Technical 
and  knowledge  capitalization  documents  (fact  sheets,  technical  references,  etc.)  will  be 
produced in various forms in collaboration with the technical team of the  project during the life 
of  the  project. To  this  end,  the  RPCO  will  have  Knowledge  Management  and  Communication 
(KMC) Coordinator and each SPCO a KMC Officer.  
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
Financial Management 
120.  Anticorruption  and  good  governance  framework:  The  project  will  be  subject  to  IFAD's 
anticorruption  policy.  According  to  the  policy,  IFAD  applies  a  zero-tolerance  policy  towards 
fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive  or  coercive  actions  in  projects  financed  through  its  loans  and 
grants.  
121.  Project  financial  management:  IFAD  requires  that  the  project  will  be  implemented  in  an 
environment  with  sufficiently  strong  financial  management  systems  and  controls  in  place  to 
properly  manage,  control  and  report  on  project  finances.  The  RPCO  through  the  SPCOs  will 
assume  overall  responsibility  of  managing  the  project's  fiduciary  performance  including, 
budgeting,  accounting,  financial  reporting,  submission  of  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  and 
hiring of the external auditor. 
122.  Staffing:  Qualified  staff  will  be  recruited  through  a  transparent  and  competitive  process.  The 
RPCO will employ a financial controller, an accountant, and an internal auditor. Each SPCO will 
employ a finance officer, an accountant, and an internal auditor. 
123.  Budgeting and budget control: The RPCO will prepare a consolidated AWPB based on input 
from the SPCOs  in  a format acceptable to IFAD  and  submit it to  IFAD for its non-objection at 
least two months before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year. There will be no state specific 
allocation of financing in the IFAD Financing Agreement. Instead the transfer of funds from the 
RPCO  to  the  states  will  be  performance  based  and  decided  during  implementation  based  on 
the AWPB and their past financial performance. 
124.  Accounting:  The  project  will  record  its  transactions  in  accordance  with  International  Public 
Sector  Accounting  Standard  (IPSAS)  cash  basis  of  accounting.  A  standalone  accounting 
software is to be procured during the start-up phase and installed in the RPCO and the SPCOs. 
The  accounting  software  will  be  customized  to  produce  all  IFAD  reports  and  withdrawal 
application forms. 
125. 
Internal  controls:  In  order  to  ensure:  (a)  efficiency;  (b) reliability  of  financial  reports;  and  (c) 
compliance  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations  including  the  conditions  set  forth  in  the 
Financing  Agreement,  the  RPCO  will  ensure  that  adequate  internal  controls    including:  (i) 
adequate  policies  and  procedures,  (ii)  sufficient  segregation  of  duties,  (iii)  fixed  asset 
maintenance,  (iv)  periodic  monitoring  and  review,  and  (v)  proper  authorization  and  access 
levels,  are  maintained  throughout  project  implementation  by  the  RPCO,  SPCOs  and  all 
eventual implementing partners. 
30 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
126.  Flow  of  funds:  A  separate  Designated Account  (DA)  will  be  opened  for  the  IFAD  loan  in  the 
CBN in US$ and will not be mingled with other funds. In order to allow the FGN to monitor the 
income of funds, the DA will be a subaccount under the FGN  Treasury Single Account (TSA). 
From the DA, the funds  will flow to the project  loan account (Project Account A) in  naira. The 
federal counterpart funds will be deposited in a separate federal counterpart fund account. The 
RPCO  will  be  authorized  to  manage  both  the  DA  and  the  federal  counterpart  fund  account.  
Each  state  will  open  two  accounts  in  naira:  (i)  a  state  project  account  (Project Account  B)  to 
receive IFAD loan funds from the Project Account A, and (ii) a state counterpart fund account to 
receive state counterpart funds. Each SPCO will be authorized to manage the Project Account 
B and the state counterpart fund account. 
127. 
IFAD disbursement procedures: The IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified 
withdrawal applications in accordance with the IFAD disbursement procedures. 
128.  Authorized  allocation  of  the  Designated  Account:  The  DA  for  the  IFAD  financing  will  be 
operated and replenished following the Imprest Account arrangements. After the IFAD financing 
has entered into force and the conditions for first disbursement have been duly complied with 
and  upon  request  by  the  Borrower,  IFAD  will  make  an  initial  deposit  to  the  DA  equal  to  the 
requirements of six months implementation (Authorized Allocation). 
129.  Supporting  documentation: As  the  IFAD  financing  is  a  loan  to  the  Federal  Government,  all 
original  supporting  documentation  must  be  stored  in  the  RPCO.  The  SPCOs  will  maintain 
certified copies. 
130.  Financial reporting: The SPCO will produce periodic financial reports in an agreed format with 
IFAD  and  submit  these  to  the  RPCO.  The  RPCO  will  produce  its  own  financial  reports  and 
consolidate  all  the  financial  reports  for  the  whole  project.  The  RPCO  will  provide  IFAD  with 
consolidated financial reports21 within agreed timeframes as follows:  
(i)  Quarterly or semi-annual consolidated interim financial reports  
(ii)  Annual consolidated Financial Statements within four months after the end of the fiscal 
year  
(iii)  Annual consolidated audit report and a management letter within six months after the 
end of the Borrower’s fiscal year 
131.  External  audit:  The  RPCO  will  appoint  an  independent  private  audit  firm,  procured  in 
accordance  with  the  method  and  criteria  set  forth  in  IFAD's  Guidelines  on  Programme Audits 
(for Borrower's Use). The auditors will be required to audit the consolidated financial statements 
of the entire project for each fiscal year in accordance with International Standards on Auditing 
(ISA). The terms of reference for the audit will be agreed with IFAD on annual basis. The audit 
report, including the management letter covering the audit observations on internal controls, will 
be  submitted  to  IFAD  within  six  months  of  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year. The  appointment  of  the 
auditor shall be for a maximum period of 3 years, subject to satisfactory performance. 
132.  Supervision and implementation support:  A financial management specialist will participate 
in  the  annual  IFAD  supervision  missions  to  supervise  and  provide  implementation  support  to 
the project.  
Procurement  
133.  Public Procurement in Nigeria is governed by the Public Procurement Act (2007) which defines 
the  responsibilities,  principles  and  processes  applicable  in  the  public  procurement  of  works, 
goods  and  services.  The Act  established  the  Public  Procurement  Board  (PPB)  with  a  role  to 
supervise  the  established  laws  and  policies,  and  report  to  the  National  Council  on  Public 
21 The financial reports will include at least the following: i) sources and uses of funds by financier and by category, ii) 
variance  report  -  incurred  expenditures  against  budgeted  expenditures  by  component  and  expenditure  category,  iii) 
bank  account  reconciliation,  iv)  Statement  of  Expenditures  -  Withdrawal  Application  Statement,  and  v)  fixed  asset 
register. 
31 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Procurement,  comprised  of  high  level  government  officials,  representatives  of  professional 
associations and technical experts. The reforms in public procurement in Nigeria over the last 
15 years have largely responded to the deficiencies identified by the World Bank. 
134.  The lessons learned from the IFAD country programme implementation over the last few years 
appear to emphasize that the capacity of procurement officials remains a major challenge. Lack 
of  capacity  in  many  cases  constrains  the  ability  of  procuring  entities  to  properly  follow 
procurement  and  contract  management  rules  and  thereby  obtain  the  desired  outcome  from  a 
procurement procedure. Specifically, the issues that have been recurrently highlighted by IFAD 
supervision  missions  include  a  combination  of:  (i)  ineffective  procurement  planning;  (ii) 
ineffective  bid  evaluation  procedures;  (iii)  weak  contract  management,  and  (iv)  poor  record 
keeping. Experience has shown that the incidence of such weaknesses can be mitigated in part 
by intense implementation support and close and continuous supervision. 
135. 
In view of the above, LIFE-ND will, along with other ongoing and future IFAD projects, affiliate 
to  a  national  level  Project  Management  Unit  that  will  function  as  a  service  agency  and 
centralize  certain  functions  for  all  projects  to  increase  efficiency,  including:    liaison  with  the 
FMARD  Project  Coordination  Unit,  M&E  and  competitive  procurement.    In  the  case  of 
competitive procurement—as unique from low value local shopping procurement—it is planned 
that  the  national  level  PMU  will  competitively  recruit  professional  procurement  services  to 
service all projects.  These services will comply fully with both Nigeria's Public Procurement Act 
and IFAD's policies(detailed in Appendix 8).  These services will receive annual work plans and 
budgets,  request  and/or  develop  specifications  of  items  and  services  to  be  procured,  conduct 
tenders, and communicate with projects the winning bidders in order that the projects can make 
awards.  The service provider will be independently audited on an annual basis.  The national 
level  Project  Management  Unit  may  as  well  consider  to  engage  the  services  provider  on  the 
basis of both a base payment for each procurement and an incentive bonus on an annual basis 
for successful execution of duties.   
136.  LIFE-ND  will  comply  fully  with  internal  approval  procedures.  Appendix  8  presents  the 
recommended procurement methods and thresholds that will initially be applicable for the IFAD 
financed portion of  LIFE-ND. These thresholds will be finalised and formally communicated to 
the  Government  through  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LtB),  upon  entry  into  force  of  the  loan. 
During implementation, they may be unilaterally reviewed (raised or lowered) by IFAD. Where 
there  is  disagreement  between  the  BPP's  provisions  and  those  in  the  LTB,  the  latter  shall 
supersede the former. All contracts regardless of value will be subject to IFAD's ex-post review.  
Governance  
137.  Fighting corruption is high on FGN's agenda and the corruption perception index published by 
Transparency International has shown a minor increase in the past years22. Similarly, the World 
Bank's  Doing  Business  Report  notes  that  despite  some  developments  (e.g.  registering  property 
and  protecting  minority  investors),  the  country  still  ranks  relatively  low  (169  out  of  189)  with 
regards to the ease of doing business.  Several public expenditure and financial accountability 
(PEFA)  assessments  have  been  conducted  between  2008  and  2013  at  state  level,  of  which 
only  four  reports  have  been  made  public.  The  reports  reveal  that  although  some  minor 
differences  between  states  can  be  noted,  the  overall  quality  of  public  financial  management 
systems in the country is weak and requires improvements. At the federal level, FGN is making 
some progress in improving its financial management systems and practices. In 2016, FGN set 
up  a  Treasury  Single Account  in  the  CBN,  improving  the  FGN's  ability  to  monitor  the  flow  of 
funds to externally financed programmes and better control over US$ transactions. FGN is also 
making efforts to adopt the IPSAS accrual basis in the coming years. 
22 2012 (27); 2013 (25); 2014(27); 2015 (26); 2016 (28) 
32 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
138.  To  address  the  concerns  about  the  poor  governance  potential  in  the  project,  the  design 
incorporates the following measures for project implementation: 
i. 
Transparency of  information: Enhanced disclosure  provisions  including: (i) making all 
key  documents  public,  (ii)  informing  all  bidders  promptly  of  contract  awards  and  bid 
evaluation  summaries;  (iii)  allowing  representatives  of  end-users  of  the  goods  or  works 
being procured to attend the public bid openings; (iv) making available the details of all 
contracts awarded; and (v) making available the date of request for all contract payments 
and the date of each payment, with an explanation of the reason for any delays.  These 
provisions are backed by the Freedom of Information Act (2011) which establishes  “the 
right of any person to access or request information which is in the custody of any public 
official, agency or institution”. 
ii.  Participation and consultation: Establishing a complaint handling mechanism (and the 
use  of  sanctions),  whereby  community  members  and  the  general  public  can  channel 
complaints or inquiries e.g. through the use of mobile phone text messaging. Complaints 
and  inquiries  will  be  systematically  recorded  and  answered.  The  project  will  also  post 
complaints  on  the  national  programme’s  website  so  that  case  processing  will  be  more 
transparent.  Designated  staff  at  the  RPCO  and  SPCO  will  handle  complaints  and 
respond in a timely manner. In addition, all programme staff and all beneficiaries will be 
made aware of IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy as well as the national anticorruption policies 
and whistle blowing procedures. 
iii.  Monitoring  and  oversight:  The  project  will  establish  an  operational  M&E  system  from 
the community to the national level to proactively monitor and report on project activities 
and  performance across the result chain (including financial and  physical progress). As 
part of the M&E system, all project sites including civil works, community organizations, 
incubators  etc.  will  be  mapped  in  a  GPS  database  further  supporting  project 
implementation,  IFAD  supervision  and  evaluation  of  the  project  after  the  project  has 
finished. For financial management, there will be an in-depth and intensive supervision in 
the  initial  years  to  ensure  the  successful  implementation  of  the  financial  management 
arrangements.  Alternatively,  a  separate  mission/consultant  complemented  by  desk-
based  review  of  financial  and  internal  audit  reports  will  be  done  every  year.  Annual 
meetings will be held to review project performance as well as the country programme to 
share  lessons  learned  and  best  practices  among  programme  staff  and  government 
counterpart agencies. There  will be annual assessments of service  providers by farmer 
organizations  and  commodity  interest  groups  to  feed  into  the  annual  project  planning 
process.  Moreover,  the  project  internal  auditors  will  play  a  key  role  in  making  sure  that 
the  internal  controls  are  set  up  and  working.  The  internal  auditors  will  also  conduct 
regular field visits to ensure that the financial progress is in line with the reported physical 
progress.    The  project  will  also  be  subject  to  independent  and  external  auditing  in  line 
with IFAD procedures and requirements.  
E.  Supervision 
139.  Project supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD but in participatory manner involving key 
partners.  The  Supervision  and  implementation  support  function  will  include:  (a)  a  start-up 
workshop;  (b)  review  of AWPB  and  monitoring  the  implementation;  (c)  annual  project  review 
including review of progress reports from the  RPCO; (d) review of withdrawal applications and 
procurement  documents;  (e)  comprehensive  field  missions,  jointly  with  the  Borrower,  leading 
agencies  (FMARD),  NDDC,  participating  key  private  sector  operators  and  other  implementing 
partners;  (f)  specialized  implementation  support  or  thematic  missions  by  finance  officers  or 
technical staff and consultants to keep the project on track; (g) MTR of project implementation 
to  assess  overall  performance  on  stated  project  objective  midway  to  completion  for  any 
corrective measure; (h) knowledge events and workshops to capitalize and share knowledge on 
33 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
project  performance;  and  (i)  support  to  project  completion  exercise.  IFAD  will  jointly  with  the 
FMARD organize a start-up stakeholders’ workshop to establish a common understanding of 
the project implementation strategy, a shared vision of the project objectives and awareness of 
their respective roles and responsibilities at the commencement of the implementation.  
140.  The  start-up  workshop  will  involve  key  government  representatives,  project  staff,  other 
financing partners, beneficiary representatives,  and NGOs. Using the project  log frame as the 
starting  point,  IFAD  will  guide  the  project  team  to  work  out  the  specific  actions  needed  to 
translate the project  implementation strategy  into  the  activities and results (outputs, outcomes 
and  impacts)  intended  during  the  six  years  of  implementation. The  orientation  for  project  staff 
and key stakeholders  will explain the project objectives, log frame, conceptual framework and 
project activities as well as interpret the Letter to the Borrower, Financing Agreement, and key 
working documents. The start-up will also be used to explain the strategies for the project staff, 
key  government  functionaries,  private  sector  players,  and  other  development  agencies  to  be 
involved in implementation.   
the  Financing  Agreement.  Field  supervision  missions  will 
141.  Twelve  months  after  the  start-up  workshop,  joint  supervision  missions  (IFAD,  Government, 
NDDC  and  private  sector  players)  will  be  undertaken  annually  to  review  progress  and  assist 
implementing  agencies  to  improve  project  implementation.  The  supervision  missions  will 
assess overall physical and financial performance, address key issues regarding overall service 
delivery  to  meet  development  objectives,  poverty,  targeting  and  gender  and  job  creation,  as 
well as identify  implementation constraints and propose measures for addressing bottlenecks. 
The  aim  is  to  ensure  good  governance  and  the  project’s  compliance  with  all  the  fiduciary 
follow  after  a 
aspects  of 
comprehensive review of the project’s progress reports; so the RPCO will be required to submit 
a  report  ahead  of  the  mission. The  mission  will  end  with  a  debriefing  of  the  leadership  of  the 
Borrower  and  FMARD,  an  aide  memoire  and  management  letter  which  will  articulate  the 
findings of the mission and actionable recommendations to address any shortfall or improve on 
performance.  The  project  team,  the  Borrower,  FMARD  and  NDDC  will  be  supported  by  the 
IFAD  Country  Office  to  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  mission.  In  selecting  a 
supervision mission team, IFAD, Government and NDDC will consider continuity and variety of 
into 
team  members 
implementation.  In  this  context,  national  and  international  expertise  will  be  considered  in  the 
supervision  team.  The  national  experts  will  bring  valuable  local  knowledge  while  the 
international  experts  will  have  a  neutral  position  toward  any  local  controversies. The  financial 
experts  will  be  encouraged  to  make  a  stand-alone  mission  prior  to  the  main  mission.  Their 
findings will be made available to the main mission.  
to  ensure  consistency  and 
ideas  and  advise 
infusion  of 
fresh 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
142.  Climate risk (rated moderate): The major climate risks are increasing rainfall and temperature 
and  the  likelihood  of  some  activities  (e.g.  production  of  rice)  leading  to  emission  of  Green 
House Gases  (GHG). The concomitant flooding  associated  with increased rainfall could  wash 
away farmlands and fish ponds. Increasing rainfall  will also increase erosion in Abia, Imo and 
parts  of  Edo  and  Cross  River  states.  Rising  temperature  will  be  mostly  crop-specific  (e.g. 
excessive  heat  decreases  rice  yield)  and  location-specific  (e.g.  excessive  heat  may  reduce 
water available for crops in the derived savanna zones in  the northern parts of Edo and Ondo 
states).  Increase  in  temperature  will  also  increase  insect  and  pest  activities  and  their  impacts 
on  on-farm  and  stored  products.  The  poor  capacity  of  the  agro-allied  agencies  (extension 
services, meteorological) to generate and disseminate climate information to farmers to guide 
the timing of on-farm activities also remains a big challenge. As means of mitigation, LIFE-ND 
will:  (i)  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  extension  agency  to  disseminate  climate  information  to 
farmers  for  timely  decision  making;  (ii)  support  farmers  to  grow crops that are tolerant  to  the 
prevailing local climatic condition, and encourage fish farmers to use nets and minimally open-
up  channels  to  prevent  excessive  flood  during  heavy  rains;  (iii)  train  farmers  to  drain  rice 
34 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
paddies  in  mid-season  to  reduce  methane  emission  and  improve  residue  and  nutrient 
management;  (iv)  encourage  improved  cultivation  practices  and  use  of  organic  fertilizers  to 
boost soil fertility; (v) advise entrepreneurs to adopt a ‘no regret’ strategy including agricultural 
insurance; and (vi) discourage unsustainable secondary value chains such as the production of 
wood charcoal for use in fish kilns.  
143.  Environmental risk (rated moderate): Possible rehabilitation of  agricultural land overtaken by 
bush,  pollution  of  water  sources  from  use  of  agrochemicals,  poor  management  of  agricultural 
waste, and bush and pipeline fires are some of the environmental risks. Pollution from oil and 
hazardous  chemical  spill  in  the  interior  creeks  and  mangrove  swamps,  and  erosion  in  some 
states  are  some  of  the  long  standing  environmental  challenges  in  the  Niger  Delta  region. As 
means  of  mitigation,  the  project  will:  (i)  educate  farmers  on  the  need  to  use  sustainable  land 
development  and  preparation  methods  including  zero  or  minimum  tillage;  (ii)  discourage  (and 
definitely  not  support)  the  opening  of  virgin  forests  and  wetlands  for  farming  or  other 
enterprises; (iii) support the production of trees crops (especially oil palm) in the forest zone to 
improve  the  canopy  ecosystems  and  carbon  sink;  and  (iv)  support  the  beneficiaries  to  create 
value  chains  in  areas  such  as  integrated  pest  and  agrochemicals  management  and  waste 
valorization towards environmentally smart agricultural production and processing. 
144.  Land tenure and social exclusion (rated moderate): Security of tenure remains an issue for 
all the models of land availability in the region. In the Niger Delta land is either inherited by male 
children or is communal.  Legally, all  land is owned  by the Nigerian Government  while the de 
facto  case  is  that  inherited  lands  are  left  to  their  family  owners  and  communal  lands  can  be 
allocated by communities on a lease basis.  This de  facto reality is rarely,  if ever, challenged.  
Some  of  the  private  and  communal  land  access  arrangements  do  not  guarantee  social 
inclusion of the direct beneficiaries of the project - youth and women. In some localities, women 
cannot  own  land  independent  of  their  male  partners,  while  in  primogeniture  societies,  many 
youth and women will likely have no access to family lands. In some other communities, women 
have  no  say  in  public  discourse  and  could  be  marginalized  in  land  access  and  allocation  for 
economic activities by the community.  As means of mitigation, the project will: (i) give priority of 
land access to youth and women on any developed public (government land); and (ii) make the 
guarantee of access to land by  youth and women one of the preconditions for a community to 
be selected to participate in the project. 
145.  Social  conflicts  and  youth  restiveness  in  the  region  (rated  moderate):  Youth  restiveness 
has  resulted  from  years  of  environmental  damage  which  has  affected  traditional  livelihoods, 
neglect in physical development, and divisive politics. This has led to loss of social and cultural 
cohesion and the emergence of a local elite through the selective gratification  o f   a  m in or it y 
at   t h e  ex pe ns e  of   t h e   community  and  the  environment.  As  means  of  mitigation:  (i)  the 
Federal Government instituted an Amnesty Programme, but its management has not been very 
satisfactory;  and  (ii)  the  project:  (a)  focuses  on  job  creation  for  the  youth  through  agri-
enterprises; (b) has a robust conflict management strategy including using peer-to-peer reach-
out,  using  successful  youth  entrepreneurs  to  reach  out  to  other  youth  in  the  region;  (c)  will 
develop a clear communication and community sensitization strategy to manage expectations, 
and  (d)  operates  an  effective  complaints  and  grievance  mechanism  to  pre-empt  and  avoid 
escalation of conflict. 
146.  Resource use conflicts (rated moderate): The recent escalation of conflicts over land between 
farmers and pastoralists, precipitated by climate change and the terrorist crisis in northeastern 
Nigeria,  is  making  an  incursion  into  both  the  forest  and  savanna  zones  of  the  Niger  Delta 
region.  This  has  the  potential  of  worsening  the  crisis  situation  in  the  region.  As  means  of 
mitigation,  the  project  will:  (i)  advise  agri-entrepreneurs  to  avoid  lands  in  designated  grazing 
reserves and around known grazing routes; (ii) encourage agribusinesses to adopt agricultural 
insurance as a ‘no regret’ strategy to compensate for possible loss due to animal destruction of 
35 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
crops;  and  (iii)  encourage  state  government  to  consider  options  such  as  creating  ranches  or 
designated grazing areas for the pastoralists.  
147.  Political  and  counterpart  funding  risk  (rated  moderate):  The  CBNRMP  experience  shows 
that  the  magnitude  and  timeliness  of  release  of  counterpart  funds  by  some  levels  of 
government depended on the  level of rapport between the  different  levels of government and 
how  much  their  priorities  aligned  to  the  project’s  objectives.  This  adversely  affected  the 
sustainability and scaling up of the project. As means of mitigation, LIFE-ND will: (i) select the 
priority commodities to be  supported in each state in  collaboration  with the state government, 
and  the  dominance  of  the  commodity  at  the  LGA  level;  (ii)  minimize  counterpart  fund 
contributions  by  the  LGAs  who  have  been  unable  to  exercise  their  autonomy  in  budgets  in 
recent  years;  (iii)  limit  counterpart  funding  requirement  by  state  governments  to  payment  of 
seconded  staff  salaries  and  accommodation 
the 
recommendations  of  the  IFAD  country  programme  review  and  the  practices  of  other 
development partners operating in the country, such as the World Bank.  
the  project  office, 
line  with 
for 
in 
148.  Governance  and fiduciary  risk (rated high): The  mitigation measures for the perceived  high 
level of corruption in Nigeria, including the Niger Delta region, are highlighted in paragraph 136. 
In addition, LIFE-ND  will  adopt  a system of central procurement with regular third party audit.  
Finally,  discussions  will  be  held  by  the  project  team  with  senior  state  government  officials  on 
reducing the cost of doing business by project beneficiaries, especially related to illegal tolls on 
their  produce  during  transportation.  This  and  other  issues  will  be  addressed  through  policy 
dialogue. 
149.  Rural  infrastructure  underdevelopment (rated moderate): The lack of infrastructure in  most 
parts of the Niger Delta region remains a threat to agricultural transformation. Even when land 
is available, a lot has to be done to access it, and more still to improve rural facilities to attract 
young  people  with  a  city  mentality  to  consider  agribusiness  in  the  rural  areas.  As  means  of 
mitigation,  the  project  will:  (i)  support  a  campaign  on  the  new  interconnected  economy  and 
opportunities  created  by  globalization,  to  change  the  mentality  of  agriculture  being  a  rural 
occupation;  (ii)  encourage  the  state  governments  to  provide  basic  infrastructure  in  the  rural 
communities;  and  (iii)  invest  in  productive  and  social  infrastructure  in  support  of  the  priority 
investments of the youth and women. 
150. 
Incubators dropping out midstream (rated low): Youth in the Niger Delta region who are used 
to a ‘free flow money from oil’ mentality and ‘selective  gratification’ may  drop out  of the project 
incubation  process  when  they  realize  that  there  is  not  much  physical  cash  at  their  disposal. 
Again, some incubators may shut down or send their apprentices away due to disenchantment 
with  the  project.  As  means  of  mitigation,  the  project  will:  (i)  allow  a  certain  percentage  of 
entrants (5-10 percent) for attrition to ensure the maximum intended number of incubators and 
apprentices  is  reached;  and  (ii)  comply  with  a  rigorous  selection  process  for  the  apprentices 
using community and commodity association guarantees. 
151.  Access  to  market:  It  was  clear  based  on  discussions  with  youth  during  design  that  getting 
through the formality to gain access to market is an issue for young agri-entrepreneurs. Though 
the  off-taker  arrangement  may  reduce  this  risk,  it  makes  less  money  available  to  the 
entrepreneur  as  commodities  are  ‘cleared’  at  farm-gate  price  rather  than  market  price.  As 
means  of  mitigation,  the  project  will  assist  beneficiaries  with  market  information  and  capacity 
building when needed to enter the mainstream local and external market channels. 
152.  Elite  capture:  (rated  high)  The  chances  of  some  ‘city  youth’  that  are  more  exposed  and 
financially  endowed  than  the  ‘home  youth’  coming  back  home  to  try  and  hijack  the  whole 
process  exist.  Politicians  may  also  try  to  hijack  and  manipulate  the  selection  processes  to 
favour  their  cronies  and  supporters. As  means  of  mitigation,  the  project  will  put  in  place  strict 
due diligence and integrity checks in the selection of participating youth and women to ensure 
that only those who meet the set criteria are admitted to participate in the project. 
36 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Assumptions 
153.  LIFE-ND  will  comprise  of  two  phases,  each  with  a  duration  of  six  years.  Implementation  is 
foreseen to commence in 2018,  just after IFAD's Executive Board Approval in December 2017.  
154.  The  cost  tables  account  for  IFAD's  and  FGN's  intention  to  set  aside  and/or  mobilise  an 
additional  US$  30  million,  from  either  a  subsequent  PBAS  cycle23  or  though  co-financing,  to 
fund  activities  during  the  second  phase  (2024  –  2029).  The  specific  activities  that  will  be 
financed during Phase 2 will be a replication and up-scaling of those Phase 1 activities that de 
will have demonstrated sustainable results. 
155.  Unit costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing at the time of the first design 
mission fielded  in March 2017. Documentation from on-going projects (RUFIN,  VCDP, CASP) 
were  consulted  to  ground-truth  cost  estimates.  Given  the  prevailing  volatility  of  the  Nigerian 
Naira (NGN) on the foreign exchange market (having lost half its value in the last 4 years), the 
input currency used for these cost tables is the US$. Costs are also expressed in NGN at the 
current exchange rate of US$ 1:NGN 305 - applied throughout the project life.  
156.  Local Inflation in Nigeria today stands between 16 and 18 per cent24. Price contingencies have 
been calculated based on a constant: (i) local inflation rate of 11.5% (ten year average); and (ii) 
two per cent foreign inflation rate, based on the World Bank’s Manufactures Unit Value (MUV) 
Index25.. 
157.  Taxes  and  duties  were  estimated  using  information  made  publicly  available  by  the  Federal 
Inland  Revenue  Service  of  Nigeria.  All  good  and  services  are  subject  to  five  per  cent  value 
added tax, Imported vehicles carry a 70 per cent import duty.   
158.  For the following expenditure categories, a five per cent physical contingency has been added 
to  cost  allocations  under  the  following  expenditure  categories:  (i)  Civil  Works,  (ii)  Equipment 
and Material; (iii) Training; and (iv) Operating Costs. 
159. 
It  is  estimated  that  50  per  cent  of  expenditures  under  categories:  Civil  Works;  Vehicles  and 
Motorcycles; Consultancies; and Equipment and Material, will be made in foreign currency (i.e. 
for imported goods and services).  
B.  Project costs 
I.  Programme Costs 
160.  LIFE-ND  is  planned  with  a  financing  gap  of  six  years.    Thus  the  programme  has  both  a  first 
phase (covered by the targets set out in this document) of six years, with parallel finance from 
NDDC in three additional Niger Delta state, and then an additional six years to be financed in 
the  future  by  other  partners  and/or  an  additional  IFAD  loan.  Total  programme  costs  to  be 
incurred during the 12-year implementation period, including price and physical contingencies, 
duties  and  taxes,  are  estimated  at  US$  130.015  million.  Base  costs  amount  to  US$  121.747 
million. Estimated physical contingencies amount to US$ 1.805 million; price contingencies are 
estimated  at  US$  6.463  million.  The  estimated  foreign  exchange  element  of  project  costs  is 
US$  19.795  million  representing  approximately  15  per  cent  of  total  project  costs.  Duties  and 
taxes are equivalent  to US$ 3.057 million (two per cent of total project costs). Investment costs 
US$ 111.587 million - account for 86 per cent of base costs; total recurrent costs are estimated 
23 Financing terms to be determined and subject to IFAD's internal Procedures and Executive Board Approval 
24 Central Bank of Nigeria, 2017 
25 World Bank, 2017 – MUV is a Measure of the price of developing country imports of manufactures in U.S. dollar 
terms.  
37 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
at US$ 10.161 million. Programme coordination and Management (Component 2) costs amount 
to US$ 21.508 million, representing 16 per cent of total project costs.  
161.  Total Project Costs by component is shown in tables 5  and 6 below: 
Table 5: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Year (USD) 
Table 6: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Expenditure Account (USD) 
38 
 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Project Components by Year -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base Cost201820192020202120222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth 1. Sub-Component 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 1 9562 0519 2239 5688 6778 5615467103 1613 4402 9562 95653 8042. Sub-Component 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses -8 8278 5048 5041 124837-2 8432 7232 72332332336 7303. Sub-Component 1.3: Financial inclusion support for agri-enterprises 5756996756756996751752222102102222105 2474. Sub-Component 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 4239197947146876871362882302552302235 586Subtotal 2 95412 49519 19619 46111 18610 7598574 0636 3246 6283 7313 713101 367B. Component 2: Project management and coordination 3 8281 9241 9342 1511 9342 4241 5229139139139131 01320 380Total BASELINE COSTS 6 78114 41921 13021 61213 12013 1832 3794 9777 2377 5414 6444 726121 747Physical Contingencies 3329133734498971614717017051501 805Price Contingencies Inflation Local 1561 4572 7654 0572 3923 0271 1162 9114 0814 7703 1213 70233 556Foreign 1210216423044836327329732659781 730Subtotal Inflation 1681 5592 9294 2872 4373 1101 1793 1844 3785 0963 1803 78035 285Devaluation -127-1 196-2 289-3 389-2 019-2 574-955-2 507-3 545-4 174-2 757-3 291-28 822Subtotal Price Contingencies 413646398984175362246778339224234896 463Total PROJECT COSTS 6 85515 07422 10622 85413 63513 8152 6195 8008 2408 6335 1185 265130 015  Taxes 184426470476189218912432672661101183 057Foreign Exchange 1 1733 4733 3903 4275208045201 9781 9141 89831438319 795 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for ruralyouthSub-ComponentSub-Component1.2: ProductionSub-Component 1.3:Component 2:1.1: Support toand marketingFinancialSub-ComponentProjectRuralinfrastructureinclusion support1.4: RuralmanagementAgribusinesssupport toforInstitutionandIncubationagribusinessesagri-enterprisesStrengtheningcoordinationTotal I. Investment Costs A. Inputs ------B. Civil Works -38 328---38 328C. Vehicles and Motorcycles ----2 5882 588D. Consultancies 2 3143 0235877071 8948 524E. Credit and Subsidies 43 321----43 321F. Equipment and Materials ----711711G. Training 8 129-842 71810511 035H. Workshops --5 0802 7514 19912 030I. Unallocated Investment Costs ----3 0103 010Total Investment Costs 53 76341 3515 7506 17612 506119 546II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances /a 1 467---7 3308 797B. Operating Costs ----1 6721 672C. Unallocated Reccurent Costs ------Total Recurrent Costs 1 467---9 00210 469Total PROJECT COSTS 55 23041 3515 7506 17621 508130 015  Taxes 5221 5442082295533 057Foreign Exchange 1 15715 4452933542 54619 795 _________________________________\a Staff Salaries paid by the FGN and State Gevernments - IFAD loan to finance allowances 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
C.  Project financing 
162.  LIFE-ND will be financed by: (i) the Federal Government of Nigeria,(ii) the six participating State 
governments,  (iii)  The  Niger  Delta  Development  Corporation  (NDDC),  and  (iv)  IFAD.  The 
Federal  Government  will  provide  financing  in  foregone  tax  revenue  and  through  payment  of 
salaries  of  RPCO  staff.  State  governments  will  finance  salaries  for  all  SPCO  staff.  Moreover, 
State  governments  will  aggregately  make  30,000  ha  available  to  the  project  (not  monetised) 
and will contribute to 50 percent of the cost of land preparation on the 6,000 ha earmarked for 
incubators. The NDDC will provide US$ 30 million in  parallel co-financing to replicate LIFE-ND 
in the three states not covered by IFAD financing. IFAD  will  provide a US$ 60 million  loan for 
the  first  phase,  and  anticipates  a  further  US$  32  million  for  the  second  phase;  while  allowing 
that  this  figure  may  be  more  or  less  depending  on  the  allocation,  the  performance  and 
confinancing.  The  tables  that  follow  show  the  financing  plan  by  (i)  component,  and  (ii)  by 
expenditure account.    
163. 
IFAD financing for the first phase (2018 – 2024)  will provided as a US$ 60 million loan subject 
to (i) interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent; (ii) a maturity 
period of twenty five (25)  years; (iii)  a grace period of five  years; and (iv) a service charge of 
0.75  per  cent  incurred  by  the  Borrower  as  of  the  date  of  approval  by  the  Executive  Board. A 
further  US$  30  million  in  financing  will  be  allocated  by  IFAD  for  the  second  phase  (2025  – 
2029).  The  financing  terms  and  conditions  for  the  second  phase  will  be  subject  to  IFAD's 
internal procedures and approval by its Executive Board.  
164. 
 The  financing  plan  by  component  is  Disbursement  Account  is  presented  in  tables  7  and  8 
below:  
Table 7: Programme Financing Plan by Component (US$'000) 
Table 8: Programme Financing Plan by Disbursement Account (US$'000) 
D.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
Benefits 
39 
 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Components by Financiers(US$ '000)FederalStateLocalIFAD Loan 1IFAD Loan 2NDDCGovernmentGovernmentsTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth 1. Sub-Component 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 27 87450.514 33926.012 49622.65220.9--55 23042.51 15753 5515222. Sub-Component 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses 17 20141.69 68623.410 46225.31 5443.72 4585.941 35131.815 44524 3621 5443. Sub-Component 1.3: Financial inclusion support for agri-enterprises 2 52643.91 42224.71 59427.72083.6--5 7504.42935 2492084. Sub-Component 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 2 78445.11 56925.41 59425.82293.7--6 1764.83545 593229Subtotal 50 38446.427 01624.926 14624.12 5032.32 4582.3108 50783.517 24888 7552 503B. Component 2: Project management and coordination 9 61644.75 06623.63 85417.95532.62 41911.221 50816.52 54618 408553Total PROJECT COSTS 60 00046.132 08124.730 00023.13 0572.44 8773.8130 015100.019 795107 1633 057 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Disbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)FederalStateLocalIFAD Loan 1IFAD Loan 2NDDCGovernmentGovernmentsTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesInputs ---------------Civil Works 16 73243.79 42124.68 21121.41 5063.92 4586.438 32829.515 05921 7631 506Vehicles and Motorcycles 1 29349.952920.563724.61295.0--2 5882.01 2941 165129Consultancies 3 55041.62 24926.42 31127.13143.71001.28 5246.63 1375 074314Equipment and Materials 39956.113418.914720.7314.3--7110.530537531Salaries and Allowances 3 59240.81 53717.51 35015.30-2 31926.48 7976.8-8 797-Operating Costs 90033.468925.61 02037.9843.1--2 6922.1-2 60984Grants and Subsidies 21 45049.510 72524.811 14625.7----43 32133.3-43 321-Training 5 73747.73 23126.92 58921.54723.9--12 0299.3-11 557472Workshops 6 34848.73 56627.42 58919.95224.0--13 02410.0-12 503522Unallocated ---------------Total PROJECT COSTS 60 00046.132 08124.730 00023.13 0572.44 8773.8130 015100.019 795107 1633 057 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Over  the  first  six  years  of  implementation,  LIFE-ND  is  expected  to  generate  the  following 
quantifiable benefits: 
(i)  Employment  creation:  at  least  25,500  new  jobs,  distributed  as  follows:  male  youth 
7,069 (28 percent); female youth 5,553 (22 percent); women 5,950 (24 percent) and men 
6,428 (26 percent). 
(ii) 
Incomes  (annual)  accruing  to  the  beneficiaries  are:  cocoa  production  N$  1,152,950; 
plantain production N$ 1,144,310; oil palm production N$ 2,034,060; cassava production 
N$ 160,700; rice production N$ 246,970; poultry production N$ 535,280; fish production 
N$ 407,390; fish processing N$ 291,710; palm fruit processing N$  1,331,200; rice milling 
N$  989,760; and cassava processing N$ 672,640.  
(iii)  Yield  increments  with  improved  management  practices  are  estimated  at:  cocoa  30 
percent; plantain/banana 40 percent; oil palm 40 percent; stocking density of aquaculture 
ponds 50 percent (from 800 to 1,200 fish); palm fruits processed 50 percent (from 20 MT 
to  30  MT)  per  processor;  cassava  tubers  processed  60  percent  (from  25  MT  to  40  MT 
per processor; and paddy rice milled 30 percent (from 30 MT to 40 MT) per processor. 
(iv)  Improved food security from increased production of staple food crops, fish and poultry, 
improved nutritious feeding regimes, and improved distribution of food produced. 
(v) 
Import  substitution  and  conservation  of  foreign  exchange  with  the  increased 
production of food items that were hitherto imported such as rice, poultry and fish.  
165.  The expected unquantifiable benefits from the implementation of LIFE include: (i) fiscal - value 
added tax (VAT) paid to the government treasury by beneficiaries on the sale of produce from 
the  project;  (ii)  increased  market  levies  and  payments  for  marketing  services  by  beneficiaries 
which lead to improved marketing services; (iii) improved patronage of suppliers of farm inputs 
and  processing  equipment  by  the  beneficiaries,  fueling  the  local  economy  and  improving 
efficiency  of service delivery; (iv)  reduced youth  delinquency  with more  youths  being  gainfully 
employed  in  agribusiness  and  having  less  time  and  urge  to  harass  government  officials  and 
businessmen will lead to improved productivity in the government and business sectors of the 
region;  and  (v)  increased  foreign  exchange  earnings  associated  with  increased  production  of 
cash crops such as cocoa, palm kernel and palm kernel oil. 
Economic analysis 
166.  The estimated overall financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) for the LIFE project is 43%; with 
a  NPV  of  NGN  53,646,174,700  or  USD  175,889,100;  and  incremental  net  benefit  of  NGN 
15,148,983,800 or USD 49,668.800, assuming an opportunity cost of capital of 14%.  
167.  The  estimated  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  for  the  LIFE  project  is  35%; 
with a NPV of NGN 31,758,741,400; or USD 104,120,000; and incremental net benefit of NGN 
13,089,456,900 or USD 42,916,300, assuming an opportunity cost of capital of 14%.  
168.  Sensitivity tests indicate that the estimated EIRR for the LIFE project is stable given a variety of 
assumptions.  The  tests  indicate  that  the  LIFE  project  remains  viable  under  a  variety  of  price 
and  cost  changes.  In  general,  most  the  enterprise  models  were  sensitive  to  changes  in  the 
output  price,  investment  and  operating  costs.  A  10%  drop  in  the  output  prices  reduces  the 
project EIRR by 10%, and a 10% increase in investment cost reduces the project EIRR by 5%, 
and a 10% increase in operating costs reduces the project EIRR by 6%.  
E.  Sustainability 
169.  The sustainability of LIFE-ND benefits is anchored on:  
40 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
170. 
Institutional  sustainability:  LIFE-ND  will  be  implemented  within  the  exiting  institutional 
framework of the FMARD, the lead implementing agency, the NDDC’s Directorate of Agriculture 
(co-implementing  agency),  state  ministries  of  agriculture  and  their  ADPs  (co-implementing 
agency),  the  youth  agribusiness  network  (beneficiary  organization),    enterprise  incubation 
association  of  Nigeria  as  a  private  sector  partner  organization  (participating  organization), 
commodity  apex  organizations  (community  farmer  organizations);  as  well  as  involve  the 
participation  of  credible  service  market  operators  in  the  implementing  process  (input  dealers, 
financial  institutions  and  produce  off-takers).  At  the  field  level,  LIFE-ND  will  use  the  PPP 
instrument to facilitate  youth and women empowerment, as well as market participation of the 
beneficiaries.  The  involvement  of  community  institutions  in  the  beneficiary  selection  process 
and  use  of  successful  community-based  enterprises  to  trigger  generation  of  new  enterprises 
are process that will create dynamic youth involvement in agribusiness and ensure sustainable 
rural economy.  
171.  The incubator model is an institutional process of enterprise and job creation which is expected 
to drive itself once the initial set (600) of Enterprise Incubators are identified and strengthened. 
In  addition  to  their  role  as  mentors,  the  Pioneer  Enterprise  will  act  as  Off-takers  to  the 
Apprentices  and  young  enterprises  to  absorb  the  increase  in  produce  and  thus  deal  with  the 
implementable  policy 
potential  market  challenges.  LIFE-ND  has  also 
considerations  including  policy  debate,  institutional  and  regulatory  strengthening,  as  well  as, 
support  to  norms  and  standards  to  ensure  sustainability,  replication  and  up-scaling  of 
successes. Enterprise growth will be enhanced through reduction of market distortions such as 
illicit  levies,  counter-productive  trade  measures  or  inoperative  incentive  schemes.  Stronger 
enterprises and youth-in-agriculture organisations will be able to enter into policy dialogue with 
the  leadership  of  government  and  the  community,  resulting  in  the  beneficiaries  being  in  a 
stronger  position  to  defend  and  promote  their  interests,  while  developing  useful  services  for 
their membership.  
incorporated 
172.  Building  on  the  success  of  VCDP’s  commodity  alliance  forum,  which  is  a  PPP  arrangement 
involving  the  private  sector,  producers  and  government,  LIFE-ND  will,  by  PY2,  establish  a 
commodity  alliance  forum,  as  a  business  transaction,  knowledge  sharing  and  policy  dialogue 
platform to engage  with rural  women and  youth  quarterly  to  advance the gains of the  project. 
The forum will be used to discuss and fix the challenges facing each stakeholder prior, during 
and  after  the  planting  season.  Secondly,  from  PY1,  LIFE-ND  will  provide  the  necessary 
the  commission  undertake  a  parallel  project 
technical  support 
implementation  in  some  states  and  local  governments.  This  process  is  expected  to  empower 
NDDC  to  build  on  the  success  of  the  project  by  mainstreaming  the  LIFE-ND  enterprise 
incubation model in their system and sustain the job creation initiative.  
to  enable 
to  NDDC 
173.  Economic and financial sustainability: The use of the private sector to drive implementation, 
emphasis  on  productivity  enhancement  through  the  use  of  best  production  and  business 
practices,  profitability  of  enterprises  to  ensure  income  in  beneficiary  income,  as  well  as 
employment/job  creation  through  ownership  of  profitable  enterprises    have  built  an  economic 
sustainability  framework  in  this  design.  Building  on  the  experiences  of  CBNRMP,  the  entire 
LIFE-ND  design  is  built  on  the  ability  of  the  project  to  engage  in  high  value  (profitable) 
enterprises  that  also  have  the  potential  to  create  jobs  for  youth  and  poor  women,  which  has 
proven to proliferate enterprises even after project completion. The design also provides for the 
linkage of the enterprises to credible financial institutions, as well as the existing CBN and BoA 
refinancing facilities. 
174.  Technical sustainability: The process of identifying, seconding a beneficiary (apprentice) and 
nurturing  him/her  to  become  an  independent  entrepreneur  involves  five  stages:    (a)  initial 
orientation for mind-set change, (b) business training for the beneficiary to develop and operate 
41 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
a bankable business plan, (c) hands-on training through attachment to a mature enterprise, (d) 
linkage  with  fabricators  of  production  and  processing  equipment;  and  (e)  linkage  with  private 
extension  providers.  The  design  has  also  emphasized  that  most  technical  services  will  be 
outsourced  to  competent  service  providers  and  private  sector  extension  services  will  be 
mainstreamed  in  the  implementation  process.  This  process  confers  technical  sustainability  to 
the LIFE-ND project.  
175.  Environmental  sustainability:  In  regards  to  the  issues  of  environment  and  climate  change, 
LIFE-ND  has  incorporated  the  use  of  climate  smart  agriculture  involving  weather  tolerant 
planting  materials,  climate  resilient  infrastructure,  tree  planting,  productivity  enhancing 
practices,  and  compliance  with  SECAP  for  all  project  activities  especially  those  targeted  at 
enhancing  land  access  to  women  and  youth.  It  is  expected  that  increased  agricultural 
productivity,  combined  with  the  use  of  environmentally  friendly  best  practices,  will  limit 
expansion  of  land  area  and  halt  deterioration  of  the  physical  agricultural  landscape  (structure 
and texture of the soil).  
42 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
1. 
Nigeria is  the most  populous African country,  with a  population  of 182.2 million people,  which 
increases at 3 per cent per year26. The population is young with approximately 105 million under the 
age of 35 (59 per cent). Nigeria covers 92.4 million hectares including land and water bodies. About 
85 per cent of the total land area is cultivable and 40 per cent of the total is arable.  
2. 
The country is also the biggest oil exporter in Africa, with the largest natural gas reserves in the 
continent. About 95% of export earnings and 70% of government revenue is derived from the oil and 
gas sector. The oil sector has been in decline since 2015, albeit at a slower rate than in the previous 
years. Owing to the falling oil prices, security concerns and policy uncertainty, the GDP growth rate fell 
from 6.7 percent in 2014 to 2.7 per cent (from projections of 7.0) in 2015.  2016 growth is projected at 
negative 1.8 per cent. The Oil and gas GDP was estimated to have declined by 1.6% in 2013; 1.5% in 
2014 and sharply to 11% in 2015. The 11% decline of oil contribution to the real GDP in 2015 was due 
to challenges in production occasioned by youth restiveness (WB report 2015). The development has 
reduced  daily  production  since  third  quarter  of  2014  by  more  than  40  per  cent.  This  situation  has 
posed major challenges to the country’s external balance and public finances (MNPB 2015). Despite 
recent shocks, Nigeria’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the largest in Africa. GDP grew by 3.8 per 
cent on average from 2009 to 2014 as Nigeria became a middle income country. The GDP numbers 
indicate  that  telecommunications,  real  estate,  manufacturing,  construction,  entertainment  increased 
their  shares  of  GDP.  Agriculture  contributed  21  per  cent  to  Nigeria's  GDP  in  201527,  but  remains 
underdeveloped.    Nevertheless,  much  lower  oil  prices  will  continue  to  pose  strong  challenges  for 
public finance at all levels of government during the year, and will also represent a major constraint on 
the ability of the new federal government to launch some of its ambitious programs.  
3. 
Nigeria ranked 152 out of 187 countries in Human Development in 201528. Unemployment of 
women and youth is particularly high (23.3 per cent and 41.6 per cent respectively in 2009)29. Since 
2005, approximately 20 million youth entered the country’s labour market and unemployment of youth 
rose  to  56  per  cent  by  2011  and  remains  critical30.  The  focus  on  oil  revenue  and  oil  dominated 
economy  exposed  Nigeria  to  negative  terms  of  trade;  depressed  development  of  other  sectors  and 
resulted in volatile growth. In the past two years, Nigeria has been in recession, caused mainly by a 
mono  petro-oil  economy,  high  import  bills,  marginal  increase  in  local  supply  of  agricultural 
commodities  over  increasing  population  growth,  and  over  dependent  on  foreign  goods.  Of  recent 
(2016 to date), the situation has degenerated to astronomical rise in food prices.  
4. 
In general, unemployment, between 2007  and  2011  grew from 15.7 to 28.9  per  cent, stunting 
affects 51 per cent of the population; and 9 per cent of children under five and 13 per cent of women 
of child bearing age suffer acute malnutrition in the northern part of the country. IFAD is jointly working 
with  the  government  of  Nigeria  through  the  USD  100.4  million  climate  change  adaptation  and 
agribusiness  support  programme  (CASP)  to  address  the  issue.  In  the  Southern  and  Niger  Delta 
region between 2007 and 2011 unemployment grew from 15.1 to 28.0 per cent and about 17 per cent 
of the population are faced with malnutrition; 5 per cent of children under five and 3 per cent of child 
bearing age women suffer from acute malnutrition. 
5. 
Rural poverty context: Nigeria is predominantly a rural economy with over 60 per cent of the 
182.2 million people living in the rural area. As at 2013, urban poverty rate is 12.6 per cent, while rural 
poverty is 44.9 per cent31. So, poverty  in Nigeria is essentially a rural issue.  90 per cent of the rural 
people are engaged in agriculture as their source of livelihood. 70 per cent of the rural population are 
subsistence smallholders.  46 per cent  of the arable  land is cultivated,  and 4.5  per cent  of this land 
could be irrigated with available water.  95 per cent of agricultural land is untitled limiting users from 
accessing finance or investing in improvements. Agricultural production varies from region to region. 
26 WB World Development Indicators data, 2015 
27 WB World Development Indicators data, 2015 
28 The country’s HDI of 0.504 is only just above the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. However, when the value is 
discounted for inequality, the HDI falls below the Sub-Saharan average (0.300 compared to 0.334) (UNDP Human 
Development Report, 2014). 
29 ILO data, 2015; NBS Annual Abstract of Statistics, 2012 
30 Samuels, Fiona et al., 2011 
31 CPE 
43 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
In the southern and Niger Delta region, production include on roots and tubers, bananas, cereals and 
tree  crops  including  cocoa,  oil  palm,  nuts  and  fruits;  and  is  managed  under  smallholder  agriculture 
system. Staples are produced for local markets and cash crops are sold through loose relationships 
with  private  traders.  Insecurity  affects  the  region,  particularly  in  the  Niger  Delta  where  youth 
restiveness  was  renewed  since  2015  due  to  lack  of  employment  caused  by  limited  economic 
opportunities.  
6. 
Inadequate  access  to  land  and  land  tenure  insecurity,  private  sector  exclusion,  lack  of  initial 
capital, lack of reliable market outlet and social perception of agriculture limit youth and women from 
engaging  in  agriculture  to  improve  their  livelihood32.  The  rural  youth  and  women  also  suffer  from 
limited  alternative  employment  opportunities.  Weak  governance  also  contributes  to  higher  rural 
poverty, notably in terms of inefficient local administration, corruption and inadequate involvement of 
the  poorer segment of the  society  in  political and resource allocation processes. Degradation  of the 
environment  is  also  a  contributor  to  rural  poverty.  Smallholder  productivity  is  progressively  declining 
as a result of poor agricultural practices, over-grazing, and deforestation (estimated at 3.5% annually), 
exacerbated by the felling of trees for fuel wood as the main source of power for rural and peri-urban 
households. Productivity of the rural population is also hampered by ill-health, particularly HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria. According to the  National  HIV/AIDS Strategy  Plan 2010-2015, Nigeria has 
about 6.2 million people with HIV/AIDS, yielding a prevalence rate of 4.4%. Despite this relatively low 
rate, Nigeria has one of the greatest numbers of people affected by HIV/AIDS in Africa. Of recent, the 
farmer-herdsmen  conflict  has  generated  fear  among  rural  farmers,  led  to  low  productivity  and 
production, and tended to exacerbate poverty.  
7. 
Rural poverty is found to vary according to the education, gender of the household head, size of 
the  family  as  well  as  women  and  youth  in  involvement  in  agribusiness.  Larger  families  (with  20  or 
more persons) and households headed by persons with little or no formal education tend to have the 
highest poverty incidence, depth and severity. Farmers are fragmented and average landholding per 
family is less than 2 hectares. The majority of the rural poor are women. Culturally women and youth 
are unable to access land and agricultural water, while only a few are able to access production credit 
without the permission of their men folk/husbands. Access to land by women is extremely difficult and 
constrained by the culture of the people nationally. Women only  obtain user-rights on a small portion 
of land through their husbands and other male relatives. Over 80% of women in rural areas make a 
living  from  small-scale  agriculture  enterprise  with  limited  value  addition.  Productivity  for  most 
commodities  is  more  than  30  per  cent  below  potential  due  low  uptake  of  improved  technologies. 
Farmers are not connected to institutional markets or reliable market outlets leading to lose of over 40 
per cent of their produce to decay. Little or no value addition exit to create enterprises that represent 
jobs  and  employment  for  youth  and  poor  women.  Increased  poverty  and  youth  unemployed  have 
triggered migration to the western countries by rural youth and women with attended risk of drowning 
in large water bodies while crossing the African content and engaging in illicit behavior in the foreign 
land.   
8. 
The Niger Delta context: The region comprising 9 states with a population of about 20 million 
people presents an excellent mixed grill. This is a region enriched with enormous natural and human 
endowments,  and  endowed  with  rich  agricultural  heritage.  It  has  the  largest  concentration  of  forest, 
tree  crop  resources  and  biodiversity  in  Nigeria.  Being  a  rain  forest  with  several  water  tributaries,  it 
commands a significant position in the country’s production  of vegetable, fruit, root and tuber crops. 
Apart  from  the  vast  agricultural  and  huge  aquatic  resources,  standing  on  its  tributaries  of  various 
rivers and streams, the region has the largest deposit of oil and gas minerals on which the country’s 
economy  largely  depends.  It  contributes  95  per  cent  of  government  earning  and  provides  major 
source of wood materials for the nation.  There is increasing depletion of the natural resources due to 
oil  exploration,  which  leads  to  environmental  degradation,  low  productivity,  incessant  water,  air  and 
land pollution, poverty and misery. Consequent, despite the abundant resources, the region poses the 
features of under-development and fragility associated with intermittent youth restiveness in the form 
social conflict, kidnapping for ransom, raping,  armed robbery and other forms of social vices mainly 
due  to  and  lack  of  decent  means  of  livelihood  for  youth  and  women  and  increasing  youth  um-
employment. 
32 The FGN and the National Parliament are currently pursuing the amendment of the Land Use Act (1978) to improve 
on the thorny issue of land ownership and insecurity for the generality of smallholder farmers/producers, especially 
aimed at enhancing their land transactions, mortgages/sub-leases and use of land as collateral for loans. 
44 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
9. 
Policy context: Government has recognized the need to diversify export earnings and alter its 
economic growth strategy.  The challenging process of implementing reforms, caused mainly by poor 
business environment and private section exclusion, was revitalized through a Roadmap developed in 
2010  from  the  national  vision  20:20  policy,  which  clearly  outlines  the  government’s  strategy  and 
actions  for  implementing  comprehensive  power  sector  reforms  to  expand  supply,  open  the  door  to 
private investment and address some of the chronic sector issues hampering improvement of service 
delivery. Vision 20:20 has emphasises on private section-led economy, diversification of the economy, 
agricultural growth and employment creation.  
10.  The  national  development  agenda,  of  the  current  administration  under  General  Mohamad 
Buhari,  which  build  on  vision  20:20  is  focusing  on  anti-corruption,  economic  recovery,  employment 
creation  and  security.  The  government  recently  responded  to  the  current  recession  and  ailing 
economy  with  a  focused  economic  recovery  plan,  which  re-emphasised  agricultural  transformation 
following the value chain and private sector participation partway. 
11. 
In line with the RB-COSOP, the LIFE Programme hinges on the Agricultural Promotion Agenda, 
otherwise  called  Green Alternative. The  Green Alternative  emphasises  on  four  pillars:  food  security, 
job  creation,  import  substitution  and  economic  diversification.    Effectively,  the  policy  seeks  to 
commercialize  agriculture,  develop  agribusinesses,  ensure  private  sector  inclusion  to  create  rural 
jobs. The government has  also developed a  youth and  women inclusion policy  which  aims to target 
reducing  discrimination;  increasing  inclusion;  and  access  to  resources,  infrastructure,  training  and 
finance  by  women  and  youth.    Other  government  policies  which  address  rural  poverty  are  (a)  the 
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) initiated financial inclusion policies supported by IFAD-assisted RUFIN 
programme, which promotes guarantees, MFI capacity building and subsidized value chain finance for 
micro, small and medium enterprises; (b) the National  Plan  of Action on Food  and Nutrition (NPAN)͕ 
which targets access to quality food; consumer education and better market linkages to support food 
security;  (c)  the  Agricultural  Resilience  Framework,  which  is  a  climate  change  adaptation  and 
resilience  framework  to  support  agricultural  and  related  practices  in  Nigeria.  LIFE  will  build  on  the 
lessons  of  the  government  supported YEAP  (youth  empowerment  in  agribusiness  programme),  IITA 
youth enable programme and closed IFAD-assisted CBNRMP enterprise development initiative. 
Location and basic facts 
12.  The  Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria  comprising  of  36  states  and  774  Local  Government  Areas 
(LGAs) lies roughly between Latitudes 4o and 14oN and Longitudes 3o and 15oE. It covers a surface 
area of 923,769 km2 which is 14% of the land area of the West Africa region. The country has 909,890 
km2 of land area and 13,879 km2 of water area and ranked the fourteenth largest country in Africa (in 
landmass),  first  in  population  and  GDP,  and  is  among  the  most  populous  and  fastest  growing 
countries in the world. The population as at 2015 was estimated at 183.6million (i.e. about 15.4% of 
Africa’s population and the tenth in the  world) consisting mainly  of children and  youth of  which 49.5 
percent  are  women  and  50.5  percent  are  men.  The  population  is  growing  at  2.8%  and  population 
density is 201persons per square kilometer (ppkm2). Table 1 shows some basic facts about Nigeria. 
Table 1: Some basic facts about Nigeria 
Description 
Total area (km2)1 
Land Area (km2)1 
Water area (km2)1 
Population (million)2 
Population density (ppkm2)2 
Population Growth Rate (%)2 
Total fertility rate 7 
Male population (%) 2015 7 
Amount 
923.769 
909.89 
13.879 
183.6 
201.7 
2.8 
5.5 
50.5 
Female population (%) 2015 7 
Agriculture population (%) 2015 4 
Life expectancy (years)2 
GDP at current market price (USD- 
billion)2 
49.5 
48.8 
52.9 
Description 
GDP per capita (USD)2 
Real GDP growth (%)2 
Agriculture growth rate (%)2 
Unemployment rate  rate (%)2 
incidence of poverty (2012) (%)2 
Agriculture % of GDP 2015 3 
  Annual rate of deforestation (%)8 
Number of rural poor (million, approx.) 2014 5 
Total GHG emission (in CO2 eq) (million 
tonnes (Mt) in 2000 6 
Contribution  of GHG from agriculture and 
LULUCF (%) 6 
Mean temperature (oC)6 
Amount 
2,683.1 
2.8 
3.7 
10.4 
72 
20.9 
3.7 
50.0 
214.21 
27 
27.2 
0.2 
492.5 
Average changes in temperature (oC)6 
45 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
1NBS (2012) : National Bureau of Statistics Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library 
2CBN (2015):  Central Bank of Nigeria Draft Annual Report 2015. Available at 
https://www.cbn.gov.ng/Documents/cbnannualreports.asp  
3The Wolrd Bank (2016): World Development Indicators : Nigeria Available online at http://data.worldbank.org/ country/Nigeria 
[10th November, 2016] 
4United Nations (2016) World Statistic Pocketbook. New York: United Nations Publication. eISBN: 978-92-1-058230-8 
5IFAD, https://www.ruralpoverty portal.org/country/ statistics/tags/nigeria. 
6 Federal Government of Nigeria (2014): Nigerian Second National Communication Under the UNFCCC. 
Federal Ministry of Environment, Abuja - Nigeria  
7 NBS (2015): Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 Arch 2017 
8 FAO (2011): State of the world’s forest 2011. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, 2011. Available 
at http://www.fao.org  
Socio-demographics and health  
13.  Nigeria is still a growing nation with a total fertility rate (TFR) of 5.5 and a mortality rates which 
declined  from  100  in  2004  to  58  in  2014  (NBS  2015).  However,  health  issues  continue  to  be  a 
problem. The  case  rate  of  HIV  in  2015  was  10.2  for  male  and  12.3  for  female  and  the  case  fatality 
rates of was 4.2 and 11.5 for male and female respectively. Malaria remains a big issue with case rate 
of  58.8  men  and  70.3  for  women  and  a  case  fatality  rate  of  11.4  and  3.4  for  men  and  women 
respectively.  Life  expectancy  is  estimated  at  52.9  years.    Poverty  and  unemployment  are  common.  
According to NBS (2016), the national poverty rate in 2009-2010 is 62.6% which is higher in the rural 
(69%)  than  urban  (51.2)  areas.  The  total  number  of  poor  is  estimated  at  102.2million  people.  The 
unemployment  rate  is  about  10.4%  and  incidence  of  poverty  (as  at  2012)  was  72%  which  is  also 
higher in the rural than urban areas. 
Climate and agriculture  
14.  Nigeria  enjoys  a  wide  range  of  climatic,  vegetation  and  soil  conditions  which  provide  great 
potentials for agricultural production. Nigeria is covered by two major types of vegetation – the forest - 
consisting  of  mangrove  and  freshwater  swamps  and  the  tropical  rainforest  dominantly  found  in  the 
south, and the Savannas - consisting of the Derived, Guinea, Sudan and Sahel savannas extending 
from the interface with the rainforest around Latitude 8o to the boundary with Niger Republic. Because 
of  the  spatial  variation  in  climatic  regime  and  vegetation  and  soil  types,  Nigeria  is  able  to  grow 
different  types  of  crops  including:  cereals,  roots  and  tubers,  legumes,  tree  crops,  fruits  and 
vegetables. 
15.  Nigeria  has  about  712,000  km2  of  cultivable  land  out  of  which  only  342,000  km2  (48%)  is 
actually being cultivated with less than 1% under irrigation. According to NBS (2016), in the production 
of primary crops for the period 2013–2015, cassava crop had the highest area cultivated for 2013 and 
2014  with  6,718,490  ha  and  6,458,435  ha  respectively,  while  maize  had  the  highest  in  2015  with 
6,771,189 ha. Sugarcane had the least area cultivated with 77,030 ha in 2013, 81,870 ha in 2014 and 
84,320  ha  in  2015.  In  terms  of  production  quantity,  cassava  is  highest  for  the  three  years  with 
54,023,150 tonnes in 2013, 56,328,480 tonnes in 2014 and 57,643,271 tonnes in 2015. Cottonseed 
had the least production quantity with 296,610 tonnes in 2013, 290,162 tonnes in 2014, and 401,441 
tonnes in 2015. Growth in the agricultural sector has been limited by expensive agricultural inputs and 
limited  access  to  credit,  lack  of mechanization  and  little  use  of  fertilizer  in  agriculture. There  are  an 
estimated  98.1  million  farmers  in  Nigeria  in  2011,  90%  of  them  are  smallholders  with  production 
primarily oriented towards meeting subsistence needs (IFAD 2016). 
16.  Nigeria’s  environment  and  agricultural  sector  is  under  increasing  threat  from  climate  change. 
According  to  (FGN,  2014),  Nigeria  contributed  about  214.21  million  tonnes  (Mt)  of  CO2  equivalent 
(CO2  e)  of  GHG  to  the  atmosphere  in  the  year  2000. The  energy  sector  accounted  for  70%  of  this 
while the agriculture and land-use and land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector accounted for 
about 27%. The observed climate indicates that temperatures in Nigeria have been on the increase in 
the last five decades and have been very significant since 1980s. The linear warming for the 30-year 
averages  on  a  decadal  slice  reveals  changes  in  temperature  by  an  average  of  0.2oC.  Future 
projections for temperature suggest an increasing temperature and therefore a warmer climate.  The 
inter-annual fluctuations observed in the annual rainfall over the country are high and are responsible 
for  the  extreme  climate  events  such  as  drought  and  flood.  The  general  trend  indicates  a  decline  in 
rainfall over the country although some locations may experience better rainfall than  what has been 
46 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
expressed  over  the  country.  Future  projections  also  suggest  increased  rainfall  and  thus  a  wetter 
climate in the coastal areas while the rest of the country may experience rainfall decline. 
Natural resource management  
17.  Nigeria  is  blessed  with  different  ecosystems  including  the  mangrove  swamps  and  coastal 
wetlands,  rain  forest,  inland  wetlands,  and  the  Savannas  (see  Table  2).  Desertification  is  becoming 
more severe in the far north and gully erosion and flooding increasing in the north. It is estimated that 
351,000 ha of the Nigerian landmass is lost to desert conditions annually.  
Table 2: Major ecosystems of Nigeria 
Ecosystems 
Rain forest 
Mangrove swamps and other coastal wetlands 
Freshwater and inland wetlands 
Savanna: Derived, Guinea, Sudan, Sahel 
Tree Crop Plantations 
Fallow Vegetation (Farmland) 
Total 
Coastal-land & Marine (Exclusive Economic Zone –EEZ) 
Source: SEDEC Associates (2008): State of the Nigerian Environment Report, Federal Ministry of Environment and UNDP. 
Total geographic area 
(ha) 
8,874,225 
927,314 
18,641,000 
44,883,510 
276,500 
18,779,251 
92,376,800 
41,090,000 
% of total 
geographic area 
9.61 
1.05 
20.18 
48.53 
0.30 
20.33 
100.00 
18.  Nigeria’s rate of deforestation was estimated at 3.7% in 2011 (FAO, 2011). According to    IFAD 
(2016),  about  410,000  ha  of  forest  loss  was  recorded  between  2010  and  2015  and  87%  of  wood 
removals  used  as  fuel.  These  changes  are  expected  to  highly  impact  food  production,  water 
availability, and food insecurity, increasing the vulnerability of Nigeria's smallholder farmers since most 
agricultural  production  is  rain-fed.  By  2050,  there  are  high  probabilities  of  declines  in  yields  in  all 
cereals  in  all  agro-ecological  zones  aside  from  millet  and  maize.  Roots  and  tuber  yields  are  more 
uncertain. 
The Niger Delta  
19.  Location:  The  focus  area  of  the  LIFE-Niger  Delta  (LIFE-ND)  is  the  nine  (9)  southern  oil 
producing  states  of:  Abia,  Akwa  Ibom,  Bayelsa,  Cross-River,  Edo,  Delta,  Imo,  Ondo  and  Rivers 
making  up  the  oil  producing  region  of  Nigeria  also  referred  to  as  the  Niger  Delta  states. The  region 
situated  in  the  southern  part  of  Nigeria  and  bordered  to  the  south  by  the Atlantic  Ocean  and  to  the 
East by Cameroon, covers  about 110,624 km2  (12% of Nigeria’s land  area). The region consists of 
nine  states  with  184  LGAs.  The  South-South  (Akwa  Ibom,  Bayelsa,  Cross  River,  Delta,  Edo  and 
Rivers),  South  East  (Abia  and  Imo)  and  South  West  (Ondo)  geopolitical  zones  of  Nigeria  are 
represented in the Niger Delta States (see Map 1). Cross River State is the largest of the states with a 
landmass of 21,787 km2, followed by Edo 19,187 km2, Ondo 15,820 km2, Rivers 10,575 km2, Bayelsa 
9,059 km2, Akwa Ibom 6,900 km2, Imo 5,288 km2 and Abia 4,900 km2 in that order. 
20.  Population: The total population of the nine states in the Niger Delta in 2006 was  31,267,901 
consisting of 15,847,359 male (51%) and 15,420,542 (49%) female. The estimated population for the 
region as at 2011 was 36,515,429 (NBS 2012). Rivers State has the highest population estimated  at 
6,162,063  in  2011  followed  by    Delta    4,825,999,  Akwa  Ibom  4,625,119,  Imo  4,609,038,  Ondo 
4,020,965,  Edo  3,700,706,  Cross  River  3,344,410,  Abia  3,256,642  and  Bayelsa  1,970,487  in  that 
order.  Like  the  rest  of  the  Nigeria,  the  Niger  Delta  states  consists  mainly  of  young  and  growing 
population  with  62%  below  the  age  of  30  years  (NDRMP  ***). The  population  density  is  about  30.1 
ppkm2 which is far higher than the national average of 201.7 ppkm2. Imo state has the highest density 
at 871.6ppkm2 followed by Akwa Ibom 670.3, Abia 664.6, Rivers 582.701,  Delta  282.1, Ondo 254.2, 
Bayelsa 217.5, Edo 192.9 and cross River 153.5 respectively. Table 3 summarizes the basic facts of 
the Niger Delta States.  
47 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Table 3: Basic facts about the Niger Delta states 
State 
No of 
LGAs 
Abia 
Akwa Ibom 
Bayelsa 
Cross 
River 
Delta 
Edo 
Imo 
Ondo 
Rivers 
Region 
17 
31 
8 
18 
25 
18 
27 
18 
23 
185 
Land 
Area 
(km2) 
4,900 
6,900 
9,059 
21,787 
17,108 
19,187 
5,288 
15,820 
10,575 
110,624 
Population 2006*** 
male 
1,420,298 
1,983,202 
874,083 
1,471,967 
2,069,309 
1,633,946 
1,976,471 
1,745,057 
2,673,026 
15,847,359 
female 
1,415,082 
1,918,849 
830,432 
1,421,021 
2,043,136 
1,599,420 
1,951,092 
1,715,820 
2,525,690 
15,420,542 
Nigeria 
774 
909,890 
71,345,488 
69,086,302 
Population 
(projected 
2011)*** 
3,256,642 
4,625,119 
1,970,487 
3,344,410 
4,825,999 
3,700,706 
4,609,038 
4,020,965 
6,162,063 
36,515,429 
183,600,000 
 in 2015 ***** 
Density 
TFR**** 
664.6208 
670.3071 
217.5171 
153.5048 
282.0902 
192.8757 
871.6033 
254.1697 
582.701 
330.086 
4 
4 
6.7 
5.8 
5.3 
5.3 
4.6 
3.9 
4.3 
4.878 
Public pry sch enrolment 
(2014)** 
male 
100,879 
448,032 
61,647 
101,402 
187,825 
170,998 
718,141 
629,257 
128,438 
2,546,619 
female 
97,600 
479,062 
61,739 
95,538 
95,538 
451,984 
672,039 
630,543 
130,845 
2,714,888 
**Projected 
HIV 
population 
(2014) 
Unemployment 
rate*** 
81,853 
245,489 
30,858 
83,596 
34,717 
22,821 
93,822 
49,281 
121,351 
763,788 
2007 
25.1 
18.0 
21.9 
32.8 
22.9 
14.8 
28.3 
6.7 
66.4 
26.3 
2011 
11.2 
18.4 
23.9 
18.2 
27.2 
35.2 
26.1 
12.5 
25.5 
22.0 
201.7826 
5.5 
12,145,968 
10,983,959 
3,070,174 
12.7 
23.9 
**NBS (2016): Social statistics report 2016. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
***NBS (2012):  National Bureau of Statistics Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library Access 16 March 2017 
****NBS 2015 Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
48 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
21.  The  Niger  Delta  is  a  growing  region  with  an  average  total  fertility  rate  (TFR)  of  4.8  which  is 
lower than the national average of 5.5. However, Bayelsa and Cross River have TFR higher than the 
national average, while Edo and Delta have TFR higher than the region’s average. The other states - 
Abia, Imo, Akwa Ibom, Ondo and Rivers - have TFR that is lower than the region’s average. The total 
children  enrolment  into  public  primary  school  as  at  2014  stood  at  5,261,507  (23%  of  national 
enrolment)  with  males  accounting  for  48%  and  female  52%  (NBS  2016).    Imo  and  Ondo  states 
accounted  for  the  highest  public  primary  school  enrolment  with  over  one  million  children  each. 
Bayelsa, Abia,  Cross  River  and  Rivers  in  that  order  accounted  for  the  lowest  figures. The  projected 
population  of  HIV  population  as  at  2014  stood  at  763,788  (i.e.  25%  of  the  total  national  projected 
population  for  HIV).  Akwa  Ibom  has  the  highest  with  245,489  and  Edo  has  the  least  with  22,821 
people. The average unemployment rate for the region declined from 26.2% in 2007 to 22% in 2011 
(while the national unemployment rate  increased from 12.7 to 23.9%  within the same period) (NBS, 
2012).  However,  states  such  as  Edo,  Ondo  and  Bayelsa  recorded  increase  in  unemployment  rates 
within the period by as much as 20.4% for Edo. 
22.  Land and People. The very rich culture and heritage of the region is based on the presence of 
about  40  different  ethnic  groups  speaking  250  languages  and  dialects  (NDRMP**).  The  numerous 
ethnic  groups  include  Ijaws,  Ogonis,  Ikwerres,  Etches,  Ekpeyes,  Ogbas,  Engennes,  Obolos,  Isoko, 
Nembes, Okrikans, Kalabaris, Urhobos, Itsekiris, Igbos, Ika-Igbos, Ndoni, Oron, Ibeno, and Yorubas, 
Ibibios,  Annangs  and  Efiks.  Other  groups  include  Ibibios,  Anang,  Efiks,  Bekwarras,  Binis,  etc.  The 
heritage  of  the  people  is  reflected  in  modes  of  dressing,  marriages,  traditional  culture  and  festivals. 
These ethnic groups have co-existed and peace and harmony for a very long period. 
23. 
Land,  in  relation  to  the  population,  is  relatively  scarce  in  the  Niger  Delta  Region  especially  in 
the lower interiors that consists of creeks and inlets. As the population increases, the pressure on land 
for  all  purposes  including  agriculture  increases  accordingly.  The  highest  pressure  on  land  is  in  the 
coastal mangrove vegetation zone with a population density of 0.46 ha/person followed by the derived 
savannah zone with 0.49 ha/person (NDRMP**). 
24. 
Like the rest of the nation, the people of the Niger delta region face the challenges of access to 
land. The ownership of land in Nigeria by virtue of the Land Use Act 1978 is vested in the governor of 
the  state.  Only  usufructuary  right  is  granted  to  the  citizens  (by  the  governor  of  the  state)  through 
certificate of occupancy (in urban area) and statutory or customary right of occupancy (for rural lands). 
The typologies of access to land available in the Niger Delta region  include  individual holdings from 
family  inheritance  or  purchase  from  communal  or  other  family  land;  family  land  derived  from 
communal holding of  the progenitor; communal land owned by the community; and customary tenure 
where family or community grants a right of occupation of land to another person or group of persons 
who are usually strangers or immigrants to live in or farm in return for which they acknowledge the title 
of their grantor by the payment of customary tribute which may be in cash, kind or both. 
25.  These land holdings typologies are fraught with danger of social exclusion and lack formal title 
on  holding.  Most  of  the  land  owned  by  individuals,  families  or  communities  in  rural  areas  have  no 
statutory or customary right of occupancy. This limits agricultural investment to improve and equip the 
land. The risk of being ‘pushed-off’ land is also high, and the land cannot be used to secure access to 
credit to improve productivity. Again, among the Ibos where inheritance is primogeniture the possibility 
of exclusion of women and youth from access to land is very high.  The government also has lands 
which  have  been  acquired  lands  for  agricultural  purposes.  But  aaccess  to  the  lands  may  be 
cumbersome due to government bureaucracy. It can also contentious because community can block 
physical access to the land or make life difficult for land users where compensation has not been paid 
on the land.  It is also subject to political wills and caprices. 
26.  The  land  situation  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  especially  in  the  coastal  interiors  is  particularly 
contentious. By nature, 50% of the lands in the interior Niger Delta is not workable due to the edaphic 
and  physiographic  limitations  imposed  by  drainage.  Secondly,  while  the  land-use  Act  of  1978 
cemented state government ownership of the land, the Petroleum Act of 1969 and other mineral Acts, 
through the  principle  of ‘eminent domain’,  placed all  minerals and its exploration in the  hand  of the 
Federal  Government.  Thus,  all  the  lands  in  the  southern  interior  including  agriculturally  productive 
lands  have  been  parcelled  into  Oil  Prospecting  Leases  (OPL)  which  becomes  Oil  Mining  Leases 
(OML) once oil has been found on the land. Thus, oil exploration activities on productive lands and its 
concomitant externalities drive the local population to the margin of survival. This is the root cause of 
resource conflicts in the Niger Delta. 
49 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
27.  Environment. The Niger Delta region consists of a wetland area which has been estimated at 
1,794000 ha consisting of 617,000 ha of saline and 1,177,000 ha of freshwater swampland (NEST, 
1991). The  region  has  a  rich  and  diverse  mosaic  of  ecological  types.  Five  distinct  ecological  types 
can be identified and these are:  the barrier island and mangrove and coastal vegetation, fresh water 
swamp forest, lowland rain forest, derived savanna and the montane forest. All the ecosystems are 
found  in  gradients  from  the  coast  to  the  hinterland  in  each  of  the  states  with  the  exception  of  the 
montane ecosystems that is localized to the northern part of Cross-River state.  
28.  There are 12 important bird areas (IBA) in the Niger Delta area. These include Obudu Paltuea, 
Afi River Forest Reserve, Okomu national park, Cross River national park (oban division) crossriver 
national park (okwango dicvision), and Upper orashi forest reserve. Others are Biseni forest, Akassa 
forest, Sunvit Farms (Agenebode Forests), Ebok-Kabbaken swallow root and Itu wetlands. This is in 
addition to other protected game reserves (Table 4). 
Table 4: Some protected areas in the Niger Delta region 
Name  
Cross River National Park 
Obudu Game Reserve 
Okomu National Park 
Gilli Gilli Game Reserve 
Kwale Game Reserve 
Ofosu Game Reserve 
Ologbo Game Reserve 
Iybi-Ada-Obi Game Reserve 
Orle River Game Reserve 
Ologolo-Eriourho Game Reserve 
Ifon Game Reserve 
Source: SEDEC (2008) 
State 
Cross River 
Cross River  
Edo  
Edo 
Edo  
Edo 
Edo 
Edo  
Delta 
Delta  
Ondo  
29.  Oil and gas exploration. Oil is the major non-renewable natural resource of the Niger Delta 
region. The oil sector presently constitutes the backbone of the Nigerian economy. This has exerted 
tremendous impacts on the fragile ecosystems of the Niger Delta. According to the CBN report, as at 
2015,  the  gross  revenue  from  oil  stood  at  N3,830.1  billion,  (i.e  4%  of  GDP,  a  decline  of  13.9%  in 
2011), representing 55.4% of total federally-collected revenue. Despite the decline in crude oil export, 
it  remained  dominant,  accounting  for  78.3%  of  Nigeria’s  total  export  while  gas  export  constituted 
14.2%. This means the oil sector constitutes 92.5% of Nigeria’s total export in 2015. According to the 
NDRMP document, as at 2004, there are 5,284 oil wells drilled in the Niger Delta region. In addition, 
there  are  257  flow  stations  for  crude  processing,  over  7000km  of  oil  and  gas  pipeline,  10  export 
terminals, and about 310,000km2 of land area within which the network of pipelines are located. 
30.  Known impacts of oil spill in the Niger Delta region according to NDES (1997) and UNEP (2011) 
include:  
  Mass mortality and or tainting of animals as well as other aquatic resources 
  Ground water contamination 
  Abandonment of fishing ground and associated livelihood pursuits 
  Vegetation desiccation and other forms of ecological damages 
  Loss of biodiversity in breeding grounds 
  Loss of drinking and industrial water sources 
  Reduction of land area available for agriculture 
  Loss of recreational facilities and aesthetic values of the environment 
 
 
  Worsened rural underdevelopment, poverty and heightened community embitterment 
  Gas flaring 
  Pipeline fires  
  Youth restiveness and loss of social and cultural cohesion 
  Emergence  of  local  bourgeois  through  selective  gratification  wh ic h  pr od u c e  powerful 
Increased economic burdens of pollution clean-up, population rehabilitation  
Impairment of human health 
minority who become rich at community and environment expense 
Illegal bunkering and refining activities. 
 
50 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
A.  Population 
1. 
Nigeria is Africa's most populous country, with an estimated population of 186,053,386 which is 
projected to 392 million in 2050 (the World Fact Book, 2016). 49.5%of the population are female (80.2 
million girls and women) and males 50.5%. The country is composed of more than 250 ethnic groups 
with  the  most  populous  being:  Hausa  and  the  Fulani  29%,  Yoruba  21%,  Igbo  (Ibo)  18%,  Ijaw  10%, 
Kanuri  4%,  Ibibio  3.5%,  Tiv  2.5%.  About  50%  of  the  population  is  Muslim,  40%  Christian,  and  10% 
indigenous beliefs. Nigeria has a young population. Almost half of the population (46%) is under age 
15. In 2012, the Nigeria National Bureau of Statistics (NBS)  estimated that the  population of  youths 
(15 – 35 years) to be 64 million where females were 51.6%. There are more females than males in all 
age groups except in the age group 15 - 19 where the females were recorded as 47.2%. Lagos State 
had the highest percentage of youths in Nigeria (6.1 per cent) followed by Kano state (5.7 per cent) 
while  Bayelsa  State  had  the  lowest  (1.3%).  Out  of  the  group  of  married  youths,  68%  were  female, 
while 32% were male. Table 1 shows the percentage distribution of youth aged between 18-35 years 
by sex while Table 2 shows the general population by gender in LIFE participating states. 
Table  1:  Percentage  distribution  of  youth  
(18 - 25) by age group and sex 
Age group 
18-20 
21-25 
26-30 
31-35 
National 
   Source: National Bureau of Statistics, 2012 
Female (%) 
50.8 
55.1 
54.4 
50.9 
52.8 
Male (%) 
49.2 
44.9 
45.6 
49.1 
47.2 
Table  2:  Population  by  gender  in  LIFE  participating 
states 
State 
Abia  
Akwa ibom  
Bayelsa  
Cross-Rivers  
Delta  
Edo  
Imo  
Ondo  
Rivers  
Female 
1,451,082 
1,918,849 
830,432 
1,421,021 
2,043,136 
1,599,420 
1,951,092 
1,715,820 
2,525,690 
Male 
1,430,298 
1,983,202 
874,083 
1,471,967 
2,069,309 
1,633,946 
1,976,471 
1,745,057 
2,673,026 
2. 
According to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 2013, Nigerian households consist of 
an average of 4.6 people with 19% of households being headed by women. Life expectancy for men 
is 53 years and 56 for women.  However females are more affected by HID/AIDS at 63.5% compared 
with  36.5%  reported  for  males,  between  2010—2013,  (NBS,  2014).  In  Nigeria,  Primary  school 
enrolment for girls increased 47.9 % in 2013 from 45.7 in 2010 but the rate for boys decreased from 
54.3% in 2010 to 53.1% in 2013. Completion rate for girls in primary and secondary schools dropped 
slightly  from  46.7%  and  47.1  %  in  2010  to  46.6%  and  46.8%  in  2013  respectively.  Enrolment  in 
tertiary  level  is  dominated  by  males  on  the  average.  In  terms  of  work  related  indicator,  the  national 
labour force participation rate of women and men aged 15-64 years was 67.4%. Men’s proportion was 
70.3%  and  women  accounted  for  64.5%.  On  average  65.5  %  of  senior  positions  in  the  Stat  Civil 
Service  were  occupied  by  men  compared  to  35.5%  women  (2010  –  2013).  Adult  illiteracy  rate  for 
women aged 15-49  years was 53.1%  while the corresponding rate for men was 75.2% (NPC & ICF 
International, 2014). 
Human Development Index: Nigeria’s HDI value for 2014 was 0.514 putting the country in the 
3. 
low  human  development  category,  positioning  it  at  152  out  of  188  countries  and  territories.  Life 
expectancy is placed at 52.5 years. Adult illiteracy rate for women aged 15-49 years was 53.1% while 
the corresponding rate for men was 75.2%.  Between 2005 and 2014, Nigeria’s HDI value increased 
from 0.467 to 0.514, an increase of 10.1% or an average annual increase of about 1.07%.  
B.  Poverty 
4. 
The economic conditions  of Nigeria, with respect to income and national output has increased 
in  recent  years  resulting  in  Nigeria  being    one  of  fastest  growing  economies  in  the  world  and  the 
largest economy in Africa (UNDP, 2015). Despite the fact that the economy is growing, the proportion 
of Nigerians living in poverty is increasing every year. Economic growth has not been associated with 
poverty reduction and unemployment has not abated. At the household level, progress is less visible 
52 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
as  unemployment,  poverty,  violence  and  other  threats  to  day-today  existence  appear  to  have 
deepened or at least persisted (ibid). Nearly half of Nigerians live below the national poverty line, and 
those in the agricultural sector face even higher poverty  levels (World Bank 2014). According to the 
NBS’ Poverty Profile (2010), subjective poverty measure shows that the core poor constitutes 46.7%, 
moderate poor 47.2% while the non-poor make up 6.1%. Relative poverty headcount has significantly 
increased since 1980 as shown in Table 3.  
The  NBS  (2013)  indicated  that  about  112  million  Nigerians  live  below  the  poverty  line.  More 
5. 
than  80%  of  urban  households  have  electricity  compared  with  only  one-third  of  rural  households. 
Overall, six in ten households have access to an improved source of drinking water. 
Table  3: 
1980-2010 
  Relative  poverty  headcount 
from  
Table 4: Poverty by state 
Year 
Poverty 
incidence 
(%) 
Estimated  
population  
(million) 
1980 
1985 
1992 
1996 
2004 
2010 
27.2 
46.3 
42.7 
65.6 
54.4 
69.0 
65.0 
75.0 
91.5 
102.3 
126.3 
163 
Populatio
n  
in 
poverty  
(million) 
17.1 
34.7 
39.2 
67.1 
68.7 
112.47 
Source: National Bureau of Statistics. HNLSS 2010 
Food poverty 
(Relative 
poverty)33 
Absolute 
poverty 
Poor 
State 
Abia  
Akwa Ibom  
Bayelsa  
Cross River  
Delta  
Edo  
Imo  
Ondo  
Rivers  
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, Poverty Profile 2010 
57.4 
53.7 
47.0 
52.9 
63.3 
65.6 
50.5 
45.7 
50.4 
Food 
poor 
30.5 
35.6 
23.3 
46.4 
42.8 
39.4 
33.3 
36.1 
26.3 
Non 
poor 
42.6 
46.3 
53.0 
47.1 
36.7 
34.4 
49.5 
54.3 
49.6 
Non 
poor 
69.5 
64.4 
76.7 
53.6 
57.2 
60.6 
66.7 
63.9 
73.7 
Poor 
63.4 
62.8 
57.9 
59.7 
70.1 
72.5 
57.3 
57.0 
58.6 
Non 
Poor 
36.6 
37.2 
42.1 
40.3 
29.9 
27.5 
42.7 
43.0 
41.4 
Dollar per day 
based on an 
adjusted PPP 
Poor 
Non 
57.8 
53.8 
47.0 
52.9 
63.6 
66.0 
50.7 
46.1 
50.6 
Poor 
42.2 
46.2 
53.0 
47.1 
36.4 
34.0 
49.3 
53.9 
49.4 
The  agriculture  sector  remains  mostly  small-scale  and  subsistence-based,  with  relatively  low 
6. 
levels of commercialization. 
7. 
Gender dimension of poverty: Given the different roles, status and entitlements, poverty has 
a  gender  dimension  with  women  being  at  a  disadvantage.  As  described  in  section  C,  women  are 
disadvantaged  in  many  areas  (relative  to  men).  This  has  contributed  to  high  poverty  levels  among 
women.  The  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  indicates  that  women  form  65%  of  the  population  living 
below poverty line against 35% for men. 
C.  Status of women and gender issues 
8. 
Gender  equality  and  empowerment  of  women  is  crucial  as  evidence  demonstrates  that  in 
economies  where  gender  equality  is  greater,  there  is  not  only  higher  economic  growth  but  also  a 
better  quality  of  life.    Rural  women  in  Nigeria,  as  in  many  African  countries,  face  constraints  which 
hamper their productive potential. There is a pronounced gender gap in access to resources such as 
finance  and  agricultural  assets,  as  well  as  access  to  technology,  and  marketing  channels.  The 
household  division  of  labour  between  women  and  men  is  also  not  equal.  Women  contribute  a 
substantial  proportion  of  agricultural  labour  but  do  not  get  equal  wages.  Rural  women  have  little 
ownership of land and while they constitute 60-79% of the rural work force, men are five times more 
likely to own land than women (British Council, 2012). Women’s access to resources and participation 
in  agriculture  is  still  largely  mediated  through  their  male  relatives,  mainly  fathers  or  husbands. 
Decision making power is also limited for most Nigerian women.  According to the DHS 2013, nearly 
half of women have sole  or joint decision making power about  visiting family  or relatives,  while  only 
38%  participate  in  decisions  about  major  household  purchases.  Nearly  four  in  ten  married  women 
participate  in  decisions  about  their  own  health  care.  Half  do  not  participate  in  any  of  the  three 
decisions and less than one-third reported that they participate in all three decisions. 47% of Nigerian 
33 Moderately poor based on 2/3 of the weighted mean household per capita expenditure regionally deflated 
53 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
women are mothers before they reach 20.  Up to one  third  of Nigerian  women report that  they  have 
been subjected to some form of violence. One in five has experienced physical violence. 
Income inequality in the formal sector has grown since 1999 with women in formal employment 
9. 
being paid less than men. Only one in every three employees in the non-agricultural formal sector is a 
woman. Regardless of their educational qualifications, women earn consistently less than their male 
counterparts. In some cases they earn less than men with lower qualifications. Women occupy fewer 
than  30%  of  all  posts  in  the  public  sector  and  only  17%  of  senior  positions.  In  the  political  domain, 
women’s  representation  in  parliament  dwindled  from  2007  (NBS,  2011;  UNDP,  2015).  Women  fair 
worse off than men in the key indicators namely health, education (including tertiary enrolment as well 
as power and decision making as demonstrated in Table 5.  
Table 5: Selected indicators by gender  
Indicators  
Population & Families  
1. Population 2006  
2. Early Marriage  
Health  
3. Percentage living with HIV/AIDS (est. 2010)  
4. Life Expectancy (HDR 2008)  
Education  
5. Youth Literacy in Any Language  
7. Adult Illiteracy  
8. Primary School Enrolment (2010)  
9. Secondary School Enrolment (2010)  
10.Tertiary Enrolment:  
NCE (2009)  
Polytechnic (2010  
University (2010)  
Power and Decision Making   
11. Parliamentary Seats both houses (INEC)  
12. State House of Assembly (INEC 2011)  
13. Permanent Secretaries (MDAs 2010)  
14. Directorate (MDAs  
Source: NBS, 2011 
Male  
Female  
%  
49  
7.2  
44.3  
48  
86.0  
31.5  
53.4  
54.2  
51.1  
72.3  
61.6  
93.6  
94.5  
96.5  
90.8  
%  
51  
92.8  
55.7  
52  
79.0  
40  
46.6  
45.8  
48.9  
27.7  
38.4  
6.4  
5.5  
3.5  
9.2  
Difference  
%  
2  
85.6  
11.4  
4  
7  
8.5  
6.8  
8.4  
2.2  
44.6  
23.2   
87.2  
89  
93  
81.6  
D.  Gender gaps in agriculture 
In Nigeria, both women and men are involved in agriculture. It is estimated that rural women in 
10. 
Nigeria, more than their male counterparts, take the lead in agricultural activities, making up to 60-80 
percent of labour force (Merit Research Journals; 2014). Unfortunately the contributions of women in 
agriculture  are  grossly  undermined  despite  the  fact  that  they  are  suppliers  of  labour,  food  crop  and 
livestock  producers,  processors  of  food  and  fish  products,  marketers  of  peasant  farm  surplus  and 
transporters of farm supplies and farm products between the farm and the home. A World Bank study 
(2014) found that women farmers consistently produce less per hectare than their male counterparts. 
In  southern  Nigeria,  when  simple  averages  are  compared,  plots  managed  by  women  appear  to 
produce substantially less (in terms of gross value of output) per hectare than plots managed by men. 
The findings suggest that if women in the south had similar quantities of productive factors to men’s, 
they could produce just as much and the gender gap might disappear (World Bank, 2014). It further 
showed that male farmers in the south deploy more labour on their plots than female farmers which 
accounts for the gender gap in the South.  The gap is further widened by the fact that women use less 
herbicide per hectare compared with men, and this imbalance further widens the gender productivity 
gap  in  the  south.  Gender  responsive  inclusive  agricultural  growth  in  Nigeria  would  therefore  benefit 
from:  i)  helping  women  overcome  their  labour  disadvantages  by  facilitating  their  use  of  farm  labour 
and  labour-saving  approaches;  ii)  expanding  female  participation  in  commercial  agriculture  iii) 
ensuring equitable ensuring that women access and use similar quantities of inputs, including labour 
and herbicides. 
54 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
11.  Though  many  women  are  involved  in  subsistence  agriculture  and  off  farm  activities,  men  are 
five times more likely  than  women to own  land. Women own  4%  of land  in the  North-East, and just 
over 10% in the South-East and South-South. Land ownership and land tenure give women security 
and provide a key to access other resources and opportunities. Without land title, it is hard for women 
to raise the finance they need to start productive enterprises. One in every five businesses is run by a 
woman but they are constrained by lack of capital and have to rely on savings. 
12.  The  consequences  of  gender  inequality  include  undermining  the  potential  contributions  of 
women  who  constitutes  almost  50%  of  the  population,  to  economic  development.  The  Agriculture 
Promotion  Policy  (2016  –  2020)  recognizes  that  implementation  of  policies  do  not  do  enough  to 
ensure  inclusion  of  women  in  agriculture  or  address  gender  inequalities  in  agriculture,  such  as, 
gender  biases  in  access  to  land  where  women  face  more  difficulty  accessing  land  than  men.  It 
therefore  seeks  to:  develop  and  launch  entrepreneurship  platforms  that  create  a  pathway  for  youth 
and  women  to  enter  agribusiness  economy;    review  the  subsisting  gender  policy  document  with  a 
view to improving the implementation activities; expand training of key leaders and influencers across 
FMARD  to  ensure  gender  /  youth  considerations  integrated  into  decision  making;  expand  capacity 
building for women and youth for entrepreneurship, including technical training and access to financial 
services;  facilitate  dialogue  with  farmer  groups  and  service  providers  (for  women  and  youth)  to 
expand pool of ideas FMARD can pursue to institutionalize change. The  LIFE project contributes  to 
the fulfilment of most of these aspirations. 
13.  To address the gender gaps and enhance empowerment of all household members,  the LIFE 
project  will  use  gender  action  learning  system  (GALS).  This methodology  is  described  elsewhere  in 
this  report.  The  project  will  enhance  women’s  eeconomic  independence  which  is  an  essential 
dimension of women’s empowerment. 
E.  Status of Youth 
14.  National Youth Policy (2009) defines youth in Nigeria as all young males and females aged 18 
–  35  years,  who  are  citizens  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria.  LIFE  project  has  adopted  this 
definition and will target young women and men of this age bracket. According to the Nigeria Bureau 
of Statistics 2012, the population of youths in the age bracket of 15 to 35 years was estimated at 64 
million  with  51.6%  being  females.  64.1%  of  youth  aged  15  to  19  were  in  school  while  21.3%  had 
never been to school. For age group 20 to 24 years, most had been to school (23.2) while 20.2% had 
never. The National Population Commission (NPoC, 2013) states that youth make up about half of the 
population  in  Nigeria  (15  to  34  years).  Unfortunately,  as  the  youth  population  grows,  so  does  the 
unemployment  rate.  It  is  estimated  that  since  2005,  approximately  20  million  young  people  entered 
the  country’s  labour  market;  youth  unemployment  reached  56%  in  2011  and  remains  critically  high. 
Unemployment  is  particularly  high  among  women  and  young  people,  reaching  23.3%  and  41.6% 
respectively, in 2009. The rising joblessness and under-employment among young people in Nigeria 
is accompanied with social ills among them:  involvement in crime, drug and alcohol abuse, and loss 
of confidence in the larger society. In terms of age, younger youth struggle even more to find jobs with 
at  least  two-thirds  of  unemployed  youth  being  between  15  and  24  years  of  age.  And  in  terms  of 
gender, available statistics show that a majority of unemployed youth are female. As shown in table 6, 
women accounted for more than 50 percent of unemployed youth between 2008 and 2012. 
15.  The  Centre  for  Strategic  and  International  Studies  (2014)  ranks  Nigeria  lowest  among  30 
countries  in  the  Global  Youth  Index34.  Despite  the  challenges  in  the  national  environment,  Nigerian 
youth report a generally positive outlook and particularly high optimism in economic opportunity. In the 
agriculture  sector,  more  than  37%  of  youths  (48.4  %  males  and  51.6%  females)  are  engaged  in 
agriculture.  
34 The rankings are scored between 0 and 1, with 1 being the highest. Scores are given across six domains of youths' 
lives: citizen participation, economic opportunity, education, health, information and communications technology, and 
safety and security. The overall score is a weighted composite of the 6 domain scores. The domains are comprised of 
40 indicators encompassing the enabling environment in which youth live and participate, youth outcome specific 
indicators, and youths' outlook and satisfaction with their own wellbeing. The results are broken into four performance 
based tiers- high, upper-middle, lower-middle, and low. 
55 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
16.  The  Niger  Delta  region  has  been  characterized  by  youth  restiveness  as  a  result  of  the 
deprivation of lands and environmental degradation due to oil producing activities, which leaves the oil 
producing communities no farming land and fishing waters.  The youth restiveness and disturbance in 
the oil producing communities could also be traced to the large number of uneducated, unskilled and 
unemployed  youths  who  are  aware  of  the  large  amount  of  money  being  made  from  their  ancestral 
lands, yet largely remain poor with limited employment opportunities (D.O. Arubayi, 2010). 
17.  Under-employed  rural  young  people,  particularly  those  who  are  frustrated  and  idle  because 
they have failed to find decent jobs after migrating to urban centres, contribute to social unrest, crime 
and  even  armed  conflicts.  Initiatives  that  improve  the  opportunities  for  young  people  to  take  part  in 
decent agricultural and non-agricultural work provide larger benefits for social harmony, as well as for 
food security and poverty reduction. Jobs in the agricultural sector are typified by low pay, low levels 
of  productivity,  underemployment,  dangerous  work  and  no  social  protection.  Thus,  the  issue  is 
predominantly the availability of decent work, rather than lack of work. There is also the challenge of 
perception  of  drudgery  of  the  agriculture  sector  by  young  persons.  Many  young  people  further  lack 
experience  and  knowledge  of  how  markets  work.  They  often  lack  business,  management  and 
entrepreneurial skills, and like many other smallholder farmers, they lack information about prices. 
18.  Young  women frequently  have fewer opportunities than  young men to benefit from education, 
training and productive agricultural employment. This is the result of traditional gender patterns in the 
allocation  of  household  labour,  career  choices,  early  marriage  and  motherhood,  and  restrictions  on 
their movement in some societies. Consequently, many women are extremely constrained in terms of 
the  employment  opportunities  that  are  open  to  them;  and  when  they  are  involved  in  off-farm 
employment, women tend to be engaged in less skilled and less financially rewarding jobs. 
Table 6: National youth unemployment 
 figures by gender (2008-2012) 
Unemployed 
Year  
youth that are 
female (%) 
%age of 
Unemployed 
youth that are 
in rural areas 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
Source: NISER, 2013 
58.50  
57.82 
54.52 
50.85 
55.42 
54.68 
50.77 
47.59 
59.95 
53.25 
19.  While  agriculture  offers  an  opportunity  to  create  employment  and  wealth,  young  women  and 
men  face  several  constraints  to  participate  and  thrive  in  this  sector.  These  include  access  to  land, 
credit,  extension  services  as  well  as  linkages  to  the  market.  It  is  recognized  that  young  women 
experience unemployment more frequently than their young male counterparts and tend to have fewer 
occupational  opportunities  (the  National  Youth  Policy,  2009).  The  increasing  number  of  early 
marriages (estimated at 92.8% for females) and teenage pregnancies recorded across the country is 
also  an  indication  that  young  women  require  specific  support  measures  in  this  regard.  Many  young 
women  have  also  been  victims  of  sexual  harassment,  physical  violence  and  abuse,  labour 
exploitation, gender discrimination, as well as negative attitudes and practices.  
F.  Targeting Mechanism 
Geographic targeting:  
20.  The project will be implemented in the Niger Delta region. IFAD support will be focused in six of 
nine  states  of  the  region.  Selection  of  IFAD  supported  states  is  based  on  criteria  that  consider:  (a) 
poverty  levels  and  (b)  tangible  political  commitment  to  invest  in  smallholder  agriculture,  community 
development  and  rural  youth  and  poor  women.  The  six  states  are:    Ondo,  Cross-River,  Edo,  Abia, 
Delta, and Bayelsa. 
56 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
21.  Within the state, selection of beneficiaries will be at village level. Participating LGAs will depend 
on dominance of the priority commodity and enterprises selected for the state on the basis of results 
from the baseline survey. Participating LGAs will have institutional structure to support LIFE.     
Target group 
22.  The target group for IFAD–LIFE will be in three categories: i) incubators ii) potential incubators; 
and  iii)  apprentices.  The  apprentices  form 
target  group  and  will  be 
the  main 
composed  of  youth  (aged  18  -  35  years) 
and  women  headed  households  with 
children  under  the  age  of  15  who  are 
actively  engaged  in  agribusiness.  This  is 
based  not  only  on  the  high  numbers  of 
youth population but also on the constraints 
and challenges facing women and youth in 
agri-
general, 
entreprenuership.  Within  the     ’youth’  target 
group, there will be consideration of gender 
differences  aiming  at  50:50  participation 
between  young  women  and  young  men. 
This  group  will  be  selected  at  village  level 
based on the criteria highlighted in box 1. 
particularly 
and 
in 
23.  The incubators and potential incubators participating in the project will not be limited by age 
or  gender.  A  mapping  of  these  groups  will  be  carried  out  under  component  1  based  on  the  level  of 
their  i)  market  linkage  ii)  adoption  of  out-grower  model,  iii)  performance  of  trainings  under  their 
incubation. The incubators will be selected among those that have strong marketing linkages with at 
least 60% of their produce sold to buyers outside their LGA. Their produce is sold to about 5 buyers. 
This group is already implementing out-grower model and some are in the process of diversifying from 
captive  farming  to  out  grower  model.  Their  business  model  has  included  training  of  potential  out 
growers  for  at  least  2  years  evidenced  by  more  than  50%  of  trainees  having  started  their  own 
production  and  supplying  to  the  incubator  or  selling  independently.  Potential  incubators  are  those 
selling mainly in the local market (within the LGA) in spite of existing market at state level and beyond. 
Any  training  that  they  conducted  occurs  at  random  without  concrete  planning.  However,  they  have 
potential for developing an out-grower based model and graduate to incubator model in 2 years. They 
may  have  20-50%  of  their  trainees  starting  own  production.  Most  of  their  agribusiness  fall  into 
category that may already be uncompetitive and may therefore experience market marginalization. It 
is important to note that selection criteria was based on the evidence from design mission’s field visit 
as well as lessons from other initiatives including CBNRMP. 
24.  Support to target group: LIFE will facilitate youth and women agri-preneurs to: i) have better 
access to markets to take advantage of the opportunities arising along the agribusiness value chain; 
ii)  strengthen  capacity  in  enterprise  development  through  training,  incubation,  mentoring,  business 
networks and associations; iii) address gender differences, and especially enable more female youth 
to participate in agribusiness; iv) support linkages for financing mechanisms and markets. 
Gender Strategy  
25.  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS):  GALS  is  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  of  the 
household methodologies.  It is an innovative approach aimed at ensuring gender equality and social 
inclusion.  The  methodology  is  proven  to  increase  impacts  when  mainstreamed  to  agricultural/rural 
development  operations.  Household  methodologies  are  participatory  approaches  used  to  promote 
equitable  intra-household  relations,  fair  division  of  labour  and  shared  decision-making  processes. 
Experience  with  the  methodology  has  demonstrated  deeper  and  more  sustainable  improvements  in 
rural  livelihoods  through  ownership,  high  quality  of  beneficiary  participation,  empowerment,  and 
sustainability  plan,  among  others.  Initially  piloted  in  Uganda  in  2009,  the  methodology  has  now 
expanded through IFAD supported interventions to other countries including Rwanda, Nigeria, Sierra 
57 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Leone  and  Ghana  among  others.  In  Nigeria,  GALS  have  been  implemented  through  Rural  Finance 
Institution Building Programme (RUFIN). Lessons from RUFIN experiences will inform implementation 
in LIFE. RUFIN started implementing GALS in 2012 as an outcome of the Learning Routes to Uganda 
and Rwanda. Box 2 highlights lessons from RUFIN. 
Box 2 Lessons on GALS from the RUFIN Programme 
  Undertaking and promoting GALS activities in the implementation of rural finance programme do 
not only contribute to improved money management knowledge but build the capacity of the 
beneficiaries especially women to effectively access and use financial resources; 
  Gender relation can change immediately especially when couples participate in the GALS learning 
 
 
 
process together; 
Joint plan and harmonious relation at household level enhances livelihood, increases productive 
and savings. This was drawn from the testimonies of men who were made to make positive 
changes (cut in alcoholism, share household work as well as hold joint decision-making with their 
family members). 
Investing in gender equity  smoothen both gender relation and role such that livelihood activity  
benefit both women and men;  
Improved  gender relations significantly influences savings in households  and ensure that women 
benefit from financial services thereby providing opportunities for greater financial inclusion for  
women 
26.  GALS  implementation  mechanism:  The  entry  point  for  mainstreaming  and  rolling  out  of 
GALS  will  be  the  enterprise  group  and  other  networks.  The  process  will  be  guided  by  the  steps 
outlined below: 
  Awareness  creation  and  selection  of  participating  groups:  Implementation  of  GALS  will 
start with 2 groups per LGA in the six participating states. 
  First exposure to the methodology: a learning route or a learning event: This will be aimed 
at  understanding  and  first  immersion  into  the  methodology  for  project  and  other  project 
implementers. The output is an action plan to launch and implement the process in the project 
or country portfolio. 
  Change catalyst workshop:  This provides a deeper  understanding of principles and tools of 
the  methodology  and  train  the  first  “trainers”  (at  community  level)  and  facilitators  (at 
project/country  level).    This  will  be  done  with  support  of  experienced  practitioners  and 
facilitators.  Actions  plans  are  defined  by  participants  to  implement  and  scale-up  the 
methodology. 
Implementing the process: The trained facilitators will then train project participants using the 
enterprise groups as entry point. 
 
  Monitoring, learning and knowledge sharing: a participatory gender review 
Results,  changes  and  achievements  will  be  captured  by  group  members  themselves.  It  is 
important to note that most of the tools used in GALS such as the Visioning tool are used both 
as planning but also monitoring tool. 
  Advancing the process: market access and livelihood development tools 
Advanced tools  will be availed to groups for sustainable results  and changes, further develop 
livelihoods and secure market access for sustainable poverty reduction and social inclusion. 
27.  The infrastructure development in component 1 will go a long way in alleviating women’s time 
poverty. In particular, the water infrastructure will include multipurpose water points where women can 
access  water  for  domestic  and  other  use  including  for  kitchen  gardens  to  cater  for  their  household 
food  related  roles.  It  is  important  to  note  that  unless  these  measures  are  taken  up  by  the  project, 
women will have limited time to devote to the project activities – hence having a negative outcome to 
their livelihood but also affecting the project outcome. While the main target group for the LIFE project 
are youth and women, special care will be taken to ensure that within the ‎‎’youth’, young women will 
have  equitable  opportunities  with  the  young  men  to  participate  and  benefit  from  the  project.  Such 
considerations will include: i) distance to the incubation centre ii) timing of training at the incubation iii) 
where required, flexible training arrangement. 
28.  While seven commodities have been selected in LIFE, the project will also consider additional 2 
opportunity  commodities  that  have  youth  and  women  appeal  for  income,  job  creation  and  nutrition, 
58 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
such  vegetables,  fruits  and  honey  production,  processing  and  marketing.  Such  commodities  may 
include cassava, rice, cocoa, oil palm, plantain, fishery  and poultry. The project will further take into 
consideration  special  constraints  faced  by  youth  and  women  particularly  in  accessing  resources 
necessary  for  agribusiness  especially,  land  and  financing.  Under  sub-component  1.3:  Financial 
Inclusion, support for agri-enterprises, financial literacy will be part and parcel of capacity building for 
beneficiaries especially women. On the 3 windows, there will financial providers will be encourage to 
develop  products  that  are  relevant  for  women  and  the  youth.  The  project  will  also  use  the  Gender 
Action  Learning  System  for  Financial  Inclusion  borrowing  on  lessons  from  RUFIN.  Under  RUFIN, 
training  on  this  methodology  included  the  following  categories  of  participants:  rural  clients  (GALS 
champions), community volunteers (field agents), bank and non-bank financial service providers, their 
apexes,  representatives  of  Central  Bank  (and  Rural  Outreach  Coordination  Committee)  and  RUFIN 
staff members. LIFE further recognizes particular challenges faced by youth and women particularly in 
accessing  and  owing  land.  In  this  regard  the  project  will  promote  land  acquisition  and  development 
initiatives of the State government to make agricultural land accessible to youth and women. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
29.  All  people-centred  surveys  undertaken  by  the  project  will  include  an  age  and  gender 
disaggregated  data  collection  and  analysis.  The  project  is  well  positioned  to  provide  insights  on 
working with youth and women in agribusiness. In order to do this, there has to be good information 
back by data. In this regard, all project reports will have age and sex disaggregated information. 
30.  Measuring Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: As part of gender analysis in the 
baseline,  an  assessment  of  women’s  empowerment  will  be  undertaken  using  the  Women’s 
Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (WEAI).  The  Index  measures  the  roles  and  extent  of  women’s 
engagement in the agriculture sector in five domains: (1) decisions about agricultural production, (2) 
access to and decision making power over productive resources, (3) control over use of income, (4) 
leadership in the community, and (5) time use. These are aligned to IFAD’s Gender policy’s strategic 
objectives as shown in table 6. It also measures women’s empowerment relative to men within their 
households. The WEAI is a composite measurement tool that indicates women’s control over critical 
parts of their lives in the household, community, and economy. It is a useful tool for tracking progress 
toward gender equality. 
Table 7:  Composition of Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index 
Five dimensions 
of empowerment 
PRODUCTION 
RESOURCES 
INCOME 
LEADERSHIP 
TIME 
Indicators 
Weight 
Input in production decisions  
1. 
2.  Autonomy in production 
3.  Ownership of assets 
4.  Purchase, sale, or transfer of assets 
5.  Access to & decision on credit 
6.  Control over use of income 
7.  Group member 
8.  Speaking in public 
9.  Workload 
1/10 
1/10 
1/15 
1/15 
1/15 
1/5 
1/10 
1/10 
1/10 
Link to objectives of IFAD’s 
Policy on GEWE 
Economic empowerment 
Decision-making & 
representation 
Equitable workload balance 
31.  The  survey  will  be  repeated  at  mid-term  and  project  closure  in  order  to  track  and  document 
LIFE’s contribution to gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
59 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
A.  Country Programme 
31.  Since  1985,  IFAD  has  approved  12  projects  for  Nigeria,  of  which  10  were  financed.  Five  of 
these  are  now  closed:  the  Cassava  Multiplication  Programme,  the  Artisanal  Fisheries 
Development  Project,  the  two  area-based  Community  Demand-driven  Rural  Development 
projects in Katsina and Sokoto States, and the Root and Tuber Expansion Programme (RTEP) 
implemented  in  24  states.  the  Community-Based  Agricultural  Development  Programme 
(CBARDP)  implemented in the  7 Northern  States35, the  Community-Based Natural Resources 
Management  Programme  (CBNRMP)  implemented  in  9 states  of  the  Niger  Delta36. There  are 
presently  two  ongoing  Programmes,  namely,  the  Value  Chain  Development  Programme 
(VCDP),  being  implemented  in  the  six  states  that  cut  across  the  Middle  Belt,  Southeast, 
Southwest  and  Northeast  regions37    and  supporting  rice  and  cassava  value  chains;  and  the 
Climate Change Adaptation and Agribusiness Support Programme (CASP) being implemented 
in  the  states  of  the  North-eastern  and  North-Western  Nigeria38.    There  is  a  third  programme 
under  completion,  the  Rural  Finance  Institution  Building  Programme  (RUFIN)  implemented  in 
12 states spread across the six geopolitical zones of the country39, which completed in March 
2017 and will be closed in September 2017,.   
Ongoing Loans [US$] 
Project Name and brief 
description 
Approval Date 
Total  Project 
Cost (US$) 
Effective 
Date 
Value Chain Development 
Programme 
Climate Change Adaptation and 
Agribusiness Support Programme 
03.Apr. 2012 
104.7 mil 
11 Dec 2013 
62.6 mil 
Oct 
31 
2013 
25  March 
2015 
& 
IFAD 
Loan 
Grant 
Amount 
74.5 mil 
76.0 mil  
% 
Disbursed 
46 
2% 
32. 
IFAD  early  intervention  in  Nigeria  was  guided  by  the  concept  of  the  Community-Driven 
Development  approach  where  rural  institutions  development  was  prioritised  to  empower  rural 
poor  communities  to  identify  and  implement  their  development  priorities.  This  era  saw  the 
introduction  of  multiple  projects  both  agriculture  and  non-agriculture-related.  Following  IFAD 
direct supervision, which started in Nigeria on 1 June 2010, the focus of IFAD projects changed 
to respond to the recommendations of the 2008 CPE.40. Thus, in the ongoing projects, the CDD 
approach  was modified to  integrate farming enterprise groups. The groups are  empowered to 
play a major role in community development, but also have a voice to integerate their projects 
in  community  and  LGA  development  plans.  Presently,  the  common  themes  found  across  all 
IFAD  supported  programmes  are  improvement  of  smallholder  agricultural  productivity,  access 
to markets, rural institutions (farmer groups) development, and community empowerment.  The 
key areas of focus for smallholder  development in agribusiness and  value chain development 
include the following: 
inputs,  as  well  as 
(a) Partnerships  and  private  sector  engagement  to  facilitate  farmers  access  to  market  and 
production 
internalize  sustainability  of  project  philosophy  during 
implementation. Partnership with the private sector like Olam, Stallion, etc, Onyx and Songhai, 
ICRISAT etc., has helped to provide reliable market outlet to farmers and facilitate technology 
transfer in agro-allied enterprises respectively.  
35 Borno, Jigawa, Katsina, Kebbi, Sokoto, Yobe, Zamfara States 
36 Abia, Akwa-Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo and Rivers States 
37 Anambra, Benue, Ebonyi, Taraba, Niger and Ogun States. 
38 Borno, Jigawa, Katsina, Kebbi, Sokoto, Yobe, Zamfara States,  
39 Katsina, Zamfara, Adamawa, Bauchi, Benue, Nasarawa, Lagos, Oyo, Akwa-Ibom, Edo, Anambra and Imo States 
40 The 2008 CPE had recommended that IFAD should refocus on agriculture and agricultural-related infrastructure using a value chain 
development approach. Thus, in response, the IFAD involvement in Nigeria had in 2010 began to emphasise on Agrienterprise and/or 
value chain development 
60 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
(b) Economic increase in the yields of targeted commodities through the use of improved varieties, 
seeds, fertilizer and other production practices;  
(c) Deepening of business orientation and increasing involvement of rural farmers in enterprises; 
(d) Increasing engagement of youth and women in gainful agricultural and agricultural related jobs; 
(e) Increasing access to financial resources for investment in activities along the commodity value 
chain – notably including acquisition of inputs and services; and 
(f)  Participatory  development  facilitated  through  the  establishment  of  local,  community-level 
development institutions. 
33.  At the state and community levels, the challenges of the country programme are as follows: 
  Lack of capacity leading to variations in implementation performance in different states; inability 
to integrate success in the national systems; and little or no availability of operational funds in 
some  States,  which  creates  loss  of momentum.  Absence  of  a  national  coordination  body  at 
the federal level worsens the entire situation. 
  Lack  of  standardisation  in  agricultural  enterprise  activities  and  infrastructural  schemes  has 
resulted  in  variability  of  the  quality  of  these  activities  from  state  to  state. While  some  states 
seem  to  be  doing  well,  others  are  yet  to  pay  the  needed  attention  to  quality  and  standard. 
This affects level of result of interventions. 
  Weakness  in  the  extension  system  in  the  Nigeria.  The  national  extension  carrier  is  the  ADP 
system (a public service provider on extension). There is lack of capacity and general shortfall 
in  qualified  personnel  for  the  nation-wide  ADPs  to  play  the  role  of  providers  in  a  complex 
nation  like  Nigeria.  The  programmes  are  averse  to  the  use  of  private  sector  to  facilitate 
services  at  the  community/beneficiary  level.  This  attitude  limits  knowledge  sharing  and 
internalisation of proven enterprise modules as well as frustrates the adoption of innovations 
by  programmes.  
  Farmers  are  participating  in  the  innovative  Commodity  Alliance  Forum,  which  is  a  transaction 
and  knowledge  sharing  platform  between  farmers  and  big  private  sector  players.  However, 
while  challenges  of  extension,  market  access/market  participation,  infrastructure,  youth 
involvement, and government participation in agriculture are being tackled by the forum, the 
programmes are yet to fix the challenges of financial access for farmers. In addition, cassava 
farmers  still  suffer  from  lack  of  reliable  produce  off-takers  for  their  fresh  cassava  roots. 
Despite  reasonable  impact,  the  RUFIN  programme  was  unable  to  link  systematically  with 
other IFAD programmes to create sustained credit access for the rural farmers. Thus, in line 
with the 2015 CPE and 2016 COSOP, other IFAD programmes will now have a finance sub-
component to facilitate credit access/delivery to enterprise groups.  
  The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system remains unable to capture impact and outcomes, 
all  programmes  still  face  issues  of  data  collection  and  data  quality.  There  is  general  under-
reporting of performance by programmes. 
  Systems  for  project  level  procurement  suffer  from  various  inefficiencies  in  the  preparation  of 
specification  of  items  and  services  to  be  procured  in  accordance  with  AWPBs  and  tenders 
themselves are frequently delayed.  The net effect of these inefficiencies and occasional mis-
steps is low disbursement. 
B.  Lessons Learnt and adherence to IFAD Policies 
34.  To be specific, all IFAD supported programmes have had common implementation challenges 
of: (a) delays in effectiveness, (b) untimely release of counterpart funds, particularly from state 
and local governments and the federal government following the recent economic recession, (c) 
weak communication and dissemination of successes, (d) slow WA processing and low drawn 
down, and (e) weak extension to support effective and timely service delivery to farmers. 
However, based on the findings of the two CPEs in 2008 and 2015, the RB-COSOP, internal 
portfolio completion report, and project completion reports of past IFAD-assisted projects, the 
design of LIFE-ND has incorporated the following key lessons that are relevant to the project. 
61 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
These lessons are categorized into: (i) targeting, (ii) enterprise development approaches and 
models, (iii) social and environmental management, and (iv) project management. 
Lessons on targeting  
35.  Spreading  resources  thin  diminishes  impact.  For  CBNRMP,  resources  were  spread  thinly 
across  the  nine  states  of  the  Niger  Delta  region  resulting  in  inefficiencies,  diluted  quality  of 
outreach, and limited overall project impact. Due to the long distances between the participating 
LGAs, large transaction costs (overhead cost up to 20 percent of project cost) were incurred in 
coordinating  and  monitoring  of  project  activities. 
In  line  with  the  COSOP  and  CPE 
recommendations,  LIFE-ND  will  limit  IFAD  loan  proceeds  to  six  states  and  aim  at  statewide 
coverage  in  these  states,  starting  with  10  LGAs  per  state  and  increasing  the  number  upon  a 
review of performance at the midterm review. Since poverty levels are similar in the nine Niger 
Delta states,  the six IFAD-supported states  were selected using  the following criteria:  (i) clear 
government  focus  on  community  development  and  smallholder  agriculture;  (ii)  willingness  to 
work with the private sector; and (iii) demonstrated commitment and political will (as expressed 
in the level of participation in former CBNRMP) to support a joint project with IFAD. Within each 
state,  the  first  10  LGAs  will  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  dominance  of  the  priority 
commodities  in  their  domain.  Villages  for  intervention  will  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  the 
willingness of community members to participate in the project.  
36.  Commodity and enterprise targeting are critical for good performance results. Unlike the 
CBNRMP  that  supported  an  unlimited  number  of  commodities  and  their  associated  agri-
enterprises,  LIFE-ND  will  emphasise  the  top  four  state  government  priority  commodities  with 
specific consideration to their level of: (i) return on investment; (ii) potential to create jobs for the 
beneficiaries;  (iii)  food  and  nutrition  security;  (iv)  capacity  for  import  substitution;  (v)  industrial 
demand;  and  (vi)  availability  of  private  sector  players  to  drive  production  and  offer  reliable 
market outlet. 
37.  Effective  targeting  of  youth  and  women  could  yield  better  results.  Overall,  Nigerian 
projects have recorded high participation of women and to a lesser extent youth. The process, 
however,  lacked  a  clear  targeting  strategy  to  create  learning  that  could  be  scaled  up.  For  50 
percent of the project beneficiaries, LIFE-ND will continue the protocol for women including: (i) 
promotion  of  women  responsive  enterprises;  (ii)  direct  targeting  of  women  only  groups;  (iii) 
organizing  time  and  venue  friendly  events  for  greater  women  participation;  (iv)  affirmative 
provision of: (a) at least 30 percent of leadership positions in commodity associations held by 
women, (b) engagement of a minimum of 35 percent women in the project coordination teams 
at  the  regional  and  state  levels;  and  (c)  use  of  the  GALS  successfully  applied  by  the  RUFIN 
programme. As  the  major  issue  being  addressed  by  the  project  is  youth  restiveness—crime, 
migration, militancy—and these are primarily social ills affected young men—50 percent of the 
beneficiaries  will  be  young  men.    To  support  this  approach,  LIFE-ND  will  also  draw  from  the 
experience  of  the  IITA  youth  agri-preneurs  and  FAO-YEAP,  to  target  youth  and  promote 
entrepreneurship skills in them through an enterprise incubation.   
Lessons on enterprise development approaches and models  
38.  The CDD approach can be adapted for the promotion of rural agribusiness development. 
The  CBARDP  had  used  the  Community  Driven  Development  (CDD)  approach  to  realize  361 
new Community Development Associations (CDAs) in northern Nigeria. CBNRMP,  in line  with 
its  renewed  focus  from  2010  on  enhanced  food  security,  job  creation  for  youth  and  poverty 
reduction, adapted the CDD approach in the Niger Delta region into a commodity development 
approach to realize 154 Commodity Apex Development Associations (CADAs). The CADA, an 
umbrella  association  to  support  the  enterprise  groups  in  each  community,  supported  the 
establishment  of  viable  agro-enterprises,  leading  to  a  marked  improvement  of  the  incomes 
women and youth. The CADA also streamlined resource flow from CBNRMP to the  enterprise 
groups  in  each  community.  While  both  the  CDA  and  the  CADA  functioned  to:  (i)  prioritize 
62 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
community  needs;  (ii)  settle  conflicts;  (iii)  ensure  social  inclusion;  (iv)  build  social  capital;  (v) 
maintain productive infrastructure; (vi) manage financial resources; (vii) act as an entry point for 
development partners and government into rural communities; and (viii) provide a learning and 
knowledge  sharing  platform  for  members  and  non-members.  The  CADA  further  had  a  strong 
emphasis  on  agribusiness  development.  It  facilitate  the  creation  of  1,800  strong  enterprises 
owned by youth. LIFE-ND will deepen the use of the CADA to facilitate youth and poor women's 
involvement  and  women  inclusion  in  agribusiness,  and  facilitate  access  to  economic 
opportunities. 
39.  Use  of  enterprise  incubation  model.  CBNRMP's  innovative  enterprise  incubation  model 
introduced  youth  to  agribusiness  and  became  a  good  youth-to-youth  mentorship  model  for 
creating  decent  jobs  and  for  sharing  knowledge. At  the  close  of  CBNRMP,  over  1,800  strong 
agri-enterprises  were  reportedly  earning  above  USD  5  per  day.  LIFE-ND  will  adopt  the 
incubation model as the entry point and a key stone to its approach. 
40.  The  private  sector  is  enthusiastic  to  engage  with  smallholder  farmers  if  the  farmers  are 
organized  and  if  there  is  a  credible  process  to  discourage  side-selling  of  produce.  VCDP 
through  the  Commodity Alliance  Platform  (CAPs),  fostered  linkages  between  farmers  and  the 
private  sector,  helping  to  build  trust  between  the  parties.  The  VCDP  has  helped  to  leverage 
finance through cashless credit support from the off-taker. LIFE-ND will deepen on the CAP to 
facilitate  access  to  finance,  technology  and  market  for  the  beneficiaries,  and  in  addition 
engaging with government and community members to secure and develop bulk land of various 
sizes for the beneficiaries. 
41. 
Inadequate  financial  access  inhibits  profitable  agri-enterprise  development.  Enterprise 
development  in  CBNRMP  and  other  IFAD-assisted  projects  has  been  constrained  by  farmers’ 
inadequate access to financial services to procure inputs to produce on an economic scale and 
reach profitable markets. RUFIN facilitated farmers’ increased access to rural financial services 
through  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs),  and  strengthened  the  savings  culture,  recordkeeping 
skills and cohesion of village saving and credit groups (VSCGs). As at 2016, up to N16 billion 
(US$  53.3  million)  was  leveraged  as  internal  saving  mobilization  by  the  RUFIN  facilitated 
savings  and  credit  groups  in  12  states  of  Nigeria.  Unfortunately,  RUFIN’s  focus  was  not 
primarily on enterprise groups and missed the opportunity to show huge impact on job creation. 
Because  of  this  weakness,  most  of  the  enterprise  groups  in  the  CBNRMP  states  struggled 
without guidance and needed to invent their own systems to improve financial access. Learning 
from  this  experience,  LIFE-ND  has  incorporated  a  financial  access  subcomponent  to 
mainstream RUFIN's lessons and facilitate financial access by beneficiaries. 
Lessons on social and environmental management 
42.  Sound technical backstopping is critical for results in natural resource management and 
climate  change  adaptation.  CBNRMP  was  designed  to  address  climate  change  and 
environmental  issues  because  the  region  is  highly  prone  to  flooding  as  the  drainage  basin  of 
the entire country,  and is  associated  with high humidity  induced pests and diseases, pollution 
and retardation of agricultural productivity. There is also effect of coastal erosion and high seas 
rising  in  the  creeks  and  small  island  communities.  However,  little  or  nothing  was  achieved  by 
CBNRMP in this sector due to lack of technical depth in the management team to incorporate 
climate  change  resilience  and  environmental  degradation  mitigation  measures.  LIFE-ND  will 
mainstream  climate  change  adaptation  and  environmental  mitigation  measures  to  promote 
climate change smart agribusiness for the beneficiaries.  
43. 
Insecurity  and  conflict  may  be  mitigated  through  job  creation.  IFAD-assisted  projects  in 
Nigeria  have  been  vulnerable  to  various  forms  of  conflict,  insurgency  or  unrest  –  especially, 
Boko  Haram  in  the  north  east  region,  pastoralist-farmer  conflicts  in  the  middle  belt,  and 
militancy and unrest in the  Niger Delta region. With the activities of the pastoralists spreading 
further southwards, LIFE-ND will undertake a conflict analysis or risk assessment at the start of 
63 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
project implementation to provide mitigation strategies against identified potential conflicts. It is 
expected  that  the  creation  of  decent  paid  jobs  by  the  project  will  help  to  reduce  youth 
restiveness in the Niger Delta region41. 
Lessons on project management   
44.  Lack of a coordination structure constrains policy engagement42. The absence of a well-
structured policy coordination unit within the federal and state ministries of agriculture has been 
a  major  constraint  to  effective  policy  engagement,  dissemination  of  results  to  government 
systems and institutions, up-scaling of successes by the government, and the development of 
strategic partnerships. LIFE-ND, along with all DP investments in Nigerian agriculture, will also 
invest  in  the  central  communication  platform  of  IFAD  supported  programmes,  which  has 
become  an  active  communication  and  knowledge  sharing  pathway  to  scale  up  results. At  the 
state level, LIFE-ND will support the strengthening of the agricultural development programmes 
(ADPs)  for  effective  policy  dialogue  on  extension,  quality  assurance  on  services  provided  to 
beneficiaries, and M&E activities. At the state level, LIFE-ND will be domiciled in the ADP office 
complex  for  better  synergy  with  government  agricultural  initiatives  and  other  development 
partner projects. 
45.  Linking  release  of  IFAD  loan  proceeds  to  counterpart  funding  limits  implementation 
effectiveness.  IFAD  usually  requires  local  counterpart  financing  as  evidence  of  ownership  of 
the project activities. However, linking counterpart fund contributions to the release of IFAD loan 
proceeds  for  field  activities  has  created  an  inefficient  fund  utilization  process,  and  limited 
implementation  effectiveness.  The  Government  of  Nigeria  also  insists  that  payment  of  staff 
salary  is  a  form  of  counterpart  fund  contribution.  The  situation  has  become  worse  now  that 
Nigeria  is  in  a  recession  and  salaries  of  staff  are  in  arrears  in  many  states.  This  lesson  was 
considered in amending the financial agreement for CBNRMP and in the design of the ongoing 
IFAD-assisted VCDP  and  CASP, and is in line  with the practice of the  World Bank  which also 
provides  100  percent  financing  for  all  credit  categories  so  that  government  counterpart 
financing is only used to cover salaries of seconded staff. In  response to the recommendation 
of the Portfolio Completion Report, LIFE-ND will accept that government counterpart financing 
requirements may be limited to salaries of the seconded staff at all levels and operational costs 
like utilities, maintenance and office accommodation at the state level. 
46.  Delay in start-up of projects. Projects in Nigeria experience an average of 30 months delay in 
start-up,  leading  to  redesigns  and  a  reduction  in  the  project  relevance  in  relation  to  the 
objectives.  The  following  measures  will  be  taken  to  resolve  this  challenge:  (i)  National  LIFE 
programme with annual appropriation will ensure the inclusion of the IFAD-assisted LIFE-ND in 
the national borrowing plan; (ii) IFAD has in principle agreed with the government proposal for a 
retroactive financing in the financing agreement to facilitate implementation readiness; and (iii) 
a sufficient number of personnel with private sector experience will be competitively engaged to 
effectively  liaise  with  the  private  sector  and  deliver  on  the  LIFE-ND  investment  targets  using 
performance-based contracts. 
47.  Low  loan  draw-down.  For  most  projects  in  Nigeria,  weak  financial  management  and 
unpredictable  counterpart  funding  from  the  states  and  LGAs  have  disrupted  fund  flow  and 
project  delivery,  leading  to  low  loan  draw-down.  Consequently,  LIFE-ND  will:  (i)  align  with 
Nigeria's  new  Treasury  Single  Account  system  for  fund  monitoring  and  donor  alignment;  (ii) 
strengthen the project’s financial management capacity; (iii) as in other IFAD-assisted projects, 
limit government counterpart funding to overhead costs; and (iv) apply the IFAD loan proceeds 
to  fund  field  activities  100  percent,  pay  the  salaries  of  non-government  staff  at  the 
national/regional/state levels, and the operational allowances of project staff. 
41 See Appendix 18 for a media report on the expectations of NDDC on the impact of LIFE in reducing youth violence. 
42 As FMARD has resolved to improve its coordination role and has requested for the assistance of all development 
partners and their projects, LIFE-ND will support establishing and capacitating a project coordination unit under the 
FMARD, including for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.  
64 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Partnerships  covered  by  results-based  collaboration  agreements  are  more  effective.  Many 
partnerships  were  established  under  CBNRMP  on  ad  hoc  and  opportunistic  basis.  Fearing  a 
loss of their jobs, CBNRMP staff also missed the opportunity to engage extensively with private 
extension  providers early  enough  during the period of refocusing  on agriculture. The situation 
affected the quality of service delivery until two years to  programme completion when a mind-
set change occurred among the staff. The design of LIFE-ND draws from this experience.  The 
design  also  benefits  from: (i)  the  ongoing  VCDP  where  results-based  partnership  agreements 
are enabling stronger synergies and resulting in programme impact, especially in the areas of 
input  delivery,  financial  access,  reliable  market  outlet,  economic  and  social  empowerment  for 
small  farmers,  knowledge  sharing,  leveraging  of  resources  and  scaling  up  of  proven  results; 
and  (ii)  the  CBRNMP  partnership  with  the  Songhai  Centre,  National  Root  Crop  Research 
Institute (NRCRI), USAID funded MARKETS II, and  World Bank-assisted Fadama III involving 
memorandum of understanding (MoU) for accountability. LIFE-ND has provided for a business 
promotion  adviser  in  the  staff  team  to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  the  private  sector  and  civil 
society organisations (CSOs) in project implementation. The VCDP Commodity Alliance Forum 
(CAF) is a form of PPP where small producer enterprises, organized private sector operators, 
CSOs, NGOs, input dealers and market operators come together to engage in mutual business. 
The  main  market  operators,  who  drives  the  forum  is  the  off-taker  of  farmer  produce. 
Engagement is guided by result based MoU where obligations of each party and the time frame 
as  well  as  expected  investment  results  are  well  defined,  where  LIFE-ND  acts  as  the 
broker/facilitator. 
65 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Overall project 
app
LIFE  will  be  implemented  over  a  six-year  period  with  IFAD  financing  the  project  in  six  states.  
1. 
The NDDC  will finance, manage and supervise activities in the remaining three  states. Thus, all the 
nine Niger Delta states will be covered by the project. Investments will cover 10 LGAs per state and 
10 communities in each LGA targeted on the basis of poverty level, youth unemployment, community 
involvement, conflict-free nature, level of agricultural activities and private sector involvement.  
2. 
Through a PPP arrangement, the project will address the identified constraints that affect youth 
and  women  involvement  in  agriculture,  low  production  and  profitability,  and  employment.  LIFE  will 
support:  hands-on  practical  training  on  agribusiness  production;  access  to  resources  for  production 
including land; marketing support for enterprises through bulk contracts with the private sector; and, 
access  to  finance  and  market  infrastructure  to  improve  beneficiary  market  participation  in  the 
commodity value chain systems. These interventions will stimulate the development of agribusinesses 
leading to employment for the beneficiaries at on-farm and off-farm levels. 
The incubator model: The incubator will be the entry point for LIFE. Based on the experience 
3. 
of the IFAD-financed CBNRMP which successfully supported over 6,000 rural youth enterprises, the 
project  will  adopt  an  incubator  model  to  achieve  its  objectives  of  enterprise  and  employment 
development. Since some of the enterprises created were active in training and helping other farmers 
66 
                 Development                          into                                  Future              IncubatorApprentice application from project villagesLarge agro-businesses (market makers)Comp 1.3Rural FinanceSelected Incubator (through enterprise survey)Enterprise (apprentice’s business in the incubator)Selected ApprenticeApprentice training and graduationBusinesstraining by service providerLIFE supported Seed capital Independententerprise (starts independent business at LGA/village level)Off taker linkageOff taker Linkage tolarge agro-businessesInvestment ofAccumulatedcapitalOff taker Linkage to incubatorComp 1.2Marketing infrastr.Comp 1.1Incubator Dev.BC*NOTE: Start reading from section AApprenticeFrom villagesNEW independent ENTERPRISESOff taker credit arrangementsMFI loans (CBN-NIRSAL guarantee)Loans through BoA windowEquity Support through CADAsOff taker contractsCapacity buildingIncubator developmentApprentice selection by Service provider with community organisationsOff taker Linkage tolarge agro-businessesLand developmentProductioninfrastructureMarketing infrastructureA* 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
to  establish  their  business,  CBNRMP  coined  the  name  of  these  enterprises  as  incubator.  LIFE  will 
replicate  and  scale  up  the  Incubator  Model  to  foster  the  development  of  new  enterprises  through 
training, capacity building, backward linkages and investments. The incubators will be selected based 
on the following criteria: (i) demonstrated strong growth in profitability over the previous two years; (ii) 
evidence of market linkages to input suppliers and services as well as linkages to retail and wholesale 
buyers both inside and outside their LGA; and (iii) financial, technical, infrastructural (land, machinery, 
etc.)  and  managerial  capacity  in  the  subject  business  so  as  to  incubate  at  least  10  apprentices  per 
cycle.  
Figure  1  explains  the  process  of  incubation.    Broadly:  (i)  applicants  from  the  target  group  are 
4. 
identified by business development service (BDS) providers based on the selection criteria in Box 1; 
(ii) successful applicants become trainees and undergo a 10-day business planning and management 
training;  (iii)  successful  trainees  are  seconded  to  willing  incubators  where  they  become  apprentices 
and  undergo  practical  orientation  for  one  to  two  weeks;  (iv)  following  the  orientation,  apprentices 
execute two production and sales cycles under the mentorship of the incubator; (v) following the two 
apprenticeship cycles, the apprentices start their own  enterprises and are  encouraged to agree with 
their  incubator  a  number  of  cycles  during  which  they  will  market  their  output  with  the  incubator;  (vi) 
following this process, new enterprises may themselves become incubators. 
Figure 1: The incubation process in LIFE 
5. 
To  strengthen  the  incubator  model  the  project  will  engage  with  government,  community  or 
individuals to make land available to the beneficiaries for production and marketing.  As a quick-win, 
the project will secure farm settlements and warehouse/storage facilities from states for development 
for  use  by  the  incubators  and  apprentices.  Further  the  project  will  engage  with  market  operators  to 
broker  marketing  relationships  with  the  beneficiaries.  Where  appropriate,  the  arrangement  will  be 
guided  by  an  MoU  clearly  defining  the  obligations  of  each  party  and  responsive  to  the  project 
performance indicators and project development objective.  
Phasing: LIFE will be implemented in two phases.  Phase 1 will last for three  years, up to the 
6. 
midterm of the project. During this phase, only 25 incubators will be selected per state, each of which 
will incubate five enterprises per year for three years to generate 1,500 paid jobs in phase 1. Phase 1 
incubators will continue to generate enterprises throughout the life of the project adding another 6,000 
jobs. During Phase 2 (post midterm), the project will capitalize on the lessons learned during phase 1, 
and upscale the model to include an additional 75 incubators per state each generating 10 enterprises 
per year to generate an additional 18,000 paid jobs. This will give a total of 25,500 direct jobs created 
in the two phases. This target, as well as the number of participating LGAs, will be further reviewed 
during the midterm.    
7. 
Market,  financing  and  institutional  support  for  agri-enterprise  development:  Beyond  the 
incubator  model,  LIFE  will  opportunistically  increase  the  number  of  market  linkages  between 
smallholder farmers and large scale  off-takers. In the Niger Delta, commodities  such as cocoa, fish, 
rice,  and  palm  oil  are  already  traded  on  a  large  scale  and,  frequently,  it  may  be  possible,  without 
additional  incubation  to  augment  purchasing  arrangements  and  MOU-based  agreements  between 
buyers and out-growers to include project beneficiaries. Drawing from the successful ongoing VCDP 
model, the project will support rural out-growers to better supply off-takers. 
8. 
The project will facilitate appropriate finance to the incubators, apprentices, related businesses, 
individuals  and  catchment  area  businesses.    This  will  be  achieved  through  various  means  during 
project implementation, including: (i) promoting savings and self-finance by beneficiaries; (ii) matching 
grants to incubators and apprentices; (iii) vendor/supplier finance driven by off-taker relationships; (iv) 
matching grants to the existing BOA leveraging loans to project beneficiaries; and possibly (v) tapping 
into CBN's MSMEDF Refinancing to project areas to increase liquidity. 
67 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
9. 
The project will also implement a number of activities at national and state levels to strengthen 
the  capacity  of  relevant  civil  society,  public  and  private  sector  institutions  to:  (i)  improve  the  policy 
framework  for  youth  and  women  producers  and  marketers;  and  (ii)  support  learning,  knowledge 
sharing and communication network and activities, to incentivise youth and poor women to engage in 
agriculture.  
10.  Gender  equality,  mainstreaming  nutrition  and  food  security.  Given  that  women  have 
poorer  access  to  land,  input  and  agricultural  credit  to  improve  their  production,  productivity,  income 
and livelihood, LIFE will facilitate their grouping into enterprise clusters to leverage services from input 
suppliers  and  organized  produce  buyers.  LIFE’s  targeting  strategy  will  include  the  promotion  of 
women  responsive  enterprises  such  as  vegetable,  fish,  poultry,  honey  production,  processing  and 
marketing for income as well as household food security and nutrition; time, venue and environment 
friendly events for women participation; self-targeting of women’s only group; provision of at least 40 
percent slot for women in the benefiting community, 30 percent of leadership positions in commodity 
associations, and 30 percent of women in the project management team; and, promotion of the use of 
Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS).  The  nutrition  activities  on  integrated  homestead  food 
production and home grown school feeding initiative will specifically target the women groups in order 
to create opportunities for women and adolescent girls to be engaged on nutrition activities. 
11.  Partnerships. With the stronger focus on enterprise development under LIFE and drawing from 
the  experience  of  CBNRMP,  the  development  of  synergies  and  partnerships  with  the  private  sector 
will  critical  to  the  success  of  LIFE.  Many  partnerships  were  established  under  CBNRMP  on  ad  hoc 
and opportunistic bases. Fearing a loss of their jobs, CBNRMP staff missed the opportunity to engage 
extensively  with  private  extension  providers  early  enough  during  the  period  of  refocusing  on 
agriculture.  The  situation  affected  the  quality  of  service  delivery  until  two  years  to  programme 
completion  when  a  mind-set  change  occurred  among  the  staff.  The  design  of  LIFE  draws  from  the 
experience  of:  (i)  the  ongoing  VCDP  where  results-based  partnership  agreements  are  enabling 
stronger  synergies  and  resulting  in  programme  impact,  especially  in  the  areas  of  input  delivery, 
financial  access,  reliable  market  outlet,  economic  and  social  empowerment  for  small  farmers, 
knowledge  sharing,  leveraging  of  resources  and  scaling  up  of  proven  results;  and  (ii)  the  CBRNMP 
partnership with the Songhai Centre, National Root Crop Research Institute (NRCRI), USAID funded 
MARKETS  II,  and World  Bank-assisted  Fadama  III  involving  memorandum  of  understanding  (MoU) 
for accountability. LIFE has provided for a business promotion adviser in the project coordination team 
to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  the  private  sector  and  civil  society  organisations  (CSOs)  in  project 
implementation.  Project  management  will  adopt  more  of  a  coordinating  approach,  by  doing  less 
directly and more through engaging partners.  
The project area 
12.  Location.  The  focus  area  of  the  LIFE-Niger  Delta  (LIFE-ND)  is  the  nine  (9)  southern  oil 
producing states of Abia, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Edo, Delta, Imo, Ondo and Rivers making 
up the oil producing region of Nigeria also referred to as the Niger Delta states. The region situated in 
the  southern  part  of  Nigeria  and  bordered  to  the  south  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  to  the  East  by 
Cameroon, covers  about 110,624 km2  (12% of Nigeria’s land area). The region has 184 LGAs. The 
South-South (Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo and Rivers), South East (Abia and Imo) 
and South West (Ondo) geopolitical zones of Nigeria are represented in the Niger Delta states. (see 
Map 1). Cross River State is the largest of the states with a landmass of 21,787 km2, followed by Edo 
19,187  km2,  Ondo  15,820  km2,  Rivers  10,575  km2,  Bayelsa  9,059  km2,  Akwa  Ibom  6,900  km2,  Imo 
5,288 km2 and Abia 4,900 km2 in that order. 
68 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Map 1: The Niger Delta Region 
13.  Socio-cultural context. The total population of the nine states in the Niger Delta in 2006 was 
31,267,901  consisting  of  15,847,359  male  (51%)  and  15,420,542  (49%)  female.  The  estimated 
population  for  the  region  as  at  2011  was  36,515,429  (NBS  2012).  Rivers  State  has  the  highest 
population estimated  at 6,162,063 in 2011 followed by  Delta  4,825,999, Akwa Ibom 4,625,119, Imo 
4,609,038,  Ondo  4,020,965,  Edo  3,700,706,  CrossRiver  3,344,410,  Abia  3,256,642  and  Bayelsa 
1,970,487  in  that  order.  Like  the  rest  of  Nigeria,  the  Niger  Delta  states  consist  mainly  of  young  and 
growing population with 62% below the age of 30 years (NDRMP ***). The population density is about 
30.1 ppkm2 which is far higher than the national average of 201.7 ppkm2. Imo state has the highest 
density at 871.6ppkm2 followed by Akwa Ibom 670.3, Abia 664.6, Rivers 582.701, Delta 282.1, Ondo 
254.2, Bayelsa 217.5, Edo 192.9 and cross River 153.5 respectively. Table 1 summarizes the basic 
facts of the Niger Delta States.  
14.  The Niger Delta states is a growing region with an average total fertility rate (TFR) of 4.8 which 
is lower than the national average of 5.5. However, Bayelsa and Cross River have  TFR higher than 
the  national  average,  while  Edo  and  Delta  have  TFR  higher  than  the  region’s  average.  The  other 
states - Abia, Imo, Akwa Ibom, Ondo and Rivers - have TFR that is lower than the region’s average. 
The total children enrolment into public primary school as at 2014 stood at 5,261,507 (23% of national 
enrolment)  with  males  accounting  for  48%  and  female  52%  (NBS  2016).    Imo  and  Ondo  states 
accounted  for  the  highest  public  primary  school  enrolment  with  over  one  million  children  each. 
Bayelsa,  Abia,  Cross  River  and  Rivers  in  that  order  accounted  for  the  lowest  figures.  The  projected 
population  of  HIV  population  as  at  2014  stood  at  763,788  (i.e.  25%  of  the  total  national  projected 
population  for  HIV).  Akwa  Ibom  has  the  highest  with  245,489  and  Edo  has  the  least  with  22,821 
people. The average unemployment rate for the region declined from 26.2% in 2007 to 22% in 2011 
(while the national unemployment rate  increased from 12.7 to 23.9%  within the same period) (NBS, 
2012).  However,  states  such  as  Edo,  Ondo  and  Bayelsa  recorded  increase  in  unemployment  rates 
within the period by as much as 20.4% for Edo. 
15.  Land and people.  The very rich culture and heritage of the region is based on the presence of 
about  40  different  ethnic  groups  speaking  250  languages  and  dialects  (NDRMP**).  The  numerous 
ethnic  groups  include  Ijaws,  Ogonis,  Ikwerres,  Etches,  Ekpeyes,  Ogbas,  Engennes,  Obolos,  Isoko, 
Nembes, Okrikans, Kalabaris, Urhobos, Itsekiris, Igbos, Ika-Igbos, Ndoni, Oron, Ibeno, and Yorubas, 
69 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Ibibios,  Annangs  and  Efiks.  Other  groups  include  Ibibios,  Anang,  Efiks,  Bekwarras,  Binis,  etc.  The 
heritage  of  the  people  is  reflected  in  modes  of  dressing,  marriages,  traditional  culture  and  festivals. 
These ethnic groups have co-existed and peace and harmony for a very long period.  
16. 
Land, in relation to the population, is relatively scarce in the Niger Delta region especially in the 
lower interiors that consists of creeks and inlets. As the population increases, the pressure on land for 
all purposes including agriculture increases accordingly. The highest pressure on land is in the coastal 
mangrove  vegetation  zone  with  a  population  density  of  0.46  ha/person  followed  by  the  derived 
savannah  zone  with  0.49 ha/person (NDRMP**). Like the rest of the  nation,  the  people  of the Niger 
Delta region face the challenges of access to land. The ownership of land in Nigeria by virtue of the 
Land  Use  Act  1978  is  vested  in  the  governor  of  the  state.  Only  usufructuary  right  is  granted  to  the 
citizens (by the governor of the state) through certificate of occupancy (in urban area) and statutory or 
customary right of occupancy (for rural lands).  
17.  The typologies of access to land available in the Niger Delta region include individual holdings 
from  family  inheritance  or  purchase  from  communal  or  other  family  land;  family  land  derived  from 
communal holding of  the progenitor; communal land owned by the community; and customary tenure 
where family or community grants a right of occupation of land to another person or group of persons 
who are usually strangers or immigrants to live in or farm in return for which they acknowledge the title 
of their grantor by the payment of customary tribute which may be in cash, kind or both. These land 
holdings typologies are fraught with danger of social exclusion and lack formal title on holding. Most of 
the land owned by individuals, families or communities in rural areas have no statutory or customary 
right of occupancy. This limits agricultural investment to improve and equip the land. The risk of being 
‘pushed-off’  land  is  also  high,  and  the  land  cannot  be  used  to  secure  access  to  credit  to  improve 
productivity. Again, among the Ibos where inheritance is primogeniture the possibility of exclusion of 
women and youth from access to land is very high.  The government also has lands which have been 
acquired  lands  for  agricultural  purposes.  But  aaccess  to  the  lands  may  be  cumbersome  due  to 
government  bureaucracy.  It  can  also  contentious  because  community  can  block  physical  access  to 
the land or make life difficult for land users where compensation has not been paid on the land.  It is 
also subject to political wills and caprices. 
18.  The  land  situation  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  especially  in  the  coastal  interiors  is  particularly 
contentious. By nature, 50% of the lands in the interior Niger Delta is not workable due to the edaphic 
and  physiographic  limitations  imposed  by  drainage.  Secondly,  while  the  land-use  Act  of  1978 
cemented state government ownership of the land, the Petroleum Act of 1969 and other mineral Acts, 
through  the  principle  of  ‘eminent  domain’,  placed  all  minerals  and  its  exploration  in  the  hand  of  the 
Federal  Government.  Thus,  all  the  lands  in  the  southern  interior  including  agriculturally  productive 
lands  have  been  parcelled  into  Oil  Prospecting  Leases  (OPL)  which  becomes  Oil  Mining  Leases 
(OML) once oil has been found on the land. Thus, oil exploration activities on productive lands and its 
concomitant externalities drive the local population to the margin of survival. This is the root cause of 
resource conflicts in the Niger Delta. 
70 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Table 1: Basic facts about the Niger Delta states 
State 
No of 
LGAs 
Abia 
Akwa Ibom 
Bayelsa 
Cross River 
Delta 
Edo 
Imo 
Ondo 
Rivers 
Region 
17 
31 
8 
18 
25 
18 
27 
18 
23 
185 
Land 
Area 
(km2) 
Population 2006*** 
female 
male 
1,415,082 
1,420,298 
1,918,849 
1,983,202 
874,083 
830,432 
1,421,021 
1,471,967 
2,043,136 
2,069,309 
1,599,420 
1,633,946 
1,951,092 
1,976,471 
1,715,820 
1,745,057 
2,525,690 
2,673,026 
110,624  15,847,359  15,420,542 
4,900 
6,900 
9,059 
21,787 
17,108 
19,187 
5,288 
15,820 
10,575 
Nigeria 
774 
909,890  71,345,488  69,086,302 
Population 
(projected 
2011)*** 
Density 
TFR**** 
3,256,642  664.6208 
4,625,119  670.3071 
1,970,487  217.5171 
3,344,410  153.5048 
4,825,999  282.0902 
3,700,706  192.8757 
4,609,038  871.6033 
4,020,965  254.1697 
582.701 
6,162,063 
36,515,429 
330.086 
183,600,000 
in 2015 ***** 
201.7826 
Public pry sch 
enrolment (2014)** 
male 
female 
100,879 
448,032 
61,647 
101,402 
187,825 
170,998 
718,141 
629,257 
128,438 
2,546,619 
97,600 
479,062 
61,739 
95,538 
95,538 
451,984 
672,039 
630,543 
130,845 
2,714,888 
**Projected 
HIV 
population 
(2014) 
81,853 
245,489 
30,858 
83,596 
34,717 
22,821 
93,822 
49,281 
121,351 
763,788 
Unemployment 
rate*** 
2007 
25.1 
18.0 
21.9 
32.8 
22.9 
14.8 
28.3 
6.7 
66.4 
26.3 
2011 
11.2 
18.4 
23.9 
18.2 
27.2 
35.2 
26.1 
12.5 
25.5 
22.0 
4 
4 
6.7 
5.8 
5.3 
5.3 
4.6 
3.9 
4.3 
4.878 
5.5  12,145,968  10,983,959 
3,070,174 
12.7 
23.9 
**NBS (2016): Social statistics report 2016. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
***NBS (2012):  National Bureau of Statistics Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. Available at  http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library Access 16 March 2017 
****NBS 2015 Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
71 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
19.  Environment. The Niger Delta region consists of a wetland area which has been estimated at 
1,794000ha  consisting  of  617,000  ha  of  saline  and  1,177,000  ha  of  freshwater  swampland  (NEST, 
1991). The region has a rich and diverse mosaic of ecological types. Five distinct ecological types can 
be  identified:  the  barrier  island  and  mangrove  and  coastal  vegetation,  fresh  water  swamp  forest, 
lowland  rain  forest,  derived  savanna  and  the  montane  forest.  All  the  ecosystems  are  found  in 
gradients  from  the  coast  to  the  hinterland  in  each  of  the  states  with  the  exception  of  the  montane 
ecosystems that is localized to the northern part of Cross-River state. 
20.  There are 12 important bird areas (IBA) in the Niger Delta area. These include Obudu Paltuea, 
Afi  River  Forest  Reserve,  Okomu  National  Park,  Cross  River  National  Park  (Oban  division)  Cross 
River National Park (Okwango division), and Upper Orashi Forest Reserve. Others are Biseni forest, 
Akassa  forest,  Sunvit  Farms  (Agenebode  Forests),  Ebok-Kabbaken  swallow  root  and  Itu  wetlands. 
This is in addition to other protected game reserves (Table 2).  
Table 2: Some protected areas in the Niger Delta region 
Name  
Cross River National Park 
Obudu Game Reserve 
Okomu National Park 
Gilli Gilli Game Reserve 
Kwale Game Reserve 
Ofosu Game Reserve 
Ologbo Game Reserve 
Iybi-Ada-Obi Game Reserve 
Orle River Game Reserve 
Ologolo-Eriourho Game Reserve 
Ifon Game Reserve 
Source: SEDEC (2008) 
State 
Cross River 
Cross River  
Edo  
Edo 
Edo  
Edo 
Edo 
Edo  
Delta 
Delta  
Ondo  
21.  Oil  and  gas  exploration.  Oil  is  the  major  non-renewable  natural  resource  of  the  Niger  Delta 
region. The oil sector presently constitutes the backbone of the Nigerian economy. This has exerted 
tremendous impacts on the fragile ecosystems of the Niger Delta. According to the CBN report, as at 
2015,  the  gross  revenue  from  oil  stood  at  N3,830.1  billion,  (i.e  4%  of  GDP,  a  decline  of  13.9%  in 
2011), representing 55.4% of total federally-collected revenue. Despite the decline in crude oil export, 
it  remained  dominant,  accounting  for  78.3%  of  Nigeria’s  total  export  while  gas  export  constituted 
14.2%. This means the oil sector constitutes 92.5% of Nigeria’s total export in 2015. According to the 
NDRMP document, as at 2004, there are 5,284 oil wells drilled in the Niger Delta region. In addition, 
there  are  257  flow  stations  for  crude  processing,  over  7000km  of  oil  and  gas  pipeline,  10  export 
terminals, and about 310,000km2 of land area within which the network of pipelines are located. 
22.  Known  impacts  of  oil  spill  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  according  to  NDES  (1997)  and  UNEP 
(2011) include: 
  Mass mortality and or tainting of animals as well as other aquatic resources 
  Ground water contamination 
  Abandonment of fishing ground and associated livelihood pursuits 
  Vegetation desiccation and other forms of ecological damages 
  Loss of biodiversity in breeding grounds 
  Loss of drinking and industrial water sources 
  Reduction of land area available for agriculture 
  Loss of recreational facilities and aesthetic values of the environment 
 
 
  Worsened rural underdevelopment, poverty and heightened community embitterment 
  Gas flaring and pipeline fires 
  Youth restiveness and loss of social and cultural cohesion 
  Emergence  of  local  bourgeois  through  selective  gratification  wh ic h  pr od u c e  powerful 
Increased economic burdens of pollution clean-up, population rehabilitation  
Impairment of human health 
minority who become rich at community and environment expense 
Illegal bunkering and refining activities. 
 
72 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Goal and objective 
24.  The overall goal of LIFE is to realize a transformed rural economy in which the rural population 
can  derive  prosperity  and  equal  benefit.  The  goal  and  purpose  are  aligned  with  the  RB-COSOP 
Results  Management  Framework.  The project  development  objective is  to enhance  income,  food 
security  and  job  creation  for  rural  youth  and  women  through  agri-enterprise  development  on  a 
sustainable  basis  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  of  Nigeria.  This  feeds  directly  into  the  RB-COSOP’s 
Strategic Objective (SO) 1, which is to promote sustainable, climate resilient, economic and financial 
inclusion  of  youth  and  poor  women  in  profitable  agribusiness.  LIFE  will  also  feed  into  SO  2, 
strengthened institutions at state and community level to work with private actors in key value chains. 
The  RB-COSOP  is  aligned  to  the  Green  Alternative  (Government  Agricultural  Policy),  which 
emphasizes  four  pillars:  food  security,  job  creation,  import  substitution  and  economic  diversification. 
The  achievement  of  the  project  objective  at  the  end  of  the  project  life  will  be  measured  by  the 
following indicators: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
At  least  25,500  direct  LIFE  beneficiary  households  have  stable  income  for  enhanced 
food security and sustainable livelihood. 
At  least  25,500  youth  and  poor  women's  agri-enterprises  are  directly  strengthened  or 
created.  
At  least  25,500  gainful  jobs  (the  same  as  ii  above)  are  directly  created  for  youth  and 
women in ownership of profitable agribusiness and related paid services. 
At  least  50  percent  increase  in  volume  of  produce  by  direct  beneficiary  agri-
entrepreneurs realized. 
At  least  50  percent  increase  in  volume  of  marketed  produce  by  direct  beneficiaries 
achieved. 
At least 25 percent value addition is realized through processed produce/products.  
At least 50 percent increase in profit is realized by  direct beneficiaries engaged in agri-
enterprises.  
At  least  80  percent  of  direct  beneficiaries  (20,400)  have  increased  their  food  security 
(reduction in length of lean/hungry season, increased number of meals a day, increased 
food diversity and quality) by at least 50 percent. 
At  least  80  percent  of  direct  beneficiaries  (20,400)  have  increased  their  assets 
(measured by an increased assets ownership index, based on additional assets  - RIMS 
indicator) by at least 50 percent.  
At least 50 percent of rural institutions promoting youth-based profitable agri-enterprises 
supported and strengthened. 
At least 80 percent of direct beneficiaries (20,400) practicing improved product handling 
and marketing practices (quality, packaging, standard weights, etc). 
Component and outcomes 
25.  The  project  has  two  components:  (i)  a  technical  component, Enhancement  of  economic 
opportunities  for  rural  youth  and  women,  and  (ii)  Project  management  and  coordination.  Table  3 
summarizes the expected outcomes of the two components which contribute to the project objective. 
Table 3: Expected outcomes of the project components 
Component 
1. Enhancement of 
economic opportunities 
for rural youth and 
women 
2. Project management and 
coordination 
Outcome 
  Market driven rural business incubators are strengthened  
  Production, productivity and marketing of agro-entrepreneurs are improved 
through public-private producer partnership (PPP) models 
  Market access, participation and profitability of beneficiaries and market 
actors enhanced through sustainable enterprises, improved market 
infrastructure and access to financial services 
Increased ease of beneficiaries doing agribusiness 
 
  Efficiently and effectively managed project achieving results with 
communication and knowledge management integrated in all aspects of 
operations 
73 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth and poor women – US$ 
50 million.  
26.  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  facilitate  the  establishment  of  profitable  agribusiness  by 
beneficiaries,  indicated  by  the  number  of  paid  jobs,  youth  and  poor  women's  ownership  of 
agribusinesses,  increased  capacity  to  handle  and  operate  business,  and  improved  market 
participation and access. The expected outcomes from the component are:  
   Market driven rural business incubators are strengthened  
   Production,  productivity  and  marketing  of  agro-entrepreneurs  are  improved  through  public-
private producer partnership (PPP) models 
   Market  access,  participation  and  profitability  of  beneficiaries  and  market  actors  enhanced 
through sustainable enterprises and improved market infrastructure 
   Increased ease of beneficiaries doing agribusiness  
27.  Component  1  comprises  four  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents,  namely:  (i)  support  to 
agribusiness  incubation;  (ii)  support  to  agribusiness  production  and  marketing  infrastructure;  (iii) 
promotion of financial service for rural agribusiness; and (iv) institutional strengthening. 
28.  Subcomponent  1.1:  Support  to  rural  agribusiness  incubation.  This  subcomponent  will 
facilitate the emergence  of strong agribusiness  incubators and market linkage using PPP models. It 
will  involve  the  use  of:  (i)  established  rural  profitable  agribusinesses  that  have  backward  integration 
with  the  rural  producers  to  develop  and  proliferate  new  enterprises;  and  (ii)  big  produce  off-takers 
(market  makers  with  national  and  export  market  linkages)  to  increase  market  demand  for  produce 
from  the  incubators  and  enterprises  resulting  in  employment  opportunities  to  increase  production. 
There will be three levels of assistance: (a) market linkage assistance for incubators and smallholder 
producers,  (b)  technical  assistance  to  the  incubator,  apprentices  and  smallholder  producers  in  the 
project  catchment,  and  (c)  capacity  building  assistance  for  strengthening  rural  institutions  providing 
supporting  goods  and  services.  Enterprises  emerging  from  the  system  will  continue  to  receive 
technical assistance to become profitable and some will subsequently develop into new incubators to 
scale up the project's impact while producing new jobs.  
29.  The baseline survey conducted prior to design identified seven priority commodities based on 
their  profitability;  potential  to  create  jobs  for  beneficiaries;  household  food  security  and  nutrition; 
capacity  for  import  substitution;  as  well  as,  potential  to  service  industrial  demand  for  raw  materials. 
The commodities in order of profitability are cassava, plantain, rice, fish, oil palm, cocoa and poultry 
(Figure 2). 
Figure 2: Percentage of value chain participants making return on cost of more than 50  
percent on production or processing   
Implementation:  Each  State  Project  Coordination  Office  (SPCO)  will  select  four  out  of  the 
30. 
seven  commodities,  in  consultation  with  the  State  Government  and  IFAD.  The  commodity  selection 
will be guided by criteria including: (i) level of return on investment; (ii) potential for job creation; and 
(iii) government priority. In each state, LIFE may also select two additional  opportunity commodities - 
from or outside the list of seven commodities. This will allow the selection of those local commodities 
which offer high  employment creation opportunity, income generation potential and  nutritional  value. 
The  priority  commodities  will  be  evaluated  on  the  nutrition  gaps  and  opportunities  along  the  food 
supply chain to improve efficiency of value addition and access to nutritious food products. Given the 
current post-harvest loss rates (60 percent) in Nigeria for perishable crops, LIFE will provide support 
through  gender  responsive  and  nutrition-sensitive  time  and  energy  saving  technologies  across 
production and processing. The aim is to eradicate food waste, improve nutritional value and quality, 
74 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
mitigate  any  unintended  adverse  impact  on  women,  and  child  feeding  and  caregiving  practices. 
Approaches to these commodities will follow the prevailing logic of the project. 
31.  Selection of incubators:  In the second year of implementation, a state level enterprise survey 
will be conducted to identify strong enterprises/entrepreneurs and those with existing or potential out-
grower  linkages  in  the  project  areas.  The  survey  will  also  specify  if  some  potential  incubators  lack 
adequate  facilities  to  service  ten  apprentices.  In  such  circumstances,  LIFE  will  facilitate  the  minimal 
required assistance to develop them into fully capable incubators. The survey will include a review of 
the  1,800  Commodity Apex  Development Associations  (CADAs)  affiliated  enterprises  supported  and 
categorised as strong by CBNRMP.  
32.  Phasing and outreach: LIFE will be implemented in two phases.  
  Phase  1  (prior  to  midterm):  This  will  be  for  the  first  three  years  till  midterm,  During  this 
phase LIFE will launch the project on a limited scale by selecting 25 incubators per state 
each  of  which  will  incubate  five  enterprises  per  year  for  three  years.  This  will  generate 
1,500  paid  jobs  in  phase  1.  Phase  1  incubators  will  continue  to  generate  enterprises 
throughout the life of the project adding another 6,000 jobs.  
  Phase  2  (post  midterm):  Capitalising  on  the  lessons  learned  during  phase  1,  LIFE  will 
upscale  the  model  to  include  an  additional  75  incubators  per  state  each  generating  10 
enterprises per year. This will generate an additional 18,000 paid jobs.  
33.  The  selection  of  Phase  1  incubators  will  be  based  on  the  criteria  stated  in  paragraph  22.  In 
Phase 2 the selection criteria may be refined based on the lessons learned from Phase 1. A total of 
25.500  enterprises  which  represent  paid  jobs  will  be  generated  during  the  life  of  the  project.  The 
outreach projections from the two phases are presented in the Table 4.  
Table 2: Enterprise outreach projections  
Incubators 
per 
state 
25 
25 
75 
Phases 
Phase 1 
Phase 2* 
Phase 2 
  Total enterprises generated  
Note: * The 25 incubators from phase 1 which will continue to participate in phase 2 
Total 
number of  
incubators 
150 
150 
450 
Apprentices 
per 
incubator 
5 
10 
10 
Number 
of 
states 
6 
6 
6 
Enterprises 
per 
year 
750 
1,500 
4,500 
Active 
project 
life 
2 
4 
4 
Enterprise 
LOP 
targets 
1,500 
6,000 
18,000 
25,500  
34.  Building  on  the  technical,  financial  and  infrastructural  gaps  identified  during  the  incubator 
selection  process,  a  service  provider  will  be  engaged  by  the  project  to  support  the  incubators  to 
develop their business plans. These business plans will inter alia specify the desired financial growth 
projections of the incubator that will justify their capacity to absorb the apprentices.  
35.  Selection  of  apprentices:  LIFE  will  engage  a  service  provider  to  screen  applicants  in 
consultation with the incubators and other key stakeholders such as community based organisations, 
civil society entities and LGA representatives. The selected apprentices will receive a maximum of 10 
days  business  planning  and  management  training  by  hired  business  development  service  providers 
(non-individual)  to  provide  them  entrepreneurial  knowledge  and  skills.  The  business  orientation 
training will also include village level group formation, savings mobilisation and agri-entrepreneurship 
development  activities.  By  the  end  of  this  training  course  the  apprentices  will  have  a  bankable 
business plan, developed in consultation with the incubators, to guide their business operations during 
the incubation period.  
Incubation process: Upon successful completion of the training the apprentice will be  attached 
36. 
to the incubator to gain hands-on experiences on best practices in the activity of his/her choice. The 
apprentice will start-up an enterprise which will remain attached to the incubator for an agreed period 
not  to  exceed  two  production  cycles.  It  is  expected  that  the  apprentices  will  raise  start-up  capital 
during  this  period  as  the  person  will  own  a  module  of  the  enterprise.  An  enterprise  module  is  a 
minimum economic scale of agri-investment that allows a net profitability of at least US$ 5 per day per 
capita, as indicated in Table 4. 
Table 4: Key commodities and benchmark enterprise scale for support by LIFE 
75 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Commodity 
Cassava 
Rice 
Plantain 
Oil Palm 
Cocoa 
Vegetable 
Fishery 
Poultry (broiler/layer) 
Piggery 
Bee keeping 
Enterprise unit 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Fish (number of fingerlings) 
Bird (number of chicks) 
Pig (number of pigs – Sow, Boar) 
Hive (number of hives) 
Scale of enterprise 
4 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
1,500 
500 
15 
60 
37.  The incubators will be paid a service charge of not more than N100,000 per apprentice to cover 
the costs of training and extension services to the apprentice. Given the labour intensive nature of the 
short  duration  enterprises,  apprentices  engaged  in  such  enterprises  will  receive  N15,000  per  month 
for  six  months  while  those  engaged  in  long  duration  enterprises  will  receive  50  percent  of  this 
allowance  for  12  months.  The  project  will  provide  N500,000  per  apprentice  as  seed  capital  to  the 
incubators to invest in the initial financing needs of the business started by the apprentice attached to 
the incubator. The detail arrangements for the payment and management of the service charge  and 
seed capital to the incubator are given in paragraphs 49 to 52 under Subcomponent 1.3.  
38.  The apprentice will vacate the incubator facility after the produce from the two-cycle production 
period is sold, thus generating the capital for the apprentice to set up an independent enterprise. Any 
gap  in  this  capital  for  starting  the  new  enterprise  will  be  financed  by  the  incubator  from  the  seed-
capital funds. The incubator will continue to provide marketing support to the independent enterprise 
through re-negotiated off-taker contracts. The new enterprises can serve as village resource persons 
supporting the project to facilitate group formation, savings mobilisation and enterprise development. 
39.  Establishment  and  improvement  of  feeder  roads.  The  project  will  establish  or  rehabilitate  a 
market-connecting  road  for  easy  evacuation  of  farm  produce  from  the  small  contiguous  farm  lands, 
which  may  be  provided  government  or  community  or  individual,  and  developed/parcelling  to 
beneficiaries by  LIFE-ND. In this regard, LIFE-ND targets to  establish  or rehabilitate 180 km (30 km 
per state) market connecting feeder roads at an average of 7.5 km per feeder road. In addition, LIFE-
ND  will  establish  not  more  than  120  climate  resilient  small  bridges/culverts  for  effective  water/flood 
channelling. It will link the activities of the incubators and farmer organizations in Sub-component 1.1 
to  the  market.  For  the  sustainability  of  the  feeder  road  infrastructure,  LIFE-ND  will  support  the 
establishment  of  a  beneficiary-based  road  maintenance  strategy  by  helping  them  to  form  operation 
and maintenance (O&M) committees to ensure sustainability of the infrastructure. 
40. 
Land  development.  LIFE-ND  will  promote  and  upscale  the  land  acquisition  and  development 
initiatives of VCDP, presently being adopted by Edo and Bayelsa states in the Niger Delta Region, to 
make agricultural land accessible (available) to the beneficiaries for production. LIFE-ND investment 
in land development will include stumping, harrowing, ploughing,  levelling, drainage provision, water 
provision,  tree  planting  and  parceling.  The  established  farm  estate  will  assume  the  shape  of  the 
enterprise  incubation  model.  In  this  case,  the  project  will  identify  Enterprise  Champions  to  drive  the 
process. About 30,000ha of farm lands at the rate of 5,000ha per state will be established.  From the 
5,000ha per state, 1,000ha will be secured and developed for the Incubation Process while 4,000ha 
will  be  secured  and  developed  for  Apprentice  Graduates  who  are  interested  in  investing  in 
arable/plantation  crops.  Each  of  the  1,000ha  and  4,000ha  per  state,  will  be  subdivided  into  100  ha 
plots  and  distributed  in  the  selected  LGAs.  Each  plot  of  100  ha  will  be  assigned  to  an  Enterprise 
Incubator  to  manage/mentor  about  45  final  beneficiaries,  who  will  be  given  2  plots  each.  In  the 
1000ha  Incubation  Centre,  the  Beneficiary  (Apprentices)  will  be  allowed  to  stay  for  two  production 
cycles under the mentorship of the Incubator before he/she becomes an Independent Enterprise. The 
beneficiary  (Apprentice)  will  leave  after  two  production  cycles  for  a  new  Apprentice. A  management 
committee will be established by the beneficiaries in each farm estate for sustainability of the initiative. 
At  his/her  request,  the  Graduated Apprentice  will  be  provided  2  to  3  ha  of  land  to  continue  his/her 
business  for  not  more  than  5  years,  this  time,  only  at  the  guidance  of  an  extension  agent  for 
business/technical support. 
76 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
41.  Production  and  processing  structures.  Consistent  with  Subcomponent  1.1,  LIFE-ND  will 
facilitate the provision of production and processing facilities including production structures such as 
collapsible  fish  tanks,  fish  earthen/concrete  ponds,  livestock  production  pens/chambers,  water 
boreholes, mini-landing jetties (for boats picking up commodities on the creeks), small-scale irrigation 
schemes, etc., as  well  as processing facilities. The project will provide  a standard weighing scale  in 
each  production  and  processing  site  to  encourage  the  use  of  standard  weighting  scales  by  farmers 
and  avoid  conflicts  that  could  occur  between  farmers  and  off-takers  at  the  point  of  produce  sales. 
About 60 standard weighing scales will be provided, 10 per state. Similarly, about 60 water points will 
be provided at the rate of 10 per state. LIFE-ND will support the formation and strengthening of water 
users committees to oversee the water boreholes and water points for sustainability.  
42. 
Implementation: Land will be supplied by the government or community or individual while the 
project  will  be  responsible  for  development,  including  parceling/distribution  of  the  farm  plots  to  the 
beneficiaries  through  a  competent  service  provider.  LIFE-ND  project  will  also:  (i)  facilitate  the 
provision of water points through a competent service provider, (ii) facilitate the provision of production 
structures through a seed capital arrangement or the service charge of the Enterprise Incubator; and 
(iii)  for  land  acquisition,  encourage  a  leasing  agreement  with  the  land  owners  (government, 
community,  individual),  which  will  define  the  period  of  the  lease.  LIFE-ND  project  expects  that  the 
tenure  should  not  be  less  than  20  years  after  which  the  lease  agreement  could  be  renewed  for  a 
certain period. For individual owned land, the lease agreement would define the compensation to the 
landlord. Such agreement should be validated by the traditional leader of the community, who will also 
witness  the  signing.  For  government  land,  an  MoU  will  be  developed  between  the  relevant 
government ministry or agency and LIFE-ND to be witnessed by a serving parliamentarian, either at 
the state or national level. LIFE-ND will develop a detailed strategy for land acquisition and distribution 
as well as the terms of engagement with the land owners during the first year of implementation.  
43.  The project may also invest in other market facilitating infrastructure such as cooling facilities, 
warehouses, and commodity aggregation/collection centres to improve market access and profitability 
of the agri-enterprises. The opportunities for investment in these areas will be identified in consultation 
with  the  farmer  groups,  Incubators  and  the  new  Enterprises  where  applicable.  Detailed  feasibility 
studies  will  be  conducted  including  analysis  of  the  environmental  impact  of  the  infrastructure 
interventions.  In  the  case  of  production  activities  within  each  developed  bulk  land,  a  PPP 
implementation model will be adopted. 
44.  Physical implementation will be by service providers engaged competitively by the SPCO with 
the RPCO providing an oversight responsibility. The SPCO will use private sector contractors selected 
through  an  identified  procurement  process  to  provide  production  and  market  infrastructure  after  a 
thorough assessment of their feasibility, viability and environmental sustainability. Their provision will 
be  contingent  upon  the  establishment  of  a  maintenance  structure  by  the  benefiting  community  or 
commodity members or entrepreneurs. 
45.  Environmental  safeguards  will  be  required  for  each  infrastructure,  including  tree  planting  and 
drainages  within  the  processing  and  aggregation  hubs  where  necessary.  Portable  water  and  toilet 
facilities  are  to  be  provided  especially  within  mini-bulk  lands,  processing  clusters,  and  aggregation 
centres.  Safe effluent  and  refuse disposal systems will be provided,  including channelling  of excess 
water from boreholes and rain water to avoid breeding of mosquito and other harmful insects. 
46.  Subcomponent  1.3:  Financial  inclusion  support  for  agri-enterprises.  The  expected  outcome 
from  this  subcomponent  is  that  access  to  finance  for  agribusiness  development  in  the  rural 
communities  is  enhanced.  The  subcomponent  will  facilitate  access  to  finance  through:  (i)  savings 
promotion,  (ii)  payment  systems  and  (iii)  cashless  credit  in  off-taker  pre-financing  arrangements.  
Other  systems  currently  under  development  including  Bank  of  Agriculture's  credit  facility  and  the 
Nigeria Insurance Risk-based Agricultural Lending Micro Small and Medium Enterprise Development 
Fund will be reviewed, based on their effectiveness for possible inclusion in LIFE-ND during MTR.  
47.  Savings  Promotion.  Lack  of  investment  capital  is  a  major  challenge  among  the  target  group 
which hampers their establishment of enterprises and their ability to leverage loan finance. Based on 
lessons  learned from the IFAD supported RUFIN, LIFE-ND  will  assist the  development of a savings 
77 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
culture and internal capital accumulation among individuals and groups in the project areas. LIFE-ND 
will  initially  demonstrate  such  models  in  the  project  communities  and  train  a  set  of  beneficiary 
promoters to champion  and replicate these models  within  and around the  villages based on service 
fees from the community. The further development of promoters as agents of financial suppliers in the 
rural  areas  will  be  supported.  The  Rural  Outreach  Coordination  Committees  (ROCC)  approach, 
piloted  under  RUFIN43,  will  be  used  as  the  main  platform  for  promoting  and  championing  the 
adoption  of  these  interventions  by  financial  suppliers.  The  ROCC  will  also  be  used  to  promote 
beneficiary financing policies, products and delivery methodologies amongst the financial suppliers.  
48.  Payment  Systems. Adoption  of  digital  financial  solutions  will  be  promoted  for  improving  rural 
outreach  and  for  developing  appropriate  payment  services  towards  efficient  transaction  between 
value chain actors. Based on innovations in the telecommunications and banking sectors resulting in 
over 20 service providers, LIFE-ND will support the development of competitive options to send and 
receive and store electronically cash for credit and payments among value chain actors. 
49.  Off-taker  pre-financing.  Building  on  the  experiences  of  VCDP,  the  project  will  facilitate  the 
formation  of  a  Commodity  Alliance  Forum  (CAF)44  in  the  benefitting  communities  as  a  platform 
including the public sector, private sector, and smallholder producers. The CAF will network large off-
takers  (as  VCDP  has  done  with  rice  producers  and  Olam  International)  with  aggregators,  input 
suppliers,  producers  and  public  officials.    This  platform  will  pragmatically  link  producers  to  a  sure 
market; identify producers' needs for inputs and services; and organize the local businesses to work 
in  harmony.    Based  on  this  harmonization,  large  off-takers  will  be  able  to  provide  credit  in  kind  by 
paying input and service providers to assist producers to maximize their yields under contract with the 
off-takers.  Thus a system of cashless credit will be put in place whereby large players can finance the 
producers through the value chain and recover their investment from the producers' delivery of food 
commodities. 
50.  Options to be explored at Mid-Term.  Several efforts are currently underway in the rural finance 
space  which,  though  promising,  are  not  yet  assured  of  success  or  sustainability.   Among  these  are 
two:    (i)  Bank  of  Agriculture  (BoA)  credit  facility  to  finance  support  services  and  microenterprises 
which seeks to support service entrepreneurs such as spraying service providers, mechanised service 
providers,  agro-dealers  and  others  with  at  single  digit  interest  rate,  minimal  guarantee  requirements 
and flexible repayment duration depending on the nature of the enterprise. (ii) The Nigerian Incentive 
Based  Risk  Sharing  System  for  Agricultural  Lending  (NIRSAL)  to  direct  agro-financing  to  project 
supported  agri-enterprises  through  financial  suppliers  in  the  project  area.  Based  on  their  need,  the 
suppliers will be connected to the NIRSAL guarantee scheme, which will enable them to receive Micro 
Small  and  Medium  Enterprise  Development  Fund  (MSMEDF)  refinancing  from  CBN  at  two  percent 
interest  and  10  percent  collateral  deposit.  These  funds  will  be  on-lent  to  enterprises  at  single  digit 
interest  rate  and  flexible  repayment  terms.  As  these  two  mechanisms  are  not  yet  smoothly 
functioning, seek to intervene in the market at rates of interest below inflation and are bureaucratically 
complex, LIFE-ND will evaluate at mid-term the degree to which they are functioning and available in 
the six targeted states and determine if partnership established through fee payments to the facilities 
is warranted. 
51.  Subcomponent  1.4:  Rural 
this 
subcomponent is increased capacity  of rural institutions to identify and address infrastructure, policy 
and  regulatory  challenges.  This  subcomponent  will  target  public  and  private  institutions  such  as:  (i) 
rural  institutions  (farmers’  organisations  (FOs),  community  based  organisations  (CBOs),  Incubators, 
CADAs  etc.);  and  (ii)  state  ADPs.  Rural  institutions  will  be  empowered  with  skills,  knowledge  and 
Institution  Strengthening.  The  expected  outcome 
from 
43 As a part of RUFIN's sustainability plan, the Central Bank committed to the establishment of a ROCC in each state to 
strengthen the outreach of financiers. Each ROCC is headed by the CBN and includes representatives from the 
National Association of Microfinance Banks (NAMB), Association of Non-bank Microfinance Institutions of Nigeria 
(ANMFIN), State Department of Cooperatives (SDC), Bank of Agriculture (BoA), the Small and Medium Enterprise 
Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) and the State Ministry of Agriculture. The purpose of the ROCC is to 
promote rural outreach of financial institutions operating in the state through different available models. 
44 CAF is a business transaction, knowledge sharing and policy dialogue platform involving farmers groups, off-takers, 
financial institutions with credible credit delivery services, input dealers, civil society organizations among others, where 
issues of mutual benefit are discussed. Being a private sector business forum, off-takers usually driver the process. 
78 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
technical support, ADPs will be supported to improve the capacity of the state public extension system 
(ADPs  and  departments  of  extension)  to  adopt  inclusive  extension  delivery  system  as  appropriate. 
Furthermore,  LIFE-ND  will  facilitate  the  establishment  and/or  strengthening  of  at  least  six  youth 
advocacy  platforms which  will serve to promote the image of agriculture as a business  among rural 
youth within and outside the Niger Delta region and to stimulate further private sector investment. 
52.  Capacity Building of Rural Institutions and development of Community Action Plans: The RPCO 
with support from a qualified service provider will conduct a participatory mapping exercise to situate 
institutions and assess capacity needs to develop a short to mid-term capacity building plan for each 
selected institution to assist in orientating youth and poor women in agribusiness development. Based 
on  capacity  building  plans,  training  curricula  will  be  developed/compiled  where  available  the 
involvement of recognised research/training centres and/or universities will be sought, learning routes 
will  be  utilized.  Areas  of  training  will  include    planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  knowledge 
management,  policy  dialogue,  funds/financial  management  and  governance,  procurement,  group 
dynamics,  nutrition  knowledge,  conflict  mitigation,  gender  and  climate  change  mainstreaming.  The 
LIFE-ND  will  also  expand  this  effort  to  include  learning  and  knowledge  sharing  through  south-south 
triangular  cooperation.  The  effectiveness  of  trainings  will  be  demonstrated  through  rural  institution 
action  plans  and  annual  reporting  by  institutions.  Support  will  be  provided  to  market-oriented 
organizational  forms  to  enable  graduating  youth  entrepreneurs,  apprentices    to  benefit  from 
economies of scale in engaging with input and output players and Local Government. The shape the 
organizational form will be demand driven, while the likelihood for them to benefit either from existing 
framework through CADAs, the emerging CAFs or the establishment of new  aggregation entities will 
be  considered.  Where  capacity  is  available,  the  existing  farmers’  organisations  may  be  used  to 
facilitate  graduated  youth  to  expose  them  to  good  agribusiness  practices.  Any  aggregation  option 
(such as a group of apprentices or graduated youth) will be business-oriented and have the purpose 
of  addressing  constraints  related  to  smallholder  production  and  barriers  to  creating  linkages  to 
markets.  
53.  Organizational capacity building will focus on building social capital coupled with mainstreaming 
the  business  thinking  in  the  aggregation  process  and  help  them  come  together  to  do  things  that 
contribute to higher profitability and to move away from running operations that are solely  dependent 
on  government  or  donor  contributions.   They  will  be  facilitated  to  define  how  they  do  business  with 
their customers based on a better understanding of buyers’ needs, so that they can begin to prioritize 
activities that respond to reducing transaction costs and boosting profitability 
54.  Support  to  Public  Extension  System:  LIFE-ND  will  improve  the  capacity  of  the  state  public 
extension system (ADPs and departments of extension) to adopt inclusive extension delivery system 
as appropriate. Such systems may include; NGOs, CSOs and private sector extension delivery. In this 
context, LIFE-ND will provide technical assistance to the ADPs (and their state ministry of agriculture) 
to become regulators to ensure high quality extension delivery by the private sector, as well as initiate 
new  approaches  to  be  up-scaled  by  the  private  sector.  Consistent  with  the  current  Federal 
Government  policy  on  extension,  LIFE-ND  will  also  support  the  establishment  of  a  total  of  60  one-
stop-shop extension platforms; one in each participating local government. The output of this activity 
will be measured in terms of number of farmers receiving improved extension services. 
55.  Knowledge Sharing Platform: It is anticipated that significant knowledge will be generated at the 
various institutions level. This knowledge will be harnessed, packaged and shared by the PCO under 
Component  2  to  enable  stakeholders  address  policy  issues  relevant  to  the  .inclusion  of    youth  and 
poor  women  in  agriculture  in  their  communities.  Policy  dialogue  by  the  institutions  will  be  on  issues 
including:  (i)  insecurity  of  investments,  (ii)  double  taxation,  (iii)  access  to  financial  services,  (iv) 
produce  quality  and  standardization  involving  use  of  standard  wright  and  measure.  The  project  will 
support the establishment of periodic knowledge sharing events to discuss useful outcomes, lessons 
and  challenges  and  have  the  opportunity  to  network  and  create  partnerships.  The  stakeholders  will 
broadly  include:  neighbouring  communities,  traditional  institutions,  schools  and  colleges,  state 
institutions, national institutions, other development partners, and interested parties in the region.  
56.  The expected  outputs are:  (i) number of community action  plans developed; (ii)  annual status 
report  developed  by  supported  institutions;  (iii)  80  percent  of  participating  farmers  using  standard 
79 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
weights  and  measures;  (iv)  at  least  six  youth  advocacy  platforms  established  or  strengthened  per 
state; and (v) number of beneficiaries participating in nutrition activities. 
Component 2: Project management and coordination – US$ 10 million  
57.  The  expected  outcome  of  this  component  is:  efficiently  and  effectively  managed  project 
achieving  results  with  communication  and  knowledge  management  integrated  in  all  aspects  of 
operations. Building on the experience of CBNRMP, project coordination will remain decentralized to 
the community, LGA, state and federal levels. The RPCO will be located at the NDDC headquarters.  
58.  Project support at the RPCO and State Project Coordination Office (SPCO) will provide for staff, 
vehicles, office equipment and supplies, and operational costs. Staffing levels at the RPCO and SPCO 
will be kept to the barest minimum while technical assistance will be used in relevant fields as needed. 
At the LGA level, support will be for operational costs through the SPCO. The project will also provide 
for technical assistance support to the national LIFE Office. 
59.  The  project  will  provide  for  training  and  workshops,  studies  and  reviews,  including  monitoring 
and supervision, beneficiary and impact assessments. 
80 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
    Annex 1: Details on market infrastructure 
Introduction 
The  market  infrastructure  sub  component  of  the  LIFE  project  will  essentially  provide  the  desire 
support and drive require to achieve the overall goals and objectives of the project. It is the enabler to 
market enterprises development. It is important the  project has a sustainable  path to the  delivery of 
quality, efficient and effective market infrastructure. The entry point of the project being the Incubator, 
the  institution  will  serve  as  the  first  point  of  call  in  the  needs  assessment  drive  for  market 
infrastructure  support  to  LIFE.  The  baseline  survey  earlier  carried  out  had  identified  potential 
enterprises based on the comparative advantages that existed in the Nine Niger Delta states.  
Positive List of Infrastructure projects 
The following infrastructure projects are to be embarked upon by LIFE 
1.  Access Roads construction and Rehabilitation – including culverts and bridges 
2. Mini landing Jetties 
3. Aggregation centres 
4. Agro Processing Buildings—Cassava, Rice, Fish, etc 
5. Animal buildings – poultry , goatry, piggery 
6. Land development activities 
7. Small scale irrigation schemes 
8. Aquaculture infrastructure— buildings, ponds—concrete / earthen 
Implementation arrangements for market infrastructure 
Physical  implementation  will  be  at  the  SPCO  with  the  NPCO  and  RPCO  providing  oversight 
responsibilities.  These  infrastructures  will  be  classified  as  being  (a)  public  ---  collective/  communal   
and (b) private—individual or group owned. The SPCO will use private contractors that are selected 
through  identified  procurement  process  to  undertake  the  markets  infrastructure  projects.  These  will 
happen  after  an  assessment  of  existing  infrastructure  to  identify  priority  projects.  All  infrastructure 
projects must  be  feasible,  viable  and  environmentally  sustainable.  Their  provision  will  be  contingent 
upon  the  establishment  of  a  maintenance  structure  by  the  benefiting  community  or  commodity 
members or entrepreneurs. 
The  environmental  safeguards  will  comprise  tree  planting  and  drainages  within  the  processing  and 
aggregation  hubs  and  where  necessary.    Portable  water  and  toilet  facilities  are  to  be  provided 
especially  within  processing  clusters  and  aggregation  centres.  Safe  effluent  and  refuse  disposal 
system  must  be  provided  such  that  channelling  of  excess  water  from  boreholes  are  made  to  avoid 
breeding of mosquito and other harmful insects.  
Working with stakeholders 
The project will jointly work with relevant stake holders at all  in the provision of market infrastructure. 
Interventions will be jointly coordinated with applicable federal/state ministries and agencies as well as 
the  local  authorities.  The  beneficiaries  must  collectively  with  the  support  of  the  programme  put  in 
place  a  system  for  maintenance  and  sustainability  of  the  water  infrastructure.    The  users  will  be 
responsible for the day-to-day O&M of market infrastructure. The SPCO will support the establishment 
of the financial recovery (through agreed water charges) system of the schemes and provide training 
to the water management committees on O&M to ensure sustainability. Communities must certify that 
the  rehabilitated/constructed  market  infrastructure  has  been  delivered  before  final  payment  can  be 
made to the contractor.  
The following principles  will apply for the  implementation of activities under  market infrastructure (i) 
collaboration  with  relevant  Government  Ministries  and  Agencies  (including  the  LGAs  that  have  a 
statutory responsibility for feeder road maintenance),  as well as private consultants and contractors; 
(ii)  strong  participation  of  the  beneficiaries,  the  key  stakeholders  and  the  communities  in  detailed 
planning  and  implementation  to  ensure  local  ownership  and  O&M  responsibility;  (iii)  targeting  of  the 
infrastructure  at  production,  processing  and  aggregation    clusters;  (iv)  construction  of  all  the 
infrastructures  by  private  contractors  through  competitive  bidding;  and  (v)  capacity  building  of  the 
beneficiaries  and especially the management/maintenance committees to ensure sustainability of the 
infrastructure to be provided.  
81 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Institutional framework 
The  Market  Infrastructure  Engineer  of  the  SPCO  will  be  responsible  for  supervising  all  civil  works, 
supported by the Engineers of the respective LGAs. The SPCO will form (where it does not exist) a 
community road maintenance committee or association under a tripartite MOU with the leaders of the 
benefiting  community  and  the  LGA  to  ensure  that  the  LGA  assumes  responsibility  for  routine 
maintenance of feeder roads in collaboration with the community. The community members involved 
in  the  agri-enterprise(s)  that  brought  about  the  infrastructure  will  take  active  participation  in  the 
maintenance arrangement. The SPCO will also sign  an MoU  with the concerned State Ministries so 
that  they  assume  full  responsibility  for  recurrent,  periodic  and  emergency  maintenance  which  are 
beyond the capacity of the LGAs so as to ensure a stable financial base for maintenance. The SPCO 
action will be aligned to the FGN Draft National Transport Policy, which proposes to give top priority to 
effective  routine,  periodic  and  emergency  maintenance  of  rural  roads  in  all  LGAs  and  communities 
through  the  use  of  Rural  Maintenance  Team  that  will  be  created  at  LGA  level.  The  SPCO  will  work 
with  the  appropriate  authority  at  the  federal  level  to  ensure  the  creation  of  the  proposed  Rural 
Maintenance Team in the participating  LGAs and monitor their performance. It will ensure that MoU 
are developed and signed by relevant parties including community representative and representative 
of  FOs  before  execution  of  work  commences.  If  applicable,  the  SPMU  will  also  collaborate  with  the 
Ministry  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  municipalities  and/or  Local  Government  Councils  (LGCs)  to 
facilitate the construction or rehabilitation  of assemble markets and processing  infrastructures in the 
target LGAs. The training of a 1,200 team/gang on the Operation and Maintenance of physical market 
infrastructures will be carried out. 
Accessibility to Land Resource 
Market infrastructure will require the availability of land resource for their provision. The arrangement 
made  for  land  will  go  a  long  way  in  determining  sustainability  of  market  infrastructure.  Land 
development  and  Irrigation  activities  and  Roads  construction  require  large  expanse  of  land.    3,000 
hectares of land are to be developed and 900 Hectares of land for dry season vegetable farming. 180 
km  of farm  access  roads  are  target  for  entire  programme  life.  The  justification  for  the  investment  in 
these  infrastructures  is  based  on  that  fact  that  there  is  positive  return  on  investment,  that  the 
government or the community has guaranteed the lease of such land to the beneficiaries during the 
programme life, and that a strategies for the maintenance and sustainability of the infrastructure will 
be developed by concerned parties. 
Guidelines for preparation of infrastructure 
The following steps will be followed during the preparation process for infrastructure: 
  The  RPCO  in  collaboration  with  the  SPCO,  the  LGA  and  other  stakeholders  will  identify  and 
scope  all  infrastructure  that  will  enhance  enterprise  development  within  the  target  area 
through studies, surveys and beneficiary need assessments for consideration. 
  The  identified  sub-projects  are  screened  to  eliminate  those  that  do  not  meet  the  project 
eligibility criteria. 
  Ranking  of  the  individual  sub-projects  based  on  comparative  socio-economic  cost/  benefit 
analysis related to the value chain and for the final selection to fall within the limit of allocation 
of each infrastructure for each LGA. 
  Maintenance sustainability assessment of top-ranked sub-projects. 
  Approval to implement the top-ranked sub-project. 
Individual infrastructure sub-projects for individual  incubators,  groups  or  clusters are estimated to cost 
between  US$10,000  and  US$150,000.  The  financing  of  infrastructural  sub-projects  would  be  in  form  of 
grants  with  the  Programme  contributing  a  maximum  of  90%  (disbursed  in  tranches,  depending  on  the 
project  cost,  implementation  period  and  the  capacity  of  the  beneficiaries)  of  the  total  cost  of  the  sub-
project  and  a  minimum  of  10%  of  total  cost  through  up-front  cash  or  in  kind  (provision  of  labour, 
materials  or  both)  in  contributions  by  the  beneficiaries.  The  preparation  of  infrastructure  for 
individual  incubators,  groups  or  clusters  will  involve  consultation  with  the  active  participants  and  all 
other stakeholders to obtain their agreement to the scope and nature of the investment, and the roles 
and  responsibilities  of  each  party  in  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  infrastructure  when 
completed. 
82 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Figure 1:  Market Infrastructure: preparation of investments – flow chart 
Mapping and data 
on registered 
farmers  
Land potentials 
and Infrastructure 
constraints 
Social & 
environmental 
safeguards  
Cost of construction 
& rehabilitation 
Sub-project 
funding 
approved by 
NPMU/IFAD 
Identification & 
scoping of 
Infrastructures  
Consultation with 
stakeholders 
Field 
reconnaissance 
Eligibility screening 
Eligibility 
parameters  
Eligible sub-
projects selected 
Comparative cost / 
benefit analysis of 
infrastructure 
Sub-projects 
ranked 
Quantification of 
social & economic 
benefits 
Sub-project does 
not proceed – go to 
second ranked 
sub-project 
Design & 
construction 
YES 
Sub-project selection 
recommendations submitted 
to RPCO  
Final 
consultation 
with Users 
Associations 
Memorandum of 
Understanding 
(MOU) signed 
83 
Resourcing 
consultations with 
beneficiaries 
Assessment of maintenance 
sustainability for highest   
ranked infrastructures 
NO 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Detailed implementation arrangements 
1. 
Identification  and  scoping:  This  involves  the  compilation  of  a  schedule  of  all  the 
infrastructures - with a concise but definitive description of each  - that may be considered for further 
assessment,  and  the  list  will  be  circulated  to  the  stakeholders  for  comment.  The  identification  and 
scoping  will  be  the  outcome  of  a  data  collection  and  consultation  process  set  out  as  follows:  (a) 
mapping  and  data  on  registered  farmers  and  other  VC  actors:  All  available  topographic  mapping 
should be obtained, at 1:100,000 scale or better, covering the target area(s) of intervention, to initially 
identify list of infrastructure demands within the target area(s). Also demographic data relating to the 
beneficiary  households  and  the  list  of  registered  farmers;  (b)  land  potentials  and  infrastructure 
constraints:  Information on agriculture potentials and  infrastructure constraints  will be identified from 
appropriate  authorities;  (c)  consultation  with  stakeholders:  The  SPCO  will  be  required  to  consult 
directly and extensively throughout the process with all the potential stakeholders - in both the private 
and public sector - that might have an interest in the selection of infrastructure sub-projects. This will 
include the investors, agro-processors and market operators within the target area that are not directly 
involved  in  the  intervention  but  might  be  affected  by  the  Programme  activities,  as  well  as  the 
community leaders. The purpose of this consultation  will be not only  to disseminate  information and 
report  on  Programme  progress,  but  to  ensure  that  all  parties  contribute  and  consent  to  decisions 
affecting the selection process as it develops; and (d) field reconnaissance: the purpose of which is to 
confirm  the  accuracy  or  otherwise  of  secondary  data  obtained  from  various  sources,  to  identify 
existing infrastructure, and to carry out an initial visual inspection and condition survey of each area 
that might be considered for the intervention. 
2. 
Selection  of  eligible  sub-projects:  The  infrastructure  identified  above  will  undergo  an  initial 
screening  to  ensure  that  those  selected  for  comparative  ranking  fully  meet  the  objectives  of  the 
Programme. Only those sections which pass the screening test will be selected to proceed to the next 
stage.  The  considerations  at  this  stage  are:  (a)  eligibility  screening  parameters:  candidate 
infrastructures should broadly fit within the framework envisaged for Subcomponent 1.2  - to enhance 
production and processing, to serve the target cluster groups, to provide access between farmers and 
buying  point,  not  to  pose  serious  physical  challenges  to  maintenance,  and  not  to  result  in  any  land 
compensation  claims;  and  (b)  environmental  and  social  safeguards:  to  minimize  the  possibility  of 
infrastructure development resulting in serious adverse social or environmental impacts, all candidate 
infrastructures will be screened against a wide range of potential impacts. 
3. 
Ranking  of  sub-projects:  Due  to  the  limited  scope  and  funding,  only  infrastructures  that  will 
impact  the  development  of  the  selected  beneficairies  will  be  implemented.  The  selection  of 
infrastructure will therefore be undertaken by means of comparative cost/benefit analysis leading to a 
ranking of the individual candidates. The comparative analysis will be based on: (a) assessed whole-
life  cost  of  construction/rehabilitation  and  maintenance:  the  construction/rehabilitation  cost  will  be 
estimated  from  the  visual  condition  survey  undertaken  as  part  of  the  identification  process  above, 
while the maintenance cost will be taken over a nominal 20-year asset lifetime; (b) assessed value of 
social  and  economic  benefits:  for  the  purposes  of  this  exercise,  only  the  benefits  accruing  to  the 
producers  served  by  the  infrastructure  will  be  assessed.  The  direct  financial  benefits  of  increased 
production capacity and market prices for farmers, and reduced vehicle operating costs for both the 
investors  and  smallholders,  will  be  added  to  assessed  indirect  benefits  of  improved  access  to 
markets,  health  and  education,  policing,  public  transport  etc.  The  detailed  work  for  quantifying  and 
weighting  the  benefits  will  be  prepared  in  the  business  plan  for  each  investment  and  given  to  all 
stakeholders during the initial consultation stage. 
4. 
Assessment  of  maintenance  sustainability:  The  project  will  provide  limited  funding  for  the 
menu of infrastructures identified for which there is a firm commitment to a sustainable maintenance 
regime.  Each  SPCO  will  consult  with  all  the  stakeholders  –  investors,  beneficiaries,  state  and  local 
governments  -  of  the  highest  ranked  infrastructures  to  obtain  a  commitment  from  all  parties  to 
resource  the  routine,  periodic  and  emergency  maintenance  for  the  infrastructure  as  a  condition  for 
funding the work. Should such a commitment not be forthcoming within a reasonable period – say one 
month – or if any affected party decides that they do not wish to proceed with the sub-project, then the 
SPCO will notify the RPCO for next step of action. 
84 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
5. 
Approval by the RPCO: It is expected that the market infrastructure preparation process and 
implementation will follow an annual cycle. On this basis the SPCO will repeat the process described 
above  for  over  a  period  of  6  months,  and  submit  the  list  of  highest  ranked  sub-projects,  as  part  of 
Market Infrastructure Selection Report to the RPCO for funding approval.  
Memorandum of understanding: Once the funding approval is secured, the User Association 
6. 
commitment to sustainable maintenance of the highest-ranked infrastructure will be formalised 
through an MOU negotiated between and willingly consented to by all the parties, facilitated by the 
SPCO, setting out the roles and responsibilities of each party. 
Evolving process/stages 
7. 
Stage  1:  Pre-construction  stage:  This  stage  involves  site  investigation,  detailed  design  and  bid 
documentation, procurement of works and consulting services which will be implemented as follows: 
(a) procure technical support services – RPCO will engage the services of a firm to provide technical 
services  on  the  conduct  of  feasibility  study,  survey,  design  and  development  of  Bill  of  Engineering 
Measurement and Estimates.  This will ensure standardization, brand identity and quality control. The 
final  method  of  selection  for  the  works  will  depend  on  the  availability  of  service  providers  and  the 
scope  of  services  required.  The  Regional  Infrastructure  Engineer  with  consultation  with  the  State 
Engineer will prepare the necessary documentation – ToR, Request for Proposals – and will lead the 
procurement  process.  The  Procurement  Officer  at  the  regional  and  state  level  will  vet  these 
documents for onward transmission for IFAD No Objection by the coordinators. Sufficient time will be 
provided  for  the  procurement  process  to  ensure  that  the  service  provider(s)  can  commence  their 
duties immediately following approval of the sub-project; (b) approval of design and cost estimates  - 
The  consultant  will  submit  the  design  report  to  RPCO  and  for  technical  review,  comments  and 
approval  of  the  design  and  to  proceed  with  the  procurement  process;  (c)  bid  documentation  -  The 
Procurement Officer unit will prepare bidding documents for the construction contracts, and packaged 
accordingly. The documents will incorporate technical specifications, drawings and Bills of Quantities 
and  any  other  relevant  technical  information;  (d)  procurement  process  –  for  Works  Contracts,  the 
bidding  process,  evaluation  of  bids  and  award  of  construction  contracts  will  be  undertaken  in  full 
accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines;  and  for  Construction  supervision,  selection  of 
consultants  (firms  or  individuals)  to  undertake  construction  supervision  will  be  carried  out  in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines. 
Figure 2: 
Implementation of pre-construction stage – flow chart 
Procure consulting services 
for feasibility study 
investigation, technical 
support 
Materials sampling 
& testing 
Inventory / 
condition survey 
Engineering survey 
(as required) 
Site conditions 
design data 
Design standards & 
parameters 
Detailed design 
Materials and costs 
data 
BOQ / cost 
estimates 
Design drawings 
Technical 
specifications 
Design report 
85 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Technical review & 
approval by NPMU 
Approval to 
proceed 
Supervision 
Procurement  
Works 
Procurement  
Award of sup. 
contracts 
Award of 
works 
contracts 
Procurement 
process 
Stage  2:  Construction  stage:    The  supervision  of  all  works  will  be  under  the  responsibility  of  the 
RPCO  and  administered  on  its  behalf  by  the  SPCO,  LGA  Engineers  and  the  consultant.  Following 
award  of  the  works  contracts,  the  works  will  be  carried  out  according  to  a  construction  programme 
agreed in advance. The works will be inspected on a regular basis to ensure the contractors comply 
fully  with  the  drawings  and  technical  specifications,  environmental  and  social  safeguards  and  other 
contract conditions, and maintain progress according to the programme.  
The works contracts will be administered by the SPCO on behalf of the RPCO. During the course of 
each contract, monthly site meetings  will be held to review progress and to resolve technical and/or 
contractual  issues  that  have  arisen.  All  construction  works  contracts  will  include  a  defects  liability 
period,  of  between  6  and  12  months,  to  provide  for  rectification  of  any  construction  defects  that 
appear after the works are certified as completed and the infrastructure is in use. 
Stage 3: Operation & maintenance stage: Once the works contracts are certified as completed,  it 
will be formally handed over by the RPCO in collaboration with the SPCO to the User Association for 
operation and maintenance purposes. 
8. 
Mode of Payment to Contractors: Generally, payments to service providers under the project are 
to be made in tranches. The first payment is the Material Advance Payment which should not be more 
than 30% of the total contract sum and backed with an Advance Payment Security issued by a reliable 
bank. The remaining 70% shall be paid in two tranches based on the progress reports and Certificate 
Valuation  raised  by  the  State  Engineer  or  the  supervising  engineer.  Payments for  sub-projects 
that are executed by the community themselves through Direct Labour usually attract 75% of the total 
amount for  the  procurement  of  all  the  materials  required  in  bulk  to avoid change  in  prices  of  materials 
along the line. The final payment for the unpaid labour is made after the sub-project execution and certified 
by the State supervising engineer.  
9.   Description of positive list of market infrastructure: The baseline survey conducted indicates 
the following list of market infrastructure supportive to LIFE project. LIFE being a category B project 
under  SECAP  categorization,  detailed  Environmental  Social  Management  Plan  must  be  carried  out 
before the commencement of any infrastructure work.  Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) of those 
likely  to  be  deprived  of  their  resource  –  e.g  land,  shrines,  buildings  etc  should  be  gotten  and  well 
documented. 
86 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Road Construction/ improvement/rehabilitation 
- Access roads (4.0m width) including design, supervision and training  
- Feeder roads (6.0m width) including design, supervision and training  
- Culverts --Box and Ring (600mm & 900mm pipe) culverts and Drifts including design, supervision  
and training 
-- Bridges  
LIFE will embark on minor roads projects that are likely within budgetary provision. The projects will be such 
that  support  agricultural  enterprises  and  activities.  Detailed  engineering  designs  and  studies  are  to  be 
carried out. The LIFE project will restrict itself to earth roads with appropriate laboratory tests carried out at 
each stage of construction operations.  Tests such as compressive strength test on concrete, compaction 
tests – proctor tests, particle size distribution test, tensile strength test on reinforcements are required. 
Land Development activities 
Land development is to be done with the intention of creating a potential use for agricultural purposes. 
Land clearing requires the removal of native cover ‒ including trees, bushes and boulders ‒ from the 
land  surface.  The  land  is  subsequently  broken  to  create  a  workable  bed  into  which  a  crop  can  be 
seeded. Land breaking includes the removal of roots, stumps and rocks.  
All  trees  of  value  for  the  purposes  of  generating  lumber,  posts,  or  firewood  should  be  selectively 
removed prior to clearing. An appropriate buffer zone should be preserved along all watercourses to 
maintain important habitat for fish and wildlife.  
Generally,  land  should  be  cleared  usually  during  the  dry  season  when  the  ground  and  precipitation 
and  runoff  are  typically  low.  Year-end  land  clearing  also  minimizes  soil  compaction  and  prevents 
excessive amounts of soil from being introduced in brush piles. Natural vegetation should be retained 
in drainage paths such as creeks and gullies to reduce the risk of soil erosion and damage to riparian 
areas. 
Brush and stumps are piled into windrows using a brush-rake, after which they are burned. A brush-
rake  is  typically  a  bulldozer  blade  with  spikes  along  the  bottom  edge.  If  the  burn  is  incomplete, 
windrows should be piled anew and burned again the following spring.  
Water resources based Infrastructures 
- Groundwater infrastructure (deep wells), including mini water scheme (borehole with submersible pump, 
overhead tank, generator room, generator and battery of taps). 
- Irrigation system infrastructures, including: Type A: Small size (01-1.0 Ha) surface irrigation system, Type B: 
Small size, sprinkler (0.1-1.0Ha) irrigation system. 
-- Drainage of agricultural land. 
It is generally recommended that solar powered borehole be constructed. 
Agro and processing Buildings  
- Aggregation Centres 
- Ventilated Improved Pit (VIP) latrine 
-Agro Processing infrastructure for array of enterprises  ( Cassava, Rice , Fish, Cocoa) 
--- Animal Buildings—Poultry, Goatry and Piggery 
Designs of agro and processing buildings should largely conform to National Building Code 2006 
Aquaculture infrastructure 
--- Earth ponds 
--- Concrete fish ponds 
--- Fish farm buildings housing – plastic tanks, poly fibre tanks 
10.  Environmental Impacts -- infrastructure projects  
Dust: Dust is defined as fine-grained suspended particulate in air. The degree to which individuals 
perceive dust to be a nuisance will depend on the frequency, intensity and duration of a dust-
generating event.  
87 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Farmers engage in a variety of activities that require the use of equipment or practices that will create 
dust. Most land clearing equipment generates some dust. Dust may also be generated as fugitive dust 
when  fine  particulates  are  lifted  from  fields,  roads,  buildings  and  yards  via  air  turbulence.    Dust 
protectors such as masks should be worn by operators and water spray used to reduce level of dust 
Ground  Movement/  Vibration/  Noise:  Heavy  equipment  used  for  road  construction  create  ground 
movement  such  that  cracks  can  occur  in  adjacent  buildings.  These  can  also  create  some  form  of 
discomfort  to  inhabitants  of  the  surroundings.  An  assessment  of  surrounding  buildings  should  be 
carried out to  ascertain  the level  of susceptibility  to cracks as a of ground movement. The buildings 
are to be strengthened and compensation paid for damages where it is unavoidable. 
Noise is also a major concern from equipment. Construction equipment with moderate decibel should 
be used and regulated considering timing when people will experience less discomfort. 
Deforestation:  Removal  of  vegetation  cover  and  trees  during  construction  can  lead  to  deforestation. 
These should be guided against when avoidable. Tree and vegetation replanting exercise should be 
carried out. 
Underground  water  contamination:  Unchecked  and  unmonitored  underground  exploration  during 
borehole construction can lead  to  ground  water contamination.  Best practices should applied during 
the construction of boreholes while also conducting appropriate studies prior to construction. 
Flooding/ Erosion: Flooding and erosion can take place due to poor judgement and wrong design and 
construction practice. Adequate drainages should be provided for surface water run-off and vegetation 
cover  provided  for  slopes  where  they  occur.  Unnecessary  dug  out  /  excavation  of  soil  from  their 
natural  terrain  should  be  avoided.  Replacement  of  dug  out  soils  should  be  carried  out  when 
necessary. 
88 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Support to Market Infrastructure 
Subcomponent 
Institutional 
Strengthening 
Outcome 
Output 
Activity 
Who's 
Responsible 
Unit 
Unit 
Cost  
N  '000 
YR 
1 
YR
2 
YR
3 
YR
4 
YR5 
YR6 
YR7 
LOP  
Target 
Total Cost 
(Naira) 
'000 
Total 
Cost 
(USD) 
'000 
Remark 
% of 
total cost 
to be 
made 
foreign 
Physical 
Challenges 
Expenditur
e Category 
Quantities 
Priority 
inrastructure 
identified 
Standardizatio
n in the O & M 
modalities  
O &M manual 
produced 
Durable and  
functional 
Infrastructure 
120 persons 
trained on O 
&M 
Standardizatio
n in 
specification 
and 
implementatio
n details  
Quality 
Control, 
Timeliness  
and Value for 
money 
Manual on 
Market 
Infrastructure 
delivered 
Projects 
completed 
according to 
contractual 
agreement 
Inventory/ 
needs 
assessment  
of  market 
infrastructure 
Preparation 
and 
development 
of Operation 
and a 
Maintenance  
guidelines/ 
Manual 
Training of  
Water User 
Association  
and Operation 
and 
Maintenance 
Team 
Development 
of Prototype 
engineering 
designs/ 
estimates of 
typical Market 
Infrastructure 
Supervision   
of 
Infrastructure 
Construction 
and 
Rehabilitation 
SPCO-- 
Engineer 
+Rural 
Institution 
RPCO  
Engineer 
RPCO + 
SPCO 
Engineer 
RPCO- 
Engineer + 
Service 
Provider 
RPCO + 
SPCO + 
Service 
Provider 
no 
3,000 
9 
9 
27,000  
89  
no 
5,000 
1 
1 
2 
10,000  
33  
no 
500 
30 
12 
42 
21,000  
0 
-    
69  
-    
no 
20,000 
1 
1 
20,000  
66  
LS 
100,000 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.15 
0.15 
0.1 
1 
100,000  
328  
Support with 
market 
Infrastructure 
Construction 
and 
Rehabiliation 
of Farm 
Access Roads 
Construction 
of Culverts 
Construction 
of Bridges 
SPCO + SP 
SPCO +SP 
SPCO +SP 
Construction 
SPCO +SP 
no 
no 
no 
no 
15,000 
3,000 
10,000 
40,000 
60 
50 
6 
2 
89 
60 
50 
6 
60 
20 
180 
2,700,000  
8,852  
120 
360,000  
1,180  
12 
120,000  
393  
2 
30 no 
per state 
20 per 
state 
2 per 
state 
state 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
Support to Market Infrastructure 
and 
Rehabilitation 
of Mini Jetties 
Provision of 
Water  Supply 
Schemes-- 
Solar 
Powered 
Boreholes 
Fish Farm 
Buiding 
Construction 
and 
rehabilitation 
Earth Ponds 
Construction 
and 
Rehabilitation 
Agro 
Processing 
Facilities ( 
Cassava, 
Rice, Plam 
Oil) 
Aggregation 
Centres 
Construction 
and 
Rehabilitation 
of Poultry 
Buildings 
Construction 
and 
Rehabilitation 
of Piggery  
Buildings 
Land 
Development 
Activities 
Dry Season 
Irrigation 
Schemes-- 
Vegetables 
TOTAL 
Quantities 
80,000  
262  
depende
nt 
SPCO +SP 
no 
10,000 
20 
40 
40 
10 
10 
120 
1,200,000  
3,934  
Incubators + 
SP 
Incubators + 
SP 
no 
25,000 
5 
5 
5 
5 
20 
500,000  
1,639  
no 
1,000 
10 
20 
10 
20 
60 
60,000  
197  
Incubators + 
SP 
SPCO +SP 
no 
no 
30,000 
10 
10 
10 
30 
900,000  
2,951  
30,000 
10 
5 
3 
18 
540,000  
1,770  
Incubators + 
SP 
Incubators + 
SP 
no 
25,000 
4 
4 
2 
2 
12 
300,000  
984  
no 
20,000 
4 
4 
2 
2 
12 
240,000  
787  
SPCO +SP 
Hecta
res 
500 
500 
900 
1,2
00 
400 
3000 
1,500,000  
4,918  
Beneficiaries 
+SP 
Hecta
res 
350 
200 
600 
100 
900 
315,000  
1,033  
-    
8,993,000  
29,485  
20 per 
state 
Av 3 
farms 
per state 
5 no per 
state 
5 
processi
ng 
centres 
per state 
3 no  per 
state 
2 no  per 
state 
2 no  per 
state 
500 
hectares 
per state 
150 
hectares 
per state 
SUMMARY OF INFR. BUDGET  
NAIRA = 8,993,000,000   
US$ = 29,485,246   
90 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report 
91 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 5: 
arrangements 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
Institutional framework for project implementation 
Implementation  of  the  project  will  be  governed  by  five  main  principles:  (i)  alignment,  to  the 
1. 
extent possible, with the Federal Government’s systems and procedures - especially those governing 
public  expenditure  management  and  procurement;  (ii)  performance-based  engagement  of  private 
sector Implementation partners; (iii) continuous monitoring of public sector implementing partners and 
ensuring  that  their  capacity  is  adequately  strengthened  so  as  to  enable  them  to  deliver  on  their 
mandates; (iv) empowerment of beneficiaries to take a leading role in project implementation through 
their grassroots institutions; and (v) stronger partnerships and harmonization with other development 
partners and stakeholders in the sector. 
LIFE will be coordinated and implemented through existing institutions used for CBNRMP. The 
2. 
lead agency remains the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD). It will share 
oversight  functions,  through  the  National  Steering  Committee,  with  other  ministries  and  agencies 
including  the  federal  ministries  responsible  for  Water  Resources,  Finance,  National  Planning  and 
Budget,  Women  Affairs,  Environment  and  Labour,  the  NDDC,  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN)  and 
Manufacturers Association of Nigeria (MAN). In particular, the technical oversight of the project will be 
delegated  to  the  Technical  Support  Committee  headed  by  the  Managing  Director  of  the  Niger  Delta 
Development  Commission  (NDDC).  The  institutions  to  be  involved  in  project  implementation,  their 
capabilities, and their roles and responsibilities are summarised in Table 1. 
Project management  
3. 
The  lead  governance  body  for  the  project  will  be  the  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC), 
chaired  by  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Agriculture.  The  NSC  will  be  responsible  for  oversight  of  the 
project  and  providing  policy  guidance  to  project  implementation.  Other  members  of  the  NSC  will 
include the Permanent Secretary of the FMARD, and representatives of NDDC, FMF, Federal Ministry 
of  National  Planning  and  Budget,  Federal  Ministries  of  Women  Affairs,  Water  Resources, 
Environment, and Labour, CBN and Manufacturers Association of Nigeria (MAN). The NSC will meet 
twice in a year to review progress, review lessons learned and good practices, and approve AWPBs. 
The National LIFE Programme Coordinator will serve as Secretary to the NSC.  
The National LIFE Programme Office (NLPO) based in Abuja will oversee the IFAD-assisted 
4. 
LIFE  project,  focusing  on  policy  dialogue,  integrating  and  up-scaling  the  successes  recorded  by  the 
project  into  the  National  LIFE  Programme,  knowledge  sharing,  and  facilitating  linkage  with  national 
institutions  including  CBN,  FMF,  SMEDAN  etc.  IFAD  will  provide  some  financial  resources  from  the 
loan proceeds to support the NLPO. 
5. 
At the regional level, a Technical Support Committee (TSC) chaired by the Managing Director 
of  NDDC,  will  comprise  of  the  NDDC  Director  of  Agriculture  and  Fisheries,  National  Programme 
Coordinator of LIFE, Regional Project Coordinator (who serves as Secretary), representative of FMF, 
representatives of recognised youth and women organisations, and a representative of the Commodity 
Alliance  Forum  from  each  participating  state.  Relevant  financial  institutions  and  research  institutions 
could  be  co-opted  when  necessary.  The  TSC  will  meet  quarterly  to  review  progress  of  project 
implementation,  assess  management  effectiveness,  decide  on  corrective  measures  where 
appropriate, provide guidance for the smooth implementation of the project activities, and review the 
AWPB before its submission to the NSC for approval.  
6. 
Day-to-day  management  of  the  project  will  be  undertaken  by  the  Regional  Project 
Coordination Office (RPCO) housed (virtually) in NDDC Headquarters in Port Harcourt. The RPCO 
will have direct responsibility for supervision, technical support and coordination of the activities of the 
State Project Coordination Offices (SPCOs). Headed by the Regional Project Coordinator (RPC), the 
RPCO  will  have  professional  staff  as  well  as  subject  matter  specialists  who  will  be  hired  when  the 
need  arises  under  the  technical  assistance  category  of  the  project.  A  suitably  qualified  staff  from 
92 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
NDDC’s Directorate of Agriculture and Fisheries will be deployed to work in the RPCO as one of the 
professional staff. Such staff shall report to the Regional Project Coordinator.   
93 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Table 1: The roles, responsibility and capabilities of key institutions and actors for implementation of LIFE 
Institution 
Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture 
and Rural 
Development 
(FMARD) 
Role under LIFE 
 Lead implementing 
agency 
 Statutory responsibility for sector policy and regulation of agricultural, natural 
resources, forestry and veterinary research all over Nigeria. 
Strength 
 Project supervision 
 Leads FGN’s effort to diversify the national economy with emphasis on agro-
based industrialization, youth employment and stimulation of the rural economy. 
 Lead agency for all donor-assisted programmes/projects in the sector and hence 
familiarity with IFAD and IFAD processes. 
 Prioritizes working with the private sector for impact. 
Federal Ministry 
of Finance 
(FMF) 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee, 
Technical Support 
Committee 
 Project supervision 
 Statutorily responsible for managing the finances of FGN. Also the Borrower. 
 Dedicated department (International Economic Relations) responsible for the 
coordination and oversight of the activities of development partners, raising 
opportunities for government ownership. 
 Participation in the project cycle provides staff of FMF strong knowledge of 
developments in project implementation.   
Constraints 
 Inadequate staff to drive 
agribusiness development 
 Yet to resuscitate a coordination 
unit for development 
interventions, to ensure synergy 
among the donor-assisted 
programmes. (The Ministry is 
planning to do this.)45. 
 Inadequate budgetary 
provisions 
 Conflicting work schedules 
sometimes limit full staff 
participation in supervision. 
Federal Ministry 
of Budget and 
Planning 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
 Statutorily responsible to prepare poverty reduction strategies, macroeconomic 
policies, the national development plan, medium term strategy for Vision 20:20, 
and annual budgets in collaboration with FMF. 
  
 Monitoring economic development trend and evaluating economic programme 
performance puts the Ministry in a good position for knowledge management and 
dissemination of good practices for scaling up as well as to nip in the bud bad 
economic practices. 
Federal Ministry 
of Water 
Resources 
(FMWR) 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
 Statutorily responsible to develop and implement policies, projects and 
 . 
programmes for sustainable access to safe and sufficient water to meet the social, 
cultural, environmental and economic development needs of all Nigerians.   
 Provides guidance and regulation of irrigation development.  
45  The  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  used  to  supervise  donor-funded  projects,  follow  up  on  the  recommendations  of  donor  supervision missions,  facilitate  inclusion  of  the  project  
budget in the Ministry’s annual budget and ensure adequate release of the funds, and ensure knowledge sharing on the successes of the projects. However the PCU was scrapped in 
2007. In October 2009, the then Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (FMAWR) directed that the Federal Department of Cooperatives should coordinate all multilateral 
and bilateral interventions. However, three months later, on 29 January, 2010, the FMAWR created a “National Programme for Agriculture and Food Security” as the new secretariat to 
coordinate all donor-assisted interventions. In April 2010, FMAWR itself was split into two ministries as was the situation prior to  May 2007 – FMARD and Federal Ministry of Water 
Resources (FMWR). 
94 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Institution 
Federal Ministry 
of Women 
Affairs 
Role under LIFE 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
to strengthen focus 
on gender equality 
under the project 
Strength 
Constraints 
 Influenced the formulation of government policies in favour of women, including 
  
the National Gender Policy of 2006 which advocates for non-discrimination on the 
basis of gender, and guarantees equal access to political, social and economic 
wealth creation opportunities for women and men. 
 The conceptual policy framework provides the opportunity for developing linkages 
with donors, the private sector and civil society. 
Federal Ministry 
of Environment 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
 Statutorily to ensure effective coordination of all environmental and climate 
change matters, in the areas of policy, awareness, enforcement and intervention. 
Federal Ministry 
of Labour and 
Productivity 
Central Bank of 
Nigeria (CBN) 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
 Member of National 
Steering Committee 
 Facilitated the start of the UNEP-led clean-up of oil-impacted Ogoni land.  
 Statutorily to oversee productivity, employment and labour matters. 
 Strong focus on youth employment. 
 Statutorily to provide a stable framework for the economic development of Nigeria 
through effective monetary and exchange rate policy, and management of the 
financial sector. 
 CBN champions agricultural financing, drives the financial inclusion strategy and 
is the custodian of microfinance policy.  
 CBN maintains strong implementation linkages with FMARD and the IFAD-
assisted RUFIN in rural finance, and has developed incentive policies promoting 
agricultural and rural micro-enterprise financing, including the agricultural credit 
guarantee scheme and the Anchor Borrowers Programme aimed at providing 
financial credit to smallholder farmers at a reduced interest rate and with minimal 
collateral requirements. 
  
  
  
Manufacturers 
Association of 
Nigeria (MAN) 
Niger Delta 
Development 
Commission 
(NDDC) 
 Member National 
 A national industrial association serving and representing over 2,500 
  
Steering Committee 
manufacturing companies in the private sector. 
 Has a mission to work with government and other stakeholders to promote an 
enabling environment for industrial development and growth.  
 Member National 
 Mandate for social, economic, infrastructural development of the nine states of the 
 Delays in release of budgeted 
Steering Committee  
Niger Delta region. 
 Chair of Technical 
Support Committee 
 Provided financial grant support to CBNRMP equivalent to amount of IFAD loan. 
 Has a Directorate for Agriculture and Fisheries which interfaces with donor and 
other stakeholders investing in the agricultural sector. 
 Recognizes enterprise development for youth as a key solution to reducing youth 
restiveness in the region. 
funds for project implementation 
affected results for CBNRMP 
Agricultural 
 Will house the SPCO 
 Established as semi-autonomous agricultural extension service agency of the 
 Due to lack of financial support 
95 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Institution 
Development 
Programme 
(State) 
Role under LIFE 
and provide service 
to the project 
(mobilization of 
youth/women, quality 
assurance of private 
extension services, 
M&E support). The 
project is expected to 
support the ADP to 
carry out these 
functions 
Strength 
State Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, with World Bank support. 
Responsible for disseminating proven agricultural technologies to farmers. 
 Has established network from the state to the LGA and village level. 
 In the past the ADP, equipped with enough resources from donors and 
government, delivered effective and efficient public sector agricultural extension 
service, and housed and implemented all the donor-assisted projects in the state.  
 Recently, the FMARD through the Department of Agricultural Extension has 
embarked on a series of support activities to strengthen the ADP system with a 
view to revitalize them for better performance as a public sector extension service.  
  ADP structure/network is capable of supporting LIFE project in mobilization/ 
profiling of youth/women agri-entrepreneurs, quality assurance of private 
extension service providers, and M&E support.  
Constraints 
from donors and government, 
agricultural extension service 
delivery to the grassroots 
famers had reduced 
considerably. 
National 
Agricultural 
Research 
System (NARS) 
 Technical service 
provider 
 Coordinated by the Agricultural Research Council of Nigeria (ARCN), comprises 
18 agricultural research institutes dealing with various subsectors of agriculture 
including crops, livestock and fishery production systems and agro-allied industrial 
research. 
  
 ARCN also oversees the federal colleges of agriculture for training middle level 
manpower for agriculture, vocational training on agricultural enterprises with a 
view to promote agri-entrepreneurs. 
 Technology development and investment promotion are the focus of institutes 
such as the Raw Materials Development Council, Federal Institute for Industrial 
Research and National Centre for Agricultural Mechanization.  
 Opportunities offered by these institutions to collaborate with LIFE to provide agro-
processing and mechanization options.  
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprise 
Development 
Agency 
(SMEDAN) 
Local 
Government 
Council (LGC) 
 Technical service 
 Focal point for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) development and 
  
provider 
related policy support. 
 Wide outreach, operating at federal, state and LGA levels, through the activities of 
business service centres (BSCs) and business information centres (BICs) 
supported by service providers.  
 Has strong partnerships, networking and collaborative activities with donor funded 
projects and relevant agencies. 
 Provide a Desk 
 Statutorily the third tier of government for local development. 
Officer, mainly for 
monitoring 
 Facilitate access of 
 The Agriculture Department of the LGC is responsible for implementing policies 
and projects for agricultural development, and it had experience in mobilizing 
participants for CBNRMP. 
 In most states, the LGC has lost 
its autonomy in budgeting to the 
state government and faces 
severe fund shortage to support 
project operations. 
96 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Institution 
Role under LIFE 
youth/women to land  
Strength 
Constraints 
Commodity 
Apex 
Development 
Association 
(CADA) 
Service 
providers  
 Participate in 
 Umbrella organization of different commodity groups facilitated by CBNRMP. 
  
identification of 
apprentices for 
incubation system. 
 Manage seed capital 
for apprentices as 
revolving fund 
 Institution building model for rural governance and decentralization of resources to 
communities and commodity groups.  
 Served as entry point for CBNRMP (and hoped in future for other development 
partners and government) in a community. 
 Served as platform for knowledge sharing and replication of best practices within 
the community for members and non-members. 
  Provide services 
 Usually specialized knowledge and skills in their respective areas. 
 Some service providers lack 
such as extension, 
training etc through 
contractual 
arrangements. 
 Usually not subject to bureaucracy of public sector. 
 Guided by results-based agreements. 
adequate staff 
97 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
7. 
At  the  state  level,  a  State  Project  Steering  Committee  (SPSC)  chaired  by  the  Honourable 
Commissioner  of Agriculture and composed of the commissioners of Finance, Budget  and Planning, 
Women Affairs,  representatives  of  government  agencies  and  departments  responsible  for  youth  and 
women  empowerment, 
the  State, 
representatives of youth and women organisations, and relevant financial institutions, will oversee the 
implementation of the project and approve the AWPB. In addition the SPSC will facilitate the effective 
participation of relevant actors in the project. The State Project Coordinator shall serve as Secretary to 
the SPSC which shall meet at least twice in a year. 
representatives  of  selected  commodity  associations 
in 
8. 
The State Project Coordination Office in each participating state shall be responsible for the 
coordination of implementation of project activities, including preparing the AWPB for the state project. 
Housed  in  the  ADP,  and  headed  by  the  State  Project  Coordinator  (SPC),  the  SPCO  will  have 
professional staff as well as subject matter specialists who will be hired when the need arises under 
the technical assistance category of the project. A suitably qualified staff from NDDC’s state office will 
be deployed to work in the SPCO as one of the professional staff. Such staff shall report to the State 
Project Coordinator.  
9. 
At the LGA level, the project will maintain a Desk Office in the Department of Agriculture. The 
Desk  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  sensitization  and  advocacy  at  the  community  level  under  the 
guidance of the SPCO, and also participate in the selection of project beneficiaries and monitoring of 
activities within the LGA..  
10.  At  the  community  level,  the  project  will  strengthen  the  existing  CADAs  through  capacity 
building  and  promote  the  formation  of  new  CADAs  where  they  do  not  exist  to  promote  further 
agribusiness  among  youth  and  women  for  employment  creation.  The  CADAs  will  be  encouraged  to 
form  a  federated  CADA  at  the  state  level  from  their  representatives  to  ensure  strong  and  viable 
agribusiness associations. 
11.  The following is a summary of the key implementing partners for LIFE: (a) at the federal level, 
(i) the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Lead Implementing Agency; (ii) the 
Federal  Ministry  of  Finance,  the    Borrower;  and  (iii)  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  for  rural  finance 
inclusion;  (b)  at  the  regional  level,  (iv)  the  Niger  Delta  Development  Commission,  a  financing  and 
implementing partner with a mandate for the development of the Niger Delta region; (c)  at the state 
level, (v) the State Ministry of Agriculture, and (vi) the Agricultural Development Programme; (d) at the 
LGA level, (vii) the Department of Agriculture; and (e)  at the community level, (viii) the Commodity 
Apex Development Association, (ix) the incubators, and (x) the apprentices.  The Bank of Agriculture, 
NIRSAL,  SMEDAN,  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  and  institutions  within  the  National 
Agricultural Research System, are also expected to play vital support roles.  
Staffing arrangements 
12.  The RPCO and the SPCO will have the professional staff listed in Table 2, and will also be able 
to  engage,  under  technical  assistance,  subject  matter  specialists  as  needed  to  supplement  the 
resources of the core team:  
Table 2: Professional staff positions at the RPCO and SPCO 
RPCO staff 
SPCO staff 
  Regional Project Coordinator 
  Agribusiness Promotion Coordinator 
  Rural Infrastructure Coordinator 
  Rural Institutions Coordinator 
  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Coordinator 
  Knowledge Management and Communication (KMC) 
  State Project Coordinator 
  Agribusiness Promotion Officer 
  Rural Infrastructure Officer 
  Rural Institution/Gender and Youth Officer 
  M&E Officer 
  KMC Officer 
Coordinator 
  Project Financial Controller 
  Regional Project Accountant 
  Procurement Coordinator 
  Administration and Logistics Officer 
  Project Internal Auditor* 
  State Project Accountant 
  State Finance Officer 
  Procurement Officer 
  Administration and Logistics Officer 
  State Project Internal Auditor* 
98 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
RPCO subject matter specialists (consultants)** 
SPCO subject matter specialists (consultants)** 
  Rural Finance 
  Gender and Youth 
  Climate and Environment 
  Nutrition and Food Security 
  Sustainable Agriculture 
  Project Management 
  Rural Finance 
  Gender and Youth 
  Climate and Environment 
  Nutrition and Food Security 
  Sustainable Agriculture 
  Project Management 
Note:  * 
** 
May be seconded from the Accountant General’s Office 
To be engaged as needed under technical assistance category 
13.  The RPCO and SPCO staff will be engaged on fixed term contracts which are renewable during 
the  life  of  the  project  based  on  satisfactory  performance.  Staff  selection  will  be  undertaken  on  a 
competitive basis. Draft terms of reference of the staff are in Annex 1.  
99 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Annex 1: Terms of reference of RPCO and SPCO staff 
RPCO1: Regional Project Coordinator (RPC) 
Main responsibilities 
The Regional  Project Coordinator  will be responsible  for overall management and implementation of 
LIFE in the Niger Delta region. He/She will be responsible for managing the team of specialists within 
the  Regional  Project  Coordination  Office  (RPCO)  and  ensuring  their  performance  and  that  of  the 
incubators  and  service  providers  engaged  to  implement  the  project  activities.  A  key  element  of  the 
position will be to ensure that the project achieves its development objective and outcomes. The RPC 
will be under a performance based renewal contract and will report to the National Steering Committee 
(NSC) through the Technical Support Committee (TSC). 
Specific duties  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Head the Secretariat of the Technical Support Committee  
Promote team work of the specialists for effective project implementation 
Coordinate and supervise implementation by the participating states  
Convene  monthly  meetings  of  the  RPCO  staff  and  bi-monthly  review  meetings  of  the  State 
Project Coordination Office (SPCO) staff 
Manage  and  motivate  the  project  staff  at  regional  and  state  levels  to  ensuring  consistent 
achievement of quality project results 
Ensure  quality  of  agri-enterprise  incubators,  service  providers  and  consultants  hired  for 
implementation. 
Consolidate  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgets  (AWPB)  of  the  SPCO  RPCO  and  submit 
through  the  TSC  to  the  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)  and  IFAD  for  approval  as  well  as 
monitor its implementation. 
Ensure  completion  of  procurement  process  in  full  compliance  with  IFAD  and  Federal 
Government of Nigeria procurement guidelines and procedure. 
Oversee contracting support staff and consultants 
Ensure timely delivery of quality reports – annual and semi-annual reports, financial statements, 
audit report, RIM data etc to NNDC, FMARD and IFAD. 
Coordinate  supervision  mission  and  ensure  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations 
(supervision and audit). 
Oversee  baseline,  impact  evaluation,  beneficiary  assessment,  midterm  review  and  final 
evaluation of the project. 
Select  service  providers  where  necessary  and  formulate  TORs  and  scope  of  work  for  the 
service  providers,  supervise,  monitor  and  certify  the  work  of  the  service  providers  for  various 
activities and assignments. 
Consolidate state progress reports and contribute to the finalization of periodic project progress 
reports of the RPCO.  
Qualification and experience  
a. 
Masters  or  higher  level  university  degree  in  Agriculture,  Agricultural  Economics,  Business 
Administration  or  other  related  discipline  with  sound  knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in 
agriculture,  agricultural  development,  agribusiness,  agri-enterprise  development  and  rural 
development. 
Minimum  of  10  years  post  qualification  experience  including  8  years  in  agriculture  or 
agribusiness management position in an international organization, private sector, development 
project. 
Proven  record  in  project  preparation,  coordination  and  supervision  of  agricultural  and 
agribusiness projects particularly agricultural value chains. 
Strong knowledge of working in Niger Delta 
Good writing skills and computer literacy.  
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The RPC will report directly to the TSC.  
100 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Duration:  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO2: Agribusiness Promotion Coordinator (APC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Agribusiness  Promotion  Coordinator  will  support  the  creation  of  jobs  using  the  Incubator-
Apprenticeship  Model,  focusing  on  the  identification,  selection,  training  and  retraining  of  potential 
youth  and  women  to  learn  and  start  profitable  agri-enterprises.  He/She  will:  (a)  be  involved  in  the 
development  of  agri-enterprises  business  plans  in  agricultural  commodity  production,  processing, 
storage and marketing; (b) coordinate the alignment of the CORY curriculum to project requirements, 
including  modules  on  village 
formation,  savings  mobilisation  and 
entrepreneurship  development  activities;  (c)  support  market  access  to  build  strong  agribusiness  and 
value  chain  orientation  to  selected  youth  and  women  in  the  project  area;  and  (d)  explore  capacity 
development  of  Agriculture  Value  Chain  Financing  models  along  production,  processing  and 
marketing. 
level  enterprise  group 
Specific duties 
a.  Develop activities for the annual work plans and budget (AWPB). 
b.  Oversee the selection process of Incubators.  
c.  Coordinate the development of a training curriculum for incubators and apprentices. 
d.  Coordinate the development and implementation of bankable business plans, marketing 
promotion strategies, product branding and linkage to service providers and markets.  
e.  Lead and supervise the state level implementation of the incubator-apprenticeship model in 
empowering at least 900 incubators and 38,250 new agri-enterprises across the 9 states of the 
Niger Delta region (i.e., 100 incubators and 4,250 agri-enterprises per state). 
f.  Supervise the agri-enterprises to ensure their viability.  
g.  Coordinate the capacity assessment and strengthening of CADA and the formation of Commodity 
h. 
Alliance Forum at the state level. 
Identify and partner with private sector operators and CADA to avail farmers and other agri-
enterprises the opportunity to sustainably access information on market demand (demand, supply 
and price). 
i.  Give technical direction and management leadership in identifying actions and mechanisms for the 
promotion and use of value addition technologies including post-harvest handling, processing, 
storage and packaging. 
j.  Promote the deployment and adoption of friendly productive technologies and the application of 
efficient/effective, dynamic and profitable modules across the value chains. 
k.  Promote volume of produce for large markets, sustainability of identified farmers markets, 
reduction of cost of services, and develop cluster/entrepreneurs arrangements and contract 
arrangements between produce off-takers and weaned agri-entrepreneurs. 
l.  Develop MoU with all categories of service providers (mechanization, agro dealers, sprayers etc) 
on areas of engagement and line and terms of support from the project. 
m.  Select service providers where necessary and formulate TORs and scope of work for the service 
providers. Supervise, monitor and certify the work of service providers for the various activities 
and assignments. 
n.  Design capacity building and technical assistance measures and activities in the areas of primary 
production, value addition, market access, business management, quality control and 
standardization. 
o.  Facilitate linkages for enhanced access to financial services for project beneficiaries, including 
trader credit, contract farming, inventory credit, commercial/development bank credit and 
insurance.   
p.  Consolidate state progress reports and contribute to the drafting of periodic project progress 
reports. 
Qualification and experience 
101 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
(a) 
(b) 
Ph.D or Masters Degree in Agribusiness or Agricultural Economics or first degree in any of the 
Agriculture related disciplines and MBA or higher degree in Agricultural Economics, Economics, 
Marketing or related fields. 
Strong  background  and  practical  skills  in  business  development  and  marketing  and  at  least  5 
years  work  experience  on  issues  and  programmes  relating  to  agricultural  commodity 
production,  commodity  marketing,  agro-processing  and  value  chain  development  and  MSME 
promotion. 
(c)  Good negotiation, inter-personal and relational skills. 
(d) 
Previous  experience  in  working  with  government  and  private  sector  in  developing  agri-
enterprises/agribusiness will be a great advantage. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The APC will report directly to the RPC.  
Duration 
The  assignment  will  be  on  a  2  year  renewal  basis  following  a  successful  completion  of  1  year  of 
probationary period. 
=== 
RPCO3: Rural Infrastructure Coordinator (RIC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Rural  Infrastructure  Coordinator  will  provide  technical  guidance  and  backstop  the  state  Rural 
Infrastructure Officers, the LGA Engineers, and the beneficiaries and relate with relevant stakeholders 
involved in the implementation of market infrastructure development.  
Specific duties  
a. 
Ensure  that  the  preparatory  activities  and  implementation  of  the  infrastructure  interventions 
are in accordance with project dictates, progressing according to the works schedule. 
Develop  a  detailed  action  plan  to  implement  the  various  market  infrastructure  activities 
proposed in close consultation with the key stakeholders. 
Participate in the procurement of contractors and consultants and oversee their activities. 
Develop appropriate market infrastructure implementation manual. 
Prepare and also vet engineering designs and estimates for market infrastructure. 
Provide assistance and practical advice to participating states and LGAs in the design of   works 
and procurement of contractors, and supervision and monitoring of works. 
Develop  eligibility  criteria  for  the  selection  of  cost  efficient,  technically  achievable  and 
sustainable market infrastructure at the state level. 
Identify  the  skill  gap  of  engineers  and  other  implementers  and  develop  capacity  building 
activities to bridge the gap. 
Develop  an  operation  and  maintenance  structure/system  for  market  infrastructure  with 
relevant partners. 
Prepare consolidated quarterly progress and monitoring reports. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
b. 
Advanced degree in civil engineering or similar discipline; A COREN registration is a must. 
Implementation  experience  in  a  broad  range  of  rural  infrastructure  (repair,  rehabilitation, 
construction and maintenance of: water supply, retention, drainage and sanitation systems and 
associated works such as washing facilities; small-scale irrigation works; agro  
and storage structures; other small buildings; and rural community access and feeder roads and 
small bridges and drainage structures). 
A  minimum  of  seven  years  field  experience  working  with  rural  communities  in  planning, 
budgeting, constructing, maintaining and monitoring rural - market infrastructure.  
Ability  to  communicate  with  and  present  clear  and  concise  instructions  and  guidelines  to 
village representatives with basic education levels.  
Experience with IFAD or international donor projects. 
processing 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
102 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The RIC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO4: Rural Institution Coordinator (RNC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Rural  Institution  Coordinator  will  facilitate  and  strengthen  the  understanding  of  community 
members and target agri-enterprise groups and commodity apex development associations (CADAs) 
to  fit  properly  into  the  project  framework.  The  aim  of  the  position  is  to  improve  the  knowledge  of 
enterprise  groups,  incubators  and  CADAs  to  adopt  agriculture  as  a  business  using  a  market-led 
approach.  
Specific duties 
a. 
Develop activities for the formation, strengthening and sustainability of relevant rural institutions 
for the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
Sensitize  existing  CADAs,  enterprise  groups,  traditional  rulers,  opinion  leaders,  youth  and 
women leaders, civil society and influential community members to foster understanding on the 
new direction of the project. 
Assist the enterprise groups to form CADA from elected representatives of each of the groups 
formed. 
Assist the CADAs to form Federated CADA at the state level from representative of each of the 
CADAs formed. 
Once  a  CADA  is  formed,  ensure  that  there  are  implementation/functional  committees  in  the 
CADA and take initiatives to strengthen the committees. 
Provide  guidance  for  the  annual  group/CADA  appraisal  exercise  to  identify  capacity  gaps  and 
assist in the strengthening of all groups/CADA. 
Develop  a  flexible  training  curriculum/manual  to  address  identified  gaps  in  developing  and 
strengthening the CADAs in consultation with the key stakeholders. 
Organize  training  for  all  enterprise  groups  on  group  participation  and  formation,  group 
leadership  and  dynamics.  The  activities  would  strengthen  skills  and  competencies  in  financial 
information,  product  marketing  strategies,  bulk 
and  business  management,  market 
procurement, distribution of critical inputs and advocate to improve enabling policy environment. 
Develop specific training for enterprise groups, group  leaders, CADAs, commodity committees 
on  producers  cluster  arrangement,  contract  farming,  operations  of  out-growers  scheme  in 
working with off-takers/processors. 
Continuously update the developed curriculum and training based on feedback to ensure that it 
is tailored to the needs of the groups and CADAs. 
Organize  cross-visits  annually  amongst  the  CADAs  to  facilitate  the  sharing  of  experiences 
between CADAs on best practice. 
Consolidate state progress reports and contribute to the drafting of periodic progress reports of 
the RPCO.  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
Advanced degree (MSc or higher preferred) in Extension, Rural Sociology, Agriculture or  other 
discipline with appropriate applied social science and agricultural experience. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
  A  minimum  of  10  years  working  experience  with  rural  communities  in  a  participatory 
  community development role. 
  Proven skill in organizing group training and learning exchanges. 
  Experience working with IFAD projects in Nigeria.  
  Excellent written and spoken English. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The RNC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
103 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO5: Monitoring and Evaluation Coordinator (MEC) 
Main responsibilities 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Coordinator will have  overall responsibility for operating, coordinating 
and  facilitating  the  planning  of  M&E  activities  related  to  project  implementation.  The  Coordinator  will 
oversee the design and operationalization of robust systems for PME and ensure its full linkage with 
other  information  and  knowledge  systems,  to  enable  the  project  to  be  flexible  and  responsive  to 
changing  circumstances.  The  Coordinator  will  also  assess  the  needs  and  capacity  for  PME  at  the 
regional level and accordingly design and implement capacity building activities. The Coordinator will 
work closely with relevant State M&E staff to ensure a coherent and collaborative approach to PME.  
Specific duties 
a. Develop activities for the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
b. Develop the project M&E system on the basis of the project’s Logical Framework taking into 
account government monitoring frameworks and IFAD RIMS methodology.  
c. Organize and supervise focused baseline surveys and assessments of beneficiaries at the 
beginning of the project to be undertaken by consultants. 
d. Prepare an M&E Plan, including the project’s monitoring formats.  
e. Establish indicators for outputs, outcomes and impact, monitor implementation processes and 
performance, and assess outputs and outcomes in line with government and IFAD RIMS 
guidelines.  
f.  Foster participatory planning and M&E by training and involving stakeholder groups. 
g. Oversee the design of a field-based system for project monitoring that incorporates the logical 
framework approach.  
h. Prepare essential data to be included in quarterly, semi-annual and annual reports. 
i.  Monitor financial and physical progress as well as reporting back to stakeholders to create a 
better learning environment; undertake project and thematic evaluations.  
j.  Integrate the M&E system into the overall project coordination and organization function and 
into an MIS. 
k. Ensure capture of intended impact as well as successes and failures; prepare reports and guide 
staff in preparing their progress reports.  
l.  Design and implement report formats so that all reports from service providers/implementing 
partners can be regularly and conveniently compiled/aggregated to contribute to the overall 
project results framework.  
m.  Organize and oversee annual review and planning workshops and preparation of AWPB. 
n. Inform and join supervision missions by screening and analysing reports.  
o. Select service providers where necessary and formulate TORs and scope of work for the 
service providers. Supervise, monitor and certify the work of service providers for the various 
activities and assignments. 
p. Consolidate state progress reports and contribute to the drafting of periodic project progress 
reports of the RPCO. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
  Masters  or  Higher  Level  University  Degree  in  Agricultural  Economics,  Social  sciences, 
  Economics, Statistics or other relevant field. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Proficient  in  the  use  of  databases  and  spread-sheets,  statistical  and  other  software  packages 
for  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  analysis  and  demonstrated  skills  in  quantitative  and 
qualitative analysis and data management. 
  Experience in analyzing complex programmes or policies. 
A  minimum  of  10  years’  proven  experience  working  in,  designing  and  implementing 
M&E/Results-based  management  and/or  project  management  in  areas  such  as  agriculture, 
natural resources, rural finance and policy matters.  
104 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
e. 
f. 
g. 
  Excellent written and spoken English. 
  Have thorough understanding of analytical tools.  
Have solid understanding of use of modern information and communication technology (ICT) in 
development  and  excellent  knowledge  of  computer-based  communications  tools,  in  particular 
web-and mobile-based technology.  
h. 
i. 
j. 
  Experience in facilitation, in particular of learning processes. 
  Strong written and oral communication skills. 
  Fluency in some of the local languages will be an asset. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The MEC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration 
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO6: Knowledge Management and Communication Coordinator (KMC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Knowledge  Management  and  Communications  Coordinator  will  have  overall  responsibility  for 
coordinating, supporting and facilitating Knowledge Management and Communication (KMC) activities 
related to project implementation at the regional level. The Coordinator will work closely with the KMC 
Advisor at the Central Communications Unit to provide leadership, guidance and capacity building in 
KMC.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Develop and manage the implementation of the KMC strategy of the project.  
Develop KMC activities for the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
Prepare  an  annual  KMC  plan  of  actions  for  enhancing  institutional  culture  of  learning  and 
knowledge-sharing.  
Facilitate knowledge sharing events and policy dialogues among project stakeholders. 
Ensure  that  innovative  experiences,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured,  synthesized, 
documented  and  shared  continuously  within  the  project,  within  the  relevant  stakeholders  and, 
with in-country partners, IFAD and other regional and international partners. 
Play  a  leading  role  in  knowledge  capitalization  and  develop  evidence  based  knowledge 
products and ensure wider dissemination.  
Develop  and  update  project  stakeholders  contact  list  and  mailing  lists  for  dissemination  of 
project knowledge products.  
Guide staff on information collection, processing, and information dissemination methods. 
Play  a  leading  role  in  external  relations,  building  relations  with  media  and  communications 
personnel, liaison and public relations.  
In close collaboration with the M&E Coordinator, ensure results from various studies  including 
quality  management,  reporting,  and  monitoring  and  evaluation  are  translated  into  evidence 
based knowledge products. 
Establish information technology requirements for effective implementation of the KMC strategy 
using social media and internet tools. 
Plan  and  coordinate  all  communication  and  advocacy  campaigns  through  mass  media, 
newsletters, stakeholder meetings, and other communication channels as appropriate. 
Assist in developing integrated information systems to enable M&E of project activities. 
Monitor and evaluate performance of the project’s KMC strategy. 
Contribute to the drafting of periodic project progress reports. 
Maintain updated cataloguing of the project’s knowledge assets/online resource materials. 
Undertake other KMC tasks as required. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
Higher  level  university  degree  or  equivalent  in  a  field  related  to  communications,  journalism, 
development or a related discipline. 
105 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Minimum  of  five  years  of  experience  in  information,  knowledge  management,  and/or 
development  communication,  preferably  in  the  agriculture  and  rural  development  sector. 
Experience in media relations, ICT and extension will be an advantage. 
Proven ability in documentation and advocacy; demonstrated capacity to develop and oversee 
implementation  of  documentation  of  programme  results,  presentations,  communication  and 
reporting skills. 
Strong oral and written communication skills; experience of interacting with a variety of internal 
and external stakeholders. 
High  degree  of  motivation,  initiative,  independence,  reliability,  adaptability,  and  professional 
maturity; and places a premium on “getting things done”. 
Strong project management and coordination skills; able to handle multiple tasks and balance 
f. 
priorities with various stakeholders 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The KMC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO7: Project Financial Controller (PFC) 
Main responsibilities 
Within  the  framework  of  the  project  design  report  and  loan/grant  agreements,  the  project  Financial 
Controller  is  responsible  for  the  financial  and  administrative  management  of  the  project,  including 
accounting, budgeting , financial reporting, internal controls, auditing arrangement, flow of funds and 
the efficient management of project resources.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and 
handbook,  IFAD  guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  and  the  Letter  to 
the Borrower (LTB) as well as the Project Financial Procedures Manual. 
Consolidate  and  prepare  together  with  the  Regional  Project  Coordination  Office  (RPCO)  team 
and M&E Coordinator, the annual work plan and budget (AWPB) and the budget and financing 
plan. 
Develop  and  maintain  an  efficient  accounting  system  and  reliable  internal  control  procedures 
(including authorization levels, segregation of duties etc.) and guidelines for financial reporting 
and recordkeeping. 
Prepare,  review  and  monitor  the  project’s  budget,  including  financing  plan,  procurement  plan 
(together  with the  Procurement Officer), and staff development plan (together with the training 
focal point). 
Prepare/verify all withdrawal applications for submission to IFAD, and ensure the availability of 
funds  for  all  planned  activities.  Manage  the  project’s  bank  accounts,  approve  and  co-sign  all 
payments. 
Ensure  payments  are  authorized,  and  recorded  in  the  accounting  system  correctly  and  in  a 
timely manner. 
Ensure  all  expenditure  items:    i)  meet  the  eligibility  criteria  as  defined  in  the  IFAD  financing 
agreement,  ii)  are  supported  by  adequate  documentation  (invoice,  contracts,  evidence  of 
payments etc.).  
Ensure  all  project  records  are  properly  filed  in  a  systematic  way  and  that  proper  back  up  is 
maintained. 
Ensure  the  timely  preparation  of    quarterly  and  annual  consolidate  financial  reports  in  agreed 
format  including:  i)  sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement,  including  incurred  expenditures  by 
component,  expenditure  category  and  financier,  ii)  variance  report  (actual  versus  budgeted 
expenditures),  iii)  designated  account  reconciliation  statement,    iv)  Withdrawal  application  -
statement of expenditure, v) fixed asset register, vi) contract register etc., for submission to the 
Regional Technical Committee, Lead Project Agency and IFAD. 
106 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
r. 
Ensure monthly bank account reconciliations are prepared in a timely manner and reconciliation 
items are promptly followed up on. 
Lead  the  process  of  contracting  an  external  audit  firm  to  conduct  an  independent  audit  of  the 
annual  project  accounts,  ensuring  that  annual  audits  are  carried  out  within  the  specified 
timeframe and ensuring the project auditors have access to all necessary files. 
Monitor the financial performance of the State Project Coordination Offices (SPCOs) including i) 
justification of advances, reporting of expenditures, financial reporting, audit process and audit 
findings. 
Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct authority. 
Review and regularly update the Financial Procedures Manual of the project. 
Develop together with the project accountants the accounting manual of the SPCOs. 
Organize and supervise RPCO office, assets, including tagging of all assets, maintaining an up 
to date fixed asset register and conducting an annual inventory exercise. 
Take active part in the consolidation of progress reports for submission to NDDC, IFAD, FMoF, 
FMPB and the participating states. 
Undertake any other activities assigned by the Regional Project Coordinator.  
Qualification and experience 
a. 
b. 
Minimum of 10 years’ post-professional experience, at least 8 of which must be in management. 
A professional qualification (FCA, ACA, FCNA, CNA) with at least 15 years of post- qualification 
experience, at least 8 of which must be in management. 
A  minimum  of  8  years’  experience  in  management  team  of  IFAD-assisted  or  donor  funded 
projects. 
Good interpersonal relationship, transparently honest, team worker and possess ability to train 
counterparts; and must be healthy and fit to undertake extensive filed visits. 
Member  of  Financial  Reporting  Council  of  Nigeria,  with  strong  working  knowledge  of  both 
national and international accounting procedures. 
Strong computer skills, spread-sheets, and other relevant accounting packages. 
f. 
g.  Working knowledge of banking and financial control procedures. 
h. 
Excellent written and spoken English. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The PFC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
RPCO8: Regional Project Accountant (RPA) 
The Regional Project Accountant is responsible for supporting the Project Financial Controller (PFC) in 
the effective discharge of his/her functions. 
Specific duties 
a. 
Master  IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and 
handbook,  IFAD  guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  and  the  Letter  to 
the Borrower (LTB) as well as the Project Financial Procedures Manual.  
Assist the PFC in the implementation of a sound financial management system as described in 
the Project Financial Procedures Manual. 
Prepare  transaction  vouchers,  input  all  transactions  into  the  RPCO  accounting  system  before 
submission to the PFC for approval and make sure all necessary supporting documentation is 
made available and filed in a systematic way. 
Process all payments, ensuring that project financial procedures are strictly adhered to. 
Process monthly payroll, payment of salaries to staff and project contributions. 
Assist the PFC in the preparation of withdrawal applications. 
Prepare cash flow forecasts as required. 
Monitor  financial  returns  from  implementing  partners  and  State  Project  Coordination  Offices 
(SPCOs), including periodic visits to their offices. 
Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
107 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
r. 
s. 
Prepare quarterly and annual financial reports in agreed format including: i) sources and uses of 
funds  statement,  including  incurred  expenditures  by  component,  expenditure  category  and 
financier,  ii)  variance  report  (actual  vs  budgeted  expenditures),  iii)  designated  account 
reconciliation  statement,  iv)  Withdrawal  application-statement  of  expenditure,  v)  fixed  asset 
register, vi) contract register for submission to the Technical Support Committee, Lead Project 
Agency and IFAD. 
Maintain  a  well-organized  and  up-to-date  filing  system for  accounting  and  financial  records  as 
well as a fixed asset tagging system. 
Perform physical inventory of project assets each year.  
Assist the PFC in the preparation of the accounting manual of the RPCO. 
Provide  assistance  to  the  external  auditors  as  required,  and  facilitate  that  the  project  auditors 
have access to all necessary files.  
Make sure all expenditure items:  i) meet the eligibility criteria as defined in the IFAD financing 
agreement,  ii)  are  supported  by  adequate  documentation  (invoice,  contracts,  evidence  of 
payments etc.).  
Ensure all project records are properly filed in a systematic way and maintain proper back up. 
Prepare  monthly  bank  account  reconciliations  are  prepared  in  a  timely  manner  and 
reconciliation items are promptly followed up on. 
Liaise  with  the  SPCOs  to  ensure  timely  delivery  of  justification  of  advances,  reporting  of 
expenditures, and financial reports, as well as follow-up on audit process and audit findings. 
Undertake any other activities assigned by the RPC and the PFC.  
Qualification and experience 
a. 
Same as for the PFC except for minimum of 8 years’ post-professional experience.  
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The RPA will report to the PFC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-year 
probational period. 
=== 
RPCO9: Procurement Coordinator (PRC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Procurement  Coordinator  will  be  responsible  for  the  management  of  project  activities  in 
accordance  with  relevant  National  and  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines,  and  building  the  capacity  of 
State Procurement Officers and other project implementing partners.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
Formulate a project procurement strategy. 
Ensure  that  procurement  is  carried  out  such  that  transparency,  integrity,  economy,  openness, 
fairness, competition and accountability remain the cardinal target.  
Facilitate  the  preparation  as  well  as  update  and  review  of  the  yearly  procurement  plan  while 
ensuring that procurement activities are carried out as per the approved procurement plan. 
Prepare and consolidate Quarterly Tracking Procurement Plan. 
Maintain and regularly update the contract register and No Objection tracker. 
Prepare and periodically update the data base of vendors, suppliers and consultants. 
Facilitate  the  preparation  of  technical  specifications/terms  of  reference  for  procurement  of 
goods, works and services. 
Handle issues relating to contract negotiation, complaints and debriefing. 
Prepare bidding documents, tender notices, and invitations for bids. 
Receive, open and evaluate bids, as well as finalize contracts. 
Administer contracts to ensure compliance with the contracts conditions, payment terms. 
Maintain all the records relating to procurement. 
Prepare procurement implementation reports in accordance  with the reporting requirements of 
IFAD and the Government and consolidated reports for the entire project. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
108 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
Provide guidance and supervision to the states, the beneficiaries and service providers.  
Ensure  that  the  procurement  capacity  of  the  states,  beneficiaries  and  service  providers  is 
developed.  
Organise and conduct training for procurement staff and participants. 
Carry out any other duties assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Masters or higher level University degree in Engineering, Finance, Management, Purchasing or 
equivalent qualifications. 
Minimum of 7 years of relevant post qualification experience. 
Strong  background  and  experience  in  successfully  carrying  out  procurement  using  similar 
procedures, methods, specifications etc. 
Knowledge  (at  least  5  years)  of  internationally  accepted  ‘best  practice’  systems,  the  Nigerian 
Procurement Laws and Guidelines and experience in working with donor funded projects. 
Good writing skills and good computer skills. 
Demonstrate team spirit, good interpersonal and conflict management skills. 
Integrity and confidentiality. 
Interpersonal and time management skills. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The PRC will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
RPCO10: Administration and Logistics Officer (ADM) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Administration  and  Logistics  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  setting  up  and  streamlining 
administrative procedures as provided in the Project Administrative Manual.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Facilitate the development of the Project Administrative Manual. 
Set up the administrative system as provided in the Project Administrative Manual. 
Advise the RPC in all areas of administration as well as participate in administrative planning in 
consultation with management staff to support project activities. 
Liaise  with  other  project  staff,  IFAD  projects  and  ICO  Nigeria  for  compliance  with  respect  to 
communities of practice. 
Set up employee database and prepare other reports stipulated in the Manual. 
Initiate recruitment procedures of both local staff and consultants, and raise contracts. 
Manage performance evaluation, reward, training and leave of staff. 
Manage  travel  arrangements,  all  logistics  arrangements  for  project  activities,  vehicles 
maintenance and fuel log, retirement of claims. 
Manage grounds/offices and timely maintenance of infrastructure and equipment. 
Ensure compliance with security guidelines. 
Undertake other related duties as may be required.  
Qualification and experience 
a. 
in  business,  public  administration  or  human  resources 
University  degree  (Bachelors) 
management. 
A  minimum  of  5  years'  working  experience  in  Administration  or  3  years'  experience  and  a 
Master's degree in the above fields. 
Must have experience in human resource management and coordination of trainings. 
Ability to motivate, inspire and achieve results. 
Integrity and confidentiality. 
Planning, problem solving and decision-making skills are required.  
Excellent  written  and  verbal  skills  in  English  and  knowledge  of  at  least  one  indigenous 
language.  
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
109 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The ADM will report directly to the RPC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
RPCO11: Project Internal Auditor (PIA) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Project  Internal  Auditor  shall  ascertain  and  evaluate  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  the 
financial management and internal control framework; ensure compliance with the IFAD and Federal 
Government  project  Financing  Agreement,  IFAD  disbursement  procedures,  Project  Implementation 
Manual,  etc;  identify  critical  weaknesses  if  any,  and  areas  for  improvement;  and  provide  the  project 
coordination  team  at  the  regional  and  state  levels  with  timely  information  and  recommendations  on 
financial management aspects of the project to enable timely corrective actions. 
Specific duties  
a. 
Carry  out  audit  of  the  project  in  accordance  with  international  standards  of  auditing,  and 
including  such  tests  and  controls  as  the  auditor  considers  necessary.  The  audit  will  cover  the 
project regional office, state and beneficial levels.  
Ensure that the accounting and financial management systems remain reliable and effective in 
design  and  assess  the  extent  to  which  they  are  being  followed.  Ascertain  the  reliability  of 
integrity, controls, security  and effectiveness of the operations of the computerized accounting 
system. 
Identify  constraints,  if  any,  in  the  timely  updating  of  the  accounting  system  and  in  adhering  to 
the  internal  control  procedures  including  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  the  Financial 
Procedures Manual. 
Review  the  adequacy  of  the  systems  established  to  ensure  compliance  with  policies,  plans 
procedures,  laws,  and  regulations  and  establish  whether  the  project  is  in  fact  in  compliance. 
Check and report on compliance with the IFAD Financing Agreement covenants. 
Review  the  efficacy,  adequacy  and  application  of  accounting,  financial  and  operating  controls 
and thereby ensure the accuracy of the books of accounts. Review the accuracy and timeliness 
of the quarterly financial reports produced by the project and confirm whether these are used by 
the management for decision making. 
Verify that the system of internal check is effective in  design and operation in order to  ensure 
frauds,  misappropriations  and 
the  prevention  of  and  early  detection  of  defalcations, 
misapplications. 
Evaluate  the  Internal  Control  System  in  operation  to  ensure  effectiveness,  efficiency  and 
economy. 
Check  the  segregation  of  duties  in  the  project  such  as:  i)  authorization  and  approval,  ii) 
recording, 
following  operating  costs:  maintenance  of 
vehicles/equipment,  fueling,  motor  license/insurance,  utilities  (water,  electricity,  telephone), 
office rent and rates, salaries and allowances of project support staff, insurance. 
Check  that  the  Statements  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  submitted  to  IFAD  reconcile  with  the 
expenditures reported under the quarterly and yearly financial reports. Duly record any ineligible 
expenditure noted during the review. 
Ensure  reconciliation  of  bank  statements  and  accounts  is  regularly  carried  out  on  a  monthly 
basis and necessary corrections on accounts of banks/debits and stale transactions accounted 
for concurrently. 
Conduct  an  independent  appraisal  of  all  the  project's  activities.  Consider  the  adequacy  of 
controls  to  ensure  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  implementation  of  project 
activities. 
Confirm  that  IFAD  no-objections  given  to  the  RPCO  and  the  state  offices  for  incurring 
expenditure under the project are used for purpose intended. 
Undertake  procurement  audits 
transparently  as  per 
procedures/thresholds.  Verify  that  all  the  goods,  works  and  services  procured  and  issues  are 
to  ensure  procedures  are  done 
iii)  documentation  on 
the 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
110 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
supported  by  valid  receipt  and  documents  including  IFAD  no-objection  and  that  a  register  of 
contracts and contract monitoring forms are maintained and up-to-date. 
Ensure that adequate records are maintained regarding the assets created and assets acquired 
by  the  project,  including  details  of  cost,  identification  and  location  of  assets;  and  that  the 
physical  verification  of  assets  is  being  carried  out  with  due  diligence  and  an  annual  inventory 
report is duly issued. Physical verification of assets and other inventories would be taken up as 
deemed necessary by the auditor in respect of all goods. 
Ensure that disbursements between RPCO and SPCOs are reconciled and accounted for. 
n. 
o. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
A minimum of First Degree or Higher National Diploma in Accounting with a minimum working 
experience of 10 years, 6 years in IFAD-assisted project. 
A professional certificate in Accounting or Auditing is an added advantage. 
Good communication and training skills. 
Proven track record in internal auditing.  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e.  Working experience of the Niger Delta area is a plus. 
f. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the RPCO located in Port Harcourt .The PIA will report directly to the RPC. 
Ability to motivate, inspire and achieve results will be an added advantage.  
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
111 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
b. 
c. 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
SPCO1: State Project Coordinator (SPC) 
Main responsibilities 
The  State  Project  Coordinator  will  be  responsible  for  overall  coordination  and  implementation  of  the 
project in the State. He/She will be responsible for managing the team of subject matter officers within 
the  State  Project  Coordination  Office  (SPCO)  and  ensuring  their  performance  to  implement  project 
activities.  A  key  element  of  the  position  is  to  ensure  that  the  project  achieves  its  developmental 
objectives.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Head the Secretariat of the State Project Steering Committee. 
Promote teamwork of the project officers for implementation. 
Convene regular meetings with the staff of SPCO. 
Manage  and  motivate  the  project  staff  to  ensure  consistent  achievement  of  quality  project 
results. 
Ensure  quality  of  service  provided  by  the  agri-enterprise  incubators,  service  providers,  and 
consultants hired for implementation. 
Ensure timely delivery of quality reports (AWPB, semi-annual reports, financial statement, audit 
report, RIM data etc) to the Regional Project Coordination Office (RPCO). 
Select  service  providers  where  necessary  and  formulate  TORs  and  scope  of  work  for  the 
service  providers,  supervise,  monitor  and  certify  the  work  of  service  providers  for  the  various 
activities and assignment. 
Ensure completion of procurement process in full compliance with IFAD and FGN procurement 
guidelines and procedure. 
Qualifications and experience 
a. 
Bachelor  or  higher  level  university  degree  in  Agriculture,  Agricultural  Economics,  Business 
Administration or other related discipline with knowledge of contemporary issues in agriculture, 
agribusiness and rural development. 
Minimum  of  10  years  post  qualification  experience  including  at  least  5  years  in  agriculture  or 
agribusiness management position in a development project. 
Good writing skills and computer literacy. 
Reporting and location     
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SPC will report directly to the Regional 
Project Coordinator (RPC) on technical issues and administratively to the Programme Manager of the 
ADP. 
Duration 
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO2: State Agribusiness Promotion Officer (SAPO) 
Main responsibilities  
The  State  Agribusiness  Promotion  Officer  will  support  the  creation  of  jobs  using  the  Incubator-
Apprenticeship Model. He/she will be actively involved in the development of agri-enterprise business 
plan in agricultural commodity production, processing, storage and marketing; support market access 
to  build  strong  agribusiness  and  value  chain  orientation  to  selected  youth  and  women  in  the  project 
areas; and explore capacity development of agriculture value chain financing models.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Develop activities for the State annual work plan and budgets (AWPB). 
Oversee the selection process of incubators and apprentices within the state. 
Coordinate the development of a training curriculum for incubators and apprentices.  
Coordinate  the  development  and  implementation  of  bankable  business  plan,  marketing 
strategies, product development and branding; and, linkage to service providers and markets. 
Lead and supervise the implementation of the incubator-apprenticeship model in empowering at 
least 100 incubators and 4,250 new agri-enterprises in the state. 
112 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
Effectively  supervise  and  ensure  that  the  objective  of  this  intervention  is  achieved  and  ensure 
the viability and profitability of the enterprises. 
Coordinate  the  capacity  assessment  and  strengthening  of  CADA  and  the  formation  of  a 
Commodity Alliance Forum at the LGA level. 
Identify  and  partner  with  private  sector  operators  and  CADA  to  avail  farmers  and  other  agri- 
enterprises  the  opportunity  to  sustainably  access  market  information  (demand,  supply  and 
price). 
Give technical direction and management leadership in identifying actions and mechanisms for 
the  promotion  and  use  of  value  addition  technologies  including  post-harvest  handling, 
processing, storage and packaging. 
Promote the deployment and adoption of friendly productive technologies and the application of 
efficient/effective, dynamic and profitable modules across the value chains. 
Promote  volume  of  produce  for  large  markets,  sustainability  of  identified  farmer  markets, 
reduction  of  cost  of  services,  and  develop  cluster/entrepreneurs  arrangements  and  contract 
arrangements between produce off-takers and weaned agri-entrepreneurs. 
Develop  MoU  with  all  categories  of  service  providers  (mechanization,  agro  dealers,  sprayers, 
extension, etc) on areas of engagement and line and terms of support from the project. 
Select  service  providers  where  necessary  and  formulate  TORs  and  scope  of  work  for  the 
service  providers.  Supervise,  monitor  and  certify  the  work  of  service  providers  for  the  various 
activities and assignments. 
Design  capacity  building  and  technical  assistance  measures  and  activities  in  the  areas  of 
primary  production,  value  addition,  market  access,  business  management,  quality  control  and 
standardization. 
Produce state progress reports and contribute to the drafting of periodic project progress report. 
Qualification and experience 
a.  Masters degree in Agribusiness or Agricultural Economics or first degree in any of the Agriculture 
related disciplines and MBA or higher degree in Agricultural Economics, Economics, Marketing or 
related fields. 
b.  Strong  background  and  practical  skills  in  business  development  and  marketing  and  at  least  3 
years  work experience  on  issues and programmes relating to  agricultural commodity production, 
commodity marketing, agro-processing and value chain development and MSME promotion. 
c.  Good negotiation, inter-personal and relational skills. 
d.  Previous  experience  in  working  with  government  and  private  sector  in  developing  agri-
enterprises/agribusiness will be a great advantage.  
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SAPO will report directly to the SPC.  
Duration 
The  assignment  will  be  on  a  2  year  renewal  basis  following  a  successful  completion  of  1  year  of 
probationary period. 
SPCO3: State Rural Infrastructure Officer (SRIO) 
Main responsibilities 
The  State  Rural  Infrastructure  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  the  onsite  management  of  market 
infrastructure development in the state, working closely with relevant stakeholders. 
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
Ensure that the preparatory activities and implementation of the infrastructure interventions are 
progressing according to the works schedule. 
Identify  cost  efficient  and  sustainable  market  infrastructure  using  the  eligibility  criteria 
developed. Relevant agencies such as the State Ministry of Works, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry,  Ministry  of  Water  Resources,  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  River  Basin  Development 
113 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
the 
interventions.  The  above-mentioned  key  stakeholders  and 
Authorities (RBDAs) where applicable, Water Board, and the LGAs should be consulted in this 
process. 
Ensure  that  contracted  consultants  prepare  the  LGA  level  action  plans  which  identify  critical 
recommend  appropriate  market 
constraints/challenges,  opportunities  available  and 
infrastructure 
identified 
beneficiaries should be part of this process. 
Supervise  the  construction/rehabilitation  of  feeder  roads,  the  construction  of  agro-processing 
and market infrastructure (including water supply systems and related ancillary works) and the 
construction  of  stores,  flood  protection  dykes  and  rehabilitation  of  irrigation  schemes 
implemented by contractors. 
Ensure  the  timely  procurement  of  agro-processing  equipment  and  machineries  for  agro 
processing buildings. 
Oversee training and capacity building activities related to the market infrastructure. 
Establish asset/infrastructure management and maintenance procedures. These should ensure 
that proper O&M is carried out by the beneficiaries using the developed procedures supported 
by the LGA Engineers. 
Supervise/co-supervise the LGA Engineers and the support staffs working with them. 
Provide  technical  guidance  to  participating  institutions  on  the  approach  of  carrying  out  their 
functions related to the infrastructural aspects of the project. 
Prepare  measurement  of  works  and  certificate  of  payment  for  all  infrastructure  activities  as 
supported by the LGA Engineers. 
Undertake other related activities as directed by the SPC.  
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
Qualification and experience  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
processing technologies contributing to rural development. 
A minimum of B.Sc university degree in Civil Engineering. 
A COREN certification is a must. 
At least five years of practical experience in agricultural and/or rural development projects. 
Strong  background  of  practical  experience  in  agricultural  related  civil  works  and  agro-
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SRIO will report directly to the SPC.  
Duration 
The  assignment  will  be  on  a  2  year  renewal  basis  following  a  successful  completion  of  1  year  of 
probationary period. 
=== 
SPCO4: State Rural Institution/Gender and Youth Officer (SIGY) 
Main responsibilities 
=== 
SPCO5: State Monitoring and Evaluation Officer (SMEO) 
Main responsibilities 
The  State  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  operating,  coordinating  and 
facilitating  the  planning  of  project  M&E  activities  at  the  state  level.  He/she  will  oversee  the 
operationalization  of  the  project  PME  system  and  ensure  its  full  linkage  with  other  information  and 
knowledge  systems,  to  enable  the  project  to  be  flexible  and  responsive  to  changing  circumstances. 
The  Officer  will  also  assess  the  needs  and  capacity  for  PME  at  the  state  level  and  design  and 
implement  capacity  building  activities.  The  Officer  will  work  closely  with  the  LGA  Desk  Officers  to 
ensure a coherent and collaborative approach to PME at the state level.  
Specific duties 
114 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
a.  Develop activities for the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
b.  Organize  and  supervise  focused  baseline  surveys  and  assessments  of  beneficiaries  at  the 
beginning of the project to be undertaken by consultants. 
c.  Prepare an M&E Plan, including the project’s monitoring formats.  
d.  Establish  indicators  for  outputs,  outcomes  and  impact,  monitor  implementation  processes  and 
performance,  and  assess  outputs  and  outcomes  in  line  with  government  and  IFAD  RIMS 
guidelines.  
e.  Foster participatory planning and M&E by training and involving stakeholder groups. 
f.  Prepare essential data to be included in quarterly, semi-annual and annual reports. 
g.  Monitor financial and physical progress as well as reporting back to stakeholders to create a better 
learning environment; undertake project and thematic evaluations.  
h.  Ensure capture of intended impact as well as successes and failures; prepare reports and  guide 
i. 
staff in preparing their progress reports. 
Implement report formats so that all reports from service providers/implementing partners can be 
regularly  and  conveniently  compiled/aggregated  to  contribute  to  the  overall  project  results 
framework. 
j.  Organize  and  oversee  state  level  annual  review  and  planning  workshops  and  preparation  of 
AWPB. 
Inform and join supervision missions by screening and analysing reports. 
k. 
l.  Select service providers where necessary and formulate TORs and scope of work for the service 
providers.  Supervise,  monitor  and  certify  the  work  of  service  providers  for  the  various  activities 
and assignments. 
m.  Contribute to the drafting and consolidation of the periodic project progress reports of the state.   
Qualification and experience 
a. 
  Masters  or  higher  level  university  degree  in  Agricultural  Economics,  Social  Sciences, 
  Economics, Statistics or other relevant field. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
Proficient  in  the  use  of  databases  and  spread-sheets,  statistical  and  other  software  packages 
for  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  analysis  and  demonstrated  skills  in  quantitative  and 
qualitative analysis and data management. 
  Experience in analyzing complex programmes or policies. 
implementing 
A  minimum  of  8  years’  proven  experience  working 
M&E/Results-based  management  and/or  project  management  in  areas  such  as  agriculture, 
natural resources, rural finance and policy matters.  
in,  designing  and 
  Excellent written and spoken English. 
  Have thorough understanding of analytical tools.  
Have solid understanding of use of modern information and communication technology (ICT) in 
development  and  excellent  knowledge  of  computer-based  communications  tools,  in  particular 
web-and mobile-based technology.  
h. 
i. 
j. 
  Experience in facilitation, in particular of learning processes. 
  Strong written and oral communication skills. 
  Fluency in the major local language(s) will be an asset. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SMEO will report directly to the SPC. 
Duration 
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO6: State Knowledge Management and Communication Officer (SKMO) 
Main responsibilities 
The  Knowledge  Management  and  Communications  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  coordinating, 
supporting  and  facilitating  Knowledge  Management  and  Communication  (KMC)  activities  related  to 
115 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
project implementation at the state level. The Officer will work closely with the KMC Coordinator at the 
RPCO and the KMC Advisor at the Central Communications Unit in implementing KMC activities.   
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Manage the implementation of the KMC strategy of the project at the state level.  
Develop KMC activities for the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
Prepare  an  annual  KMC  plan  of  actions  for  enhancing  institutional  culture  of  learning  and 
knowledge-sharing.  
Facilitate knowledge sharing events and policy dialogues among project stakeholders. 
Ensure  that  innovative  experiences,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured,  synthesized, 
documented and shared continuously within the project, within the relevant stakeholders.  
Play  a  leading  role  in  knowledge  capitalization,  develop  evidence  based  knowledge  products 
and ensure wider dissemination.  
Develop  and  update  project  stakeholders  contact  list  and  mailing  lists  for  dissemination  of 
project knowledge products.  
Guide staff on information collection, processing, and information dissemination methods. 
Play  a  leading  role  in  external  relations,  building  relations  with  media  and  communications 
personnel, liaison and public relations.  
In close collaboration with the State M&E Officer, ensure results from various studies including 
quality  management,  reporting,  and  monitoring  and  evaluation  are  translated  into  evidence 
based knowledge products. 
Establish information technology requirements for effective implementation of the KMC strategy 
using social media and internet tools. 
Plan  and  coordinate  communication  and  advocacy  campaigns 
newsletters, stakeholder meetings, and other communication channels as appropriate. 
Assist in developing integrated information systems to enable M&E of project activities. 
Monitor and evaluate performance of the project’s KMC strategy at the state level. 
Contribute to the drafting of periodic project progress reports. 
Maintain updated cataloguing of the project’s knowledge assets/online resource materials. 
Undertake other KMC tasks as required. 
through  mass  media, 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
Higher  level  university  degree  or  equivalent  in  a  field  related  to  communications,  journalism, 
development or a related discipline. 
Minimum  of  three  years  of  experience  in  information,  knowledge  management,  and/or 
development  communication,  preferably  in  the  agriculture  and  rural  development  sector. 
Experience in media relations, ICT and extension will be an advantage. 
Proven ability in documentation and advocacy; demonstrated capacity to develop and oversee 
implementation  of  documentation  of  programme  results,  presentations,  communication  and 
reporting skills. 
Strong oral and written communication skills; experience of interacting with a variety of internal 
and external stakeholders. 
High  degree  of  motivation,  initiative,  independence,  reliability,  adaptability,  and  professional 
maturity; and places a premium on “getting things done”. 
Strong project management and coordination skills; able to handle multiple tasks and balance 
f. 
priorities with various stakeholders 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SKMO will report directly to the SPC. 
Duration 
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO7: State Project Accountant (SPAC) 
Main responsibilities 
116 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Within  the  framework  of  the  project  design  report  and  loan/grant  agreements,  the  State  Project 
Accountant is responsible for the financial and administrative management of the project at the state 
level, including accounting, budgeting, financial reporting, internal controls, auditing arrangement, flow 
of funds and the efficient management of project resources. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Specific duties 
a. 
Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and 
handbook,  IFAD  guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  and  the  Letter  to 
the Borrower (LTB) as well as the Project Financial Procedures Manual. 
Draw up annual budgets and work plans for the SPCO. 
Ensure  that  all  accounting  records  are  maintained  in  line  with  approved  accounting  standards 
and in line with the IFAD requirements (IPSAS Cash). 
Ensure  that  monthly  bank  reconciliation  statements  are  prepared  for  all  bank  accounts  at  the 
state level.  
Ensure strict adherence to installed internal control systems for all areas of project operation in 
accordance with the project financial procedures manual. 
Liaise with the internal/external auditors and follow up any audit queries/management letters. 
Ensure payments are executed in a timely manner and that appropriate records of prepayments 
and advances are maintained.  
Make sure all expenditure items: i) meet the eligibility criteria as defined in the IFAD Financing 
Agreement,  ii)  are  supported  by  adequate  documentation  (invoice,  contracts,  evidence  of 
payments etc..). 
Ensure  the  timely  preparation  of  quarterly  and  annual  financial  reports  in  agreed  format 
including:  i)  sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement,  including  incurred  expenditures  by 
component,  expenditure  category  and  financier,  ii)  variance  report  (actual  versus  budgeted 
expenditures),  iii)  designated  account  reconciliation  statement,  iv)  withdrawal  application  -
statement  of  expenditure,  v)  fixed  asset  register,  vi)  contract  register  for  submission  to  the 
RPCO for consolidation. 
Perform physical inventory of project assets each year at the state level. 
Provide assistance to the external auditors as required. 
Undertake  other  duties/special  assignments  as  may  be  directed  by  the  SPC  or  the  Financial 
Controller at the RPCO. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
b. 
Minimum of 8 years’ post-professional experience, at least 6 of which must be in management. 
A professional qualification (FCA, ACA, FCNA, CNA) with at least 10 years of post-qualification 
experience, at least 6 of which must be in management. 
A  minimum  of  6  years’  experience  in  management  team  of  IFAD-assisted  or  donor  funded 
projects. 
Good interpersonal relationship, transparently honest, team worker and possess ability to train 
counterparts; and must be healthy and fit to undertake extensive filed visits. 
Member  of  Financial  Reporting  Council  of  Nigeria,  with  strong  working  knowledge  of  both 
national and international accounting procedures. 
Strong computer skills, spread-sheets, and other relevant accounting packages. 
f. 
g.  Working knowledge of banking and financial control procedures. 
h. 
Excellent written and spoken English. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SPAC will report directly to the SPC. 
Duration 
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO8: State Finance Officer (SFNO) 
Main responsibilities 
117 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
The  State  Finance  Officer  is  responsible  for  supporting  the  State  Project  Account  (SPAC)  in  the 
effective discharge of his/her functions. 
Specific duties 
a. 
 Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and 
handbook,  IFAD  guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  and  the  Letter  to 
the Borrower (LTB) as well as the Project Financial Procedures Manual. 
Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets at the state level. 
Assist the SPAC in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
Assist  the  SPAC  in  preparing  financial  reports,  including  monthly  funds  reconciliation,  and 
monthly expenditure statements. 
Responsible  for  collecting/issuing  receipts,  preparing  Payment  Vouchers  and  maintaining  the 
cash records in accordance with laid down procedures. 
Assist  the  SPAC  to  prepare  transaction  vouchers,  and  input  all  transactions  into  the  project 
accounting system before submission to the SPAC for approval. 
Assist the SPAC to process all payments, ensuring that SPCO procedures are strictly adhered 
to. 
Assist  the  SPAC  to  process  monthly  payroll,  payment  of  salaries  to  staff  and  project 
contributions. 
Assist the SPAC to prepare payment requests submitted to the SPCO. 
Assist the SPAC in preparing cash flow forecasts as required. 
Assist  in  reviewing  and  monitoring  financial  returns  from  implementing  partners,  including 
periodic visits to their offices. 
Collate data received from colleagues into the system. 
Provide assistance to the internal and external auditors as required. 
Perform secretarial duties, including maintenance of a well-organized filing system. 
Collect and review financial reports from PFMUs. 
Ensure invoices submitted for payment at the State level are promptly attended to. 
Ensure Petty Cash disbursements are appropriately and adequately documented. 
l. 
m.  Manage a well-organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records. 
n. 
o. 
p. 
q. 
r. 
s.  Write cheques. 
t. 
u. 
Qualifications and experience 
a. 
Update the Cheque Issued Register. 
Undertake any other activities assigned by the SPAC or the SPCO management. 
Minimum  of  8  years’  post-professional  experience,  at  least  6  of  which  must  be  in 
management. 
A  professional  qualification  (FCA,  ACA,  FCNA,  CNA)  with  at  least  10  years  of  post- 
qualification experience, at least 6 of which must be in management. 
A  minimum  of  6  years’  experience  in  management  team  of  IFAD-assisted  or  donor  funded 
projects. 
Good interpersonal relationship, transparently honest, team worker and possess ability to train 
counterparts; and must be healthy and fit to undertake extensive filed visits. 
Member  of  Financial  Reporting  Council  of  Nigeria,  with  strong  working  knowledge  of  both 
national and international accounting procedures. 
Strong computer skills, spread-sheets, and other relevant accounting packages. 
Working knowledge of banking and financial control procedures. 
Excellent written and spoken English. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SFNO will report directly to the SPAC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO9: State Procurement Officer (SPRO) 
118 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Main responsibilities 
The  State  Procurement  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  the  management  of  state  level  project 
procurement  activities,  in  accordance  with  relevant  National  and  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines. 
He/she will report directly to the State Project Coordinator.   
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
Specific duties 
a. 
Ensure  that  procurement  is  carried  out  such  that  transparency,  integrity,  economy,  openness, 
fairness, competition and accountability remain the cardinal target. 
Facilitate  the  preparation  as  well  as  update  and  review  of  the  yearly  procurement  plan  while 
ensuring that procurement activities are carried out as per the approved procurement plan. 
Prepare State Quarterly Tracking Procurement plan. 
Maintain and regularly update the contract register and No-objection tracker. 
Prepare and periodically update the state data base of vendors, suppliers and consultants. 
Facilitate  the  preparation  of  technical  specifications/  terms  of  reference  for  procurement  of 
goods, works and services. 
Prepare bidding documents, tender notices, and invitations for bids. 
Receive, open and evaluate bids, as well as finalize contracts. 
Administer contracts to ensure compliance with the contracts conditions, payment terms. 
 Maintain all the records relating to procurement. 
Handle issues relating to contract negotiation, complaints and debriefing. 
Prepare procurement implementation reports in accordance  with the reporting requirements of 
IFAD and the Government. 
Provide training, guidance and supervision to the beneficiaries and service providers. 
 Ensure that the procurement capacity of the beneficiaries and service providers is developed.  
Qualification and experience 
a. 
Minimum  university  degree  in  Engineering,  Finance,  Management,  Purchasing  or  equivalent 
qualifications. 
Minimum of 4 years of relevant post qualification experience. 
 Strong  background  and  experience  in  successfully  carrying  out  procurement  using  similar 
procedures, methods, specifications etc. 
Knowledge  (at  least  2  years)  of  internationally  accepted  ‘best  practice’  systems,  the  Nigerian 
Procurement  Laws  and  Guidelines  and  experience  in  working  with  IFAD  or  any  donor  funded 
projects.  
Good writing skills and good computer skills. 
Demonstrate team spirit, good interpersonal and conflict management skills. 
Integrity and confidentiality. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SPRO will report directly to the SPAC. 
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO10: State Administration and Logistics Officer (SALO) 
Main responsibilities 
The  State  Administration  and  Logistics  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  setting  up  and  streamlining 
administrative procedures at the state level as provided in the Project Administrative Manual.  
Specific duties 
a. 
b. 
d. 
Set up the administrative system as provided in the Project Administrative Manual. 
Advise the SPC in all areas of administration as well as participate in administrative planning in 
consultation with management staff to support project activities. 
Liaise  with  other  project  staff,  IFAD  projects  and  ICO  Nigeria  for  compliance  with  respect  to 
communities of practice. 
119 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
Set up employee database and prepare other reports stipulated in the Manual. 
Initiate recruitment procedures of both local staff and consultants, and raise contracts. 
Manage performance evaluation, reward, training and leave of staff. 
Manage  travel  arrangements,  all  logistics  arrangements  for  project  activities,  vehicles 
maintenance and fuel log, retirement of claims. 
Manage grounds/offices and timely maintenance of infrastructure and equipment. 
Ensure compliance with security guidelines. 
Undertake other related duties as may be required.  
Qualification and experience 
a. 
in  business,  public  administration  or  human  resources 
University  degree  (Bachelors) 
management. 
A  minimum  of  4  years'  working  experience  in  Administration  or  2  years'  experience  and  a 
Master's degree in the above fields. 
Must have experience in human resource management and coordination of trainings. 
Ability to motivate, inspire and achieve results. 
Integrity and confidentiality. 
Planning, problem solving and decision-making skills are required.  
Excellent  written  and  verbal  skills  in  English  and  knowledge  of  at  least  one  indigenous 
language.  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SALO will report directly to the SPC.   
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO11: State Project Internal Auditor (SPIA) 
Main responsibilities 
The State Project Internal Auditor shall ascertain and evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of the 
financial management and internal control framework; ensure compliance with the IFAD and Federal 
Government  project  Financing  Agreement,  IFAD  disbursement  procedures,  Project  Implementation 
Manual,  etc;  identify  critical  weaknesses  if  any,  and  areas  for  improvement;  and  provide  the  project 
coordination  team  at  the  regional  and  state  levels  with  timely  information  and  recommendations  on 
financial management aspects of the project to enable timely corrective actions.  
Specific Duties 
a. 
Carry out audit in accordance with international standards of auditing, including such tests and 
controls as the auditor considers necessary. The audit will cover implementing partners and the 
beneficial level. 
Ensure that the accounting and financial management systems remain reliable and effective in 
design  and  assess  the  extent  to  which  they  are  being  followed.  Ascertain  the  reliability  of 
integrity, controls, security  and effectiveness of the operations of the computerized accounting 
system. 
Identify  constraints,  if  any,  in  the  timely  updating  of  the  accounting  system  and  in  adhering  to 
the  internal  control  procedures  including  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  the  Financial 
Procedures Manual.  
Review  the  adequacy  of  the  systems  established  to  ensure  compliance  with  policies,  plans 
procedures,  laws,  and  regulations  and  establishing  whether  the  project  at  the  state  level  is  in 
fact  in  compliance.  Check  and  report  on  compliance  with  the  IFAD  Financing  Agreement 
covenants. 
Review  the  efficacy,  adequacy  and  application  of  accounting,  financial  and  operating  controls 
and thereby ensure the accuracy of the books of accounts; Review the accuracy and timeliness 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
120 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
the 
iii)  documentation  on 
of the quarterly Financial Reports produced by the project and confirm whether these are used 
by the management for decision making. 
Verify that the system of internal check is effective in  design and operation in order to  ensure 
frauds,  misappropriations  and 
the  prevention  of  and  early  detection  of  defalcations, 
misapplications. 
Evaluate  the  Internal  Control  System  in  operation  to  ensure  effectiveness,  efficiency  and 
economy. 
Check  the  segregation  of  duties  in  the  project  such  as:  i)  authorization  and  approval,  ii) 
recording, 
following  operating  costs:  maintenance  of 
vehicles/equipment,  fueling,  motor  license/insurance,  utilities  (water,  electricity,  telephone), 
office rent and rates, salaries and allowances of project support staff, Insurance.  
Check  that  the  Statements  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  submitted  to  IFAD  reconcile  with  the 
expenditures reported under the quarterly and yearly financial reports. Duly record any ineligible 
expenditures noted during the review.  
Ensure  reconciliation  of  bank  statements  and  accounts  is  regularly  carried  out  on  a  monthly 
basis and necessary corrections on accounts of banks/debits and stale transactions accounted 
for concurrently. 
Conduct  an  independent  appraisal  of  all  the  project's  activities.  Consider  the  adequacy  of 
controls  to  ensure  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  implementation  of  project 
activities. 
Confirm  that  IFAD  No-objections  given  to  the  RPCO  and  the  SPCO  for  incurring  expenditure 
under the project are used for purpose intended. 
Undertake  procurement  audits 
transparently  as  per 
procedures/thresholds.  Verify  that  all  the  goods,  works  and  services  procured  and  issues  are 
supported  by  valid  receipt  and  documents  including  IFAD  no-objection  and  that  a  Register  of 
Contracts and contract monitoring forms are maintained and up-to date. 
Ensure that adequate records are maintained regarding the assets created and assets acquired 
by  the  project,  including  details  of  cost,  identification  and  location  of  assets;  and  that  the 
physical  verification  of  assets  is  being  carried  out  with  due  diligence  and  an  annual  inventory 
report is duly issued. Physical verification of assets and other inventories would be taken up as 
deemed necessary by the auditor in respect of all goods. 
Ensure  reconciliation  of  disbursement  between  RPCO  and  the  SPCO  are  reconciled  and 
accounted for. 
to  ensure  procedures  are  done 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
m. 
n. 
o. 
Qualification and experience 
a. 
A  minimum  of  first  degree  or  Higher  National  Diploma  in  Accounting  with  a  minimum  working 
experience of 8 years, 4 years in IFAD-assisted project. 
A Professional Certificate in Accounting or Auditing is an added advantage. 
Good communication and training skills. 
Proven track record in internal auditing. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e.  Working experience of the Niger Delta area is a plus. 
f. 
Reporting and location 
The position will be in the SPCO housed in the State ADP. The SALO will report directly to the SPC.   
Ability to motivate, inspire and achieve results will be an added advantage.  
Duration  
The duration of the assignment will be on 2-year renewal basis following successful completion of a 1-
year probational period. 
=== 
SPCO12: Local Government Desk Officer (LGDO) 
The  Local  Government  Desk  Officer  will  facilitate  the  linkage  between  the  SPCO  and  community 
members including the targeted agri-enterprise groups/incubators and the CADAs. He/she will function 
as the project focal person in the LGA.  
Specific Duties 
121 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Facilitate  and  participate  in  the  sensitization  of  the  existing  CADAs,  enterprise  groups, 
traditional rulers, opinion leaders, youth and women leaders and influential community members 
to foster understanding on the new direction of LIFE project 
Promote  the  formation  of  the  new  CADAs  where  they  do  not  exist  which  will  serve  as  apex 
associations of enterprise groups formed at the community level. 
Participate in the monitoring and supervision of the project activities in the LGA. 
Assist  in  profiling  the  existing  and  new  agri-enterprise  groups,  incubators  and  CADAs  in  the 
LGA. 
Undertake any other assignment given by SPCO. 
e. 
Qualification and experience 
HND  or  Bachelor  in  Agriculture,  with  at  least  5  years’  experience  working  with  farmers  and  agri-
enterprises as an extension agent. Must be staff of the LGC Department of Agriculture. 
122 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Annex 1a: Indicative terms of reference for some technical assistance  
TASS1: 
Climate and Environment Specialist  
The need to mainstream climate change and environmental management into agricultural activities is 
becoming paramount to achieve sustainable agricultural development for food security under climate 
change.  This  entails  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity  and  incomes;  adapting  and 
building  resilience  to  climate  change;  and  reducing  and/or  removing  greenhouse  gases  emissions, 
where  possible.  Limited  awareness  of  climate  issues  and  the  key  changes  required  to  protect 
agriculture, poor management of land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources, inconsistency of the 
governance regimes, policies, legislations and financial mechanisms with the requirements for climate 
friendly  agricultural  practices,  inefficient  and  unsustainable  management  of  agriculture  and  natural 
resources e.g. soil, water, etc., lack of awareness of soil management practices, lack of research into 
climate smart agriculture, lack of awareness on climate change and its effects on agricultural practices 
and  poor  infrastructure  to  support  climate  smart  agriculture  have  been  some  of  the  factors  limiting 
climate and environmental-smart agriculture in Nigeria.  
The  Climate  and  Environment  Specialist  will  be  responsible  to  the  Regional  Project  Coordinator. 
He/she will be responsible for advice on the overall management of activities related to mainstreaming 
climate  change  adaptation  measures  and  sustainable  environmental  practices  into  the  production, 
processing  and  marketing  of  commodities  across  value  chain  clusters.  He/she  will:  (i)  develop  crop 
agro-ecological  suitability  map;  (ii)  carry  out  assessment  and  identification  of  negative  impacts  and 
opportunities  for  green  growth  in  commodities  clusters  and  value  chains;  (iii)  ensure  that 
recommended mitigation and adaptation measures (including no-regret measures) are adhered to and 
implement  opportunities  for  green  growth  along  the  value  chains  and  ensure  overall  environmental 
sustainability  of  the  project;  (iv)  work  closely  with  the  climate  data  generating  agency  and  the 
extension agency to make sure climate information is produced and delivered to farmers promptly to 
guide  scheduling  of  on-farm  activities;  and  (v)  develop  training  schedules  and  manuals  for  capacity 
building  purposes  for  related  institutions,  communities  and  farmer  groups  on  climate  change  and 
environment. 
Specific duties 
  Revise and update the draft project implementation manual (PIM) for support of climate change 
adaptation and environmental management 
  In close consultation with the Monitoring and Evaluation Coordinator, develop a framework for 
measuring resilience among the target beneficiaries including indicators to be monitored within 
the project’s M&E system. 
  Ensure the inclusion of climate resilience and environmental data collection in the baseline 
studies to be undertaken at the start of the project.  
  Carry out environmental and climate analysis and assessment of commodity clusters. 
  Prepare Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Basic Climate Risk Analysis. 
  Develop crop agro-ecological suitability maps.  
  Plan and create awareness for agri-enterpreneurs on environment and climate-smart practices 
in  all  aspects  of  the  enterprise  and  value  chain  opportunities  in  environmental  mitigation 
practices. 
  Assist farmers to undertake no-regret measures including agricultural insurance. 
  Ensure  adherence  to  environmental  standards  and  rules  and  discourage  production  and 
processing enterprises that are environmentally unsustainable.  
  Work closely with extension services and climate services to improve collaboration and climate 
information and technology updates delivery to farmers to guide on farm activities. 
  Assist states’ environmental agencies to carry out environmental assessment and monitoring.  
  Facilitate  training  of  intended  entrepreneurs  on  waste  valorization  and  integrated  pest  and 
agrochemicals management. 
  Develop  a  manual  for  environmental  training  on  sustainable  agricultural  enterprise  based  on 
state peculiarities. 
123 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
  Create  baseline  information  for  all  the  specific  project  locations/clusters  using  GPS,  Remote 
Sensing  and  field  surveys  during  project  inception  and  develop  an    environmental  information 
system within a GIS to monitor the project locations/clusters during the project life cycle. 
  Advise on the recruitment process for all the service providers and technical assistance required 
for the implementation of the climate adaptation and environmental management related 
activities, including the development of specific terms of reference, preparation of detailed 
work plans.  
  Advise on the selection of service providers where necessary and formulation of TORs and 
scope of work for the service providers. Supervise, monitor and certify the work of service 
providers for the various activities and assignments.  
Qualification and experience required 
  Advanced degree in agriculture, natural resource management (NRM) or rural development or 
related fields.  
  At  least  five  years  of  experience  in  the  field  of  Climate  Change  Adaptation,  Environment  and 
NRM with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
  Good  knowledge  and  experience  in  Geographic  Information  System  (GIS)  and  environmental 
database development and remote sensing. 
  Thorough  knowledge  of  climate  change  adaptation  and  environmental  safeguards  and 
familiarity with all the governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in 
the  policy  dialogue  on  climate  change  adaptation  and  environment  at  the  national  level  and 
regional levels. 
  Proven  experience  in  the  leadership  and  coordination  of  multidisciplinary  teams  and  in  the 
planning, implementation and monitoring of complex projects. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft Office packages 
etc). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
   
Note:  Preference would be given to a candidate with previous working experience in Climate Change 
Adaptation and Environmental related projects and working experience in the Niger Delta region. 
=== 
TASS2: 
Nutrition and Food Security Specialist   
The  Nutrition  and  Food  Security  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  the  facilitation  of  nutrition 
mainstreaming in project interventions in the Niger Delta region.  
Specific duties 
  Facilitate  the  analysis  of  nutrition  gaps  along  the  supply  chain  of  priority  commodities  in  the 
project locations. 
  Facilitate  the  periodic  food  survey  and  report  dissemination  on  Knowledge,  Attitude  and 
Practice (KAP). 
  In collaboration with selected relevant institutes and/or private sector, facilitate the promotion of 
value added products development and consumption among project beneficiaries. 
  Organize  nutrition publicity on project  nutrition activities; facilitate the development and testing 
of  appropriate  campaign  messages,  tools  and  materials  to  promote  nutrition  education,  social 
and behavioural change communication. 
  Facilitate  capacity  building  and  training  sessions  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture  for  project 
staff, implementers, nutrition officers, ADPs and extension workers.  
  In  collaboration  with  other  stakeholders  and  partners,  facilitate  the  activities  on  Home  Grown 
School Feeding Initiative, vegetable garden and integrated homestead food production.  
  Establish  and  maintain  working  relationships  with  the  line  ministries  (such  as  health,  gender, 
education) to build synergy in nutrition-sensitive interventions in LIFE. 
124 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
  Track  and  document  substantive  data  and  information  on  nutrition-sensitive  activities  and 
maintain  regular  technical  reports  on  nutrition  outcomes,  nutrition  indicators  and  food  security 
as linked to project interventions. 
  Work  collaboratively  with  the  technical  specialists  on  gender  and  climate  in  documenting 
interface on nutrition outcomes.  
Qualifications and experience required  
  Advanced university degree from an accredited institution in the field of  Human Nutrition, Food 
Science or equivalent in a field related to Food Security. 
  At least 3 years’ experience in, and demonstrated understanding of food and nutrition initiatives 
in rural development. Knowledge of the Niger Delta region is an advantage. 
  Experience in previous food survey and/or nutrition programme is required. 
  Excellent  written  and  verbal  communication  skills  in  English.  Working  knowledge  of  another 
local language in Niger Delta region is essential and desirable. 
  Experience of interacting with a variety of internal and external stakeholders is desirable. 
  Strong project coordination skills; and basic knowledge on gender and climate change issues is 
desirable. 
=== 
TASS3: 
Sustainable Agriculture and Climate Change Specialist (State)    
The  need  to  mainstream  sustainable  agriculture  under  climate  change  scenarios  is  becoming 
paramount  for  food  security  and  employment  generation  for  youth  and  women  agri-enterpreneurs. 
This  entails  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity  and  incomes;  adapting  and  building 
resilience  to  climate  change;  and  reducing  and/or  removing  greenhouse  gases  emissions,  where 
possible.  Limited  awareness  of  climate  and  sustainability  issues  and  the  key  changes  required  to 
protect  agriculture,  poor  management  of  land,  water,  soil  nutrients  and  genetic  resources, 
inconsistency  of  the  governance  regimes,  policies,  legislations  and  financial  mechanisms  with  the 
requirements  for  climate  friendly  agricultural  practices,  inefficient  and  unsustainable  management  of 
agriculture  and  natural  resources  e.g.  soil,  water,  etc.,  lack  of  awareness  of  soil  management 
practices, lack of research into climate smart agriculture, lack of awareness on climate change and its 
effects on agricultural practices and poor infrastructure to support climate smart agriculture have been 
some of the factors limiting climate and environmental-smart agriculture in Nigeria.  
The  Sustainable  Agriculture  and  Climate  Change  Specialist  will  be  responsible  to  the  State  Project 
Coordinator. He/she will supervise activities relating to productivity improvement and agro-processing 
efficiency  of  small  scale  producers  and  processors  and  also  supervise  activities  related  to 
mainstreaming  climate  change  adaptation  measures  and  sustainable  agricultural  practices  into  the 
production, processing and marketing of commodities across value chain clusters.  
He/she  will:  (i)  assist  the  Climate  and  Environment  Specialist  at  the  Regional  Office  in  conducting 
climate  and  environmental  assessments  and  crop  agro-ecological  suitability  map;  (ii)  carry  out 
assessment and identification of negative impacts and opportunities for green growth in commodities 
clusters  and  value  chains  at  state  levels;  (iii)  ensure  that  recommended  mitigation  and  adaptation 
measures  (including  no-regret  measures)  are  adhered  to  and  implement  opportunities  for  green 
growth along the value chains; and (iv) ensure environmental sustainability of the project at the state 
level.   
Specific duties 
  Assist  the  Sustainable  Agriculture  Specialist  and  Climate  and  Environmental  Specialist  to 
develop activities for the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB).  
  Assist the Sustainable Agriculture Specialist and Climate and Environment Specialists to revise 
and  update  the  draft  project  implementation  manual  (PIM)  for  support  of  climate  change 
adaptation.  
125 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
  In  close  consultation  with  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer,  assist  in  developing  a 
framework for agricultural sustainability and resilience among the target beneficiaries including 
indicators to be monitored within the project’s M&E system.  
  Ensure  the  inclusion  of  sustainability  and  climate  resilience  data  collection  in  the  baseline 
studies at state level.  
  Guide  the  incorporation  of  climate  change  and  climate  smart  agriculture  adaptation  measures 
into the design and construction of various infrastructures by the incubators/clusters. 
  Maintain a database of relevant institutions that can serve as service providers to build technical 
capacity of the beneficiaries at state levels. 
  Assist  the  Sustainable  Agriculture  Specialist  in  setting  up  the  overall  input  distribution  and 
equipment scheme including starter packs. 
  Assist the Climate and Environment Specialist to prepare Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and Basic Climate Risk Analysis and crop agro-ecological 
suitability maps.  
  Ensure  adherence  to  environmental  standards  and  rules  and  discourage  production  and 
processing enterprises that are environmentally unsustainable at state levels. 
  Facilitate  the  necessary  trainings  and  capacity  building  processes  at  the  state  level  including 
training of intended entrepreneurs on waste valorization and integrated pest and agrochemicals 
management,  and  develop  a  manual  for  environmental  training  on  sustainable  agricultural 
enterprise based on state peculiarities. 
  Facilitate  regular  collection  of  field  data  to  update  the  Environmental  Information  Systems  for 
project management. 
Qualification and experience required 
  Bachelor  degree  in  agriculture,  natural  resource  management  (NRM)  or  rural  development  or 
related fields. Advanced degree in the area will be an added advantage.  
  At  least  five  years  of  experience  in  the  areas  of  Sustainable  Agriculture  and  Climate  Change 
Adaptation,  Environment  and  NRM  with  strong  knowledge  of  Agricultural  Value  Chain 
Management and Climate Change Adaptation in the agricultural sector. 
  Experience  in  field  data  collection  and  integration  including  from  GPS,  Remote  Sensing  and 
GIS and environmental database management. 
  Thorough  knowledge  of  sustainable  agriculture  and  climate  change  adaptation  and 
environmental  safeguards  and  familiarity  with  all  the  governmental  and  non-governmental 
actors  and  stakeholders  involved  in  the  policy  dialogue  on  sustainable  agriculture,  agricultural 
value chain and climate change issues at the state level. 
  Experience  in  the  coordination  of  multidisciplinary  teams  and  in  the  planning,  implementation 
and monitoring of complex projects. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office packages 
etc). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Note:  Preference would be given to a candidate with previous working experience in Sustainable 
Agriculture related projects and working experience in the Niger Region. 
126 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Learning and Knowledge management 
1. 
Knowledge management and innovation play a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda. LIFE 
has  the  potential  to  bring  immense  field  experience  into  the  policy  discourse  on  youth  and  women 
agribusiness development in Nigeria. Knowledge that will be generated by this Project will contribute 
significantly to the design and implementation of  youth and poor women's empowerment agricultural 
interventions  within  the  Agriculture  Sector.  Therefore,  harnessing  the  project  experiences  by 
highlighting  success  stories  and  presenting  grounded  analysis  of  what  worked  and  what  has  not 
worked  are  key  areas  for  LIFE’s  knowledge  management.  Consequently,  useful  information  will  be 
generated  for  similar  future  interventions.  This  calls  for  developing  suitable  knowledge  sharing 
platforms and mechanisms to improve information flow among diverse stakeholders. The programme 
will  package  and  disseminate  information  to  the  respective  stakeholders  in  the  appropriate  formats 
(e.g.  brochures,  studies,  articles,  newsletter,  case  studies,  TV,  radio  and  internet);  using  the  IFAD 
supported  Central  Communication  platform  established  to  coordinate  knowledge  management 
activities of on-going IFAD programmes in Nigeria. This knowledge-sharing process will be supported 
by  a  well-focused  series  of  workshops  and  joint  learning  events.  National  and  regional  knowledge 
networking will be supported to build and share approaches, tools, methodologies, technologies and 
best practices. 
2. 
A  comprehensive  Knowledge  Management  and  communication  strategy  will  be  developed  to 
support programme implementation and make LIFE more effective and efficient, enable it to simplify 
processes,  adapt  much  faster  to  emerging  realities  and  lessons,  and  achieve  greater  impact.  The 
project’s  overall  KM  strategy  would  focus  on  four  priorities:  generating  trust  and  fostering  linkages 
between stakeholders; managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences among actors; 
innovation  activities  and  creating  conditions  for  replication,  scaling  up  and  sustainability  and 
knowledge products development and dissemination. The main purpose of KM processes within the 
project  would  be  to  ensure  that  the  knowledge  generated  is  systematically  identified,  analysed, 
documented, used to improve the performance of LIFE and shared. The KMC strategy would be fully 
aligned to the FMARD knowledge management framework for stakeholders in the agricultural sector 
in  Nigeria  which  aims  at  supporting  policy  processes,  enhancing  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of 
interventions and programmes and fostering learning and knowledge exchange at federal, state and 
local level (including public and private sector, civil society, farmers and development partners).  The 
programme  will  make  adequate  budgetary  provision  to  execute  this  function  effectively,  including 
national  and  international  technical  assistance.  A    Knowledge  Management  and  Communication 
Coordinator  will  be  responsible  for  the  knowledge  management  and  communication  function  under 
the overall guidance of the Knowledge Management and Communications Advisor at the CCU.  
3. 
Building on the past experiences and lessons from CBNRMP, special attention needs to go to 
(i)  making  sure  activities  and  budget  are  planned  at  the  onset  of  the  project,  (ii)  project  launch  for 
branding and visibility (iii) ensuring that KM indicators are included in the M&E system, (iv) setting up 
solid 
information  management  systems  (e.g.  electronic  archives),  (v)  clarifying  roles  and 
responsibilities in KM in the project management teams, (vi) facilitating cross-project exchanges and 
building  communities  of  practice,  (vii)  organising  exchanges  with  other  projects  and  agencies, 
documents,  workshops,  and  other  activities  to  disseminate  results  and  attract  the  interest  of 
government and development partners for improvement of their practices , replication and up-scaling 
of project innovations. 
Policy engagement will be strengthened at all levels, to make sure that LIFE gets on the top of 
4. 
the political agenda and to build a supportive policy framework and enabling environment for effective 
youth  and  women  employment  in  agribusiness.  LIFE  will  develop  a  coherent  approach  to  policy 
dialogues based on evidence from project activities, best practices and lessons learned to influence 
policy  makers  to  develop  improved  policies  to  support  young  men  and  women  in  profitable  agri-
enterprises.  NGOs  and  CSOs  will  be  key  partners  with  LIFE  in  implementing  policy  dialogues 
because they represent and provide the voice of people especially youth and women. 
128 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
5. 
A knowledge management strategy will be developed by LIFE during the first six months of the 
project  and  linked  to  the  Knowledge  Management  Strategy  of  the  FMARD.  The  strategy  will  aim  to 
create  a  value  chain  between  M&E,  knowledge  and  communication  in  order  to  collect,  process, 
document, use and distribute on a large scale the data and information generated by project activities. 
Multiple media and new technologies will be used. 
6. 
 The first step will be to collect in an electronic library all the important documents that provide 
information  on  the  implementation  of  LIFE.  The  second  step  will  be  to  make  an  inventory  and 
catalogue on an electronic platform of the activities of the beneficiaries, budget, results and impacts. 
The  most  important  information  will  be  compiled  and  fed  into  a  database  that  will  show  long-term 
trends for key indicators. The third step will be to analyze and present the data from the database in a 
user-friendly  and  differentiated  form,  according  to  the  needs  of  the  users.  Graphs  and  maps  will  be 
created to show the evolution of the interventions of the project in the intervention area. 
7. 
The  dissemination  and  communication  of  the  results  will  be  done  through:  (i)  a  website 
developed  by  LIFE,  which  will  be  able  to  publish  newsletters  four  times  a  year;  (ii)  interactive  radio 
broadcasts: and (iii) exchange visits on knowledge and innovations. The results of LIFE will be made 
available to different partners for use in policy dialogue and the design of new projects. To this end, 
workshops and other opportunities for dialogue  will be organized  and supported annually  during the 
presentation  of  LIFE’s  progress  report.  Good  practices  and  success  stories  will  also  be  identified, 
disseminated  and  scaled  up.  Particular  attention  will  be  given  to  the  utilization  of  local  knowledge 
generated  by  the  project.  Technical  and  knowledge  capitalization  documents  (fact  sheets,  technical 
references,  etc.)  will  be  produced  in  various  forms  in  collaboration  with  the  technical  team  of  the 
project  during  the  life  of  the  project.  To  this  end,  the  RPCO  will  have  Knowledge  Management  and 
Communication (KMC) Coordinator and each SPCO a KMC Officer. 
8. 
Planning  
9. 
LIFE will prepare the AWPB in a participatory manner by involving the various actors in priority 
agricultural commodities and strategic partners. Each state will develop an annual action plan with the 
participation of strategic partners and service providers. These plans will then be consolidated into a 
single  AWPB,  which  will  be  submitted  for  analysis  and  validation  to  the  regional  Technical  Support 
Committee and, then submitted for approval by the National Steering Committee. 
10.  Each  AWPB  proposal  will  include:  (i)  a  detailed  description  of  the  activities  planned  for  the 
coming  year,  together  with  the  monitoring  indicators  and  modalities  for  implementation;  (ii)  an  18-
month  procurement  plan;  (iii)  a  disbursement  plan;  and  (iv)  expected  results.  From  the  second  year 
onwards,  the  AWPB  should  include  a  summary  presentation  of  the  results  obtained  and  the 
constraints encountered during the previous  year. A flexible approach to the possible revision of the 
AWPB during the fiscal  year  will  be  adopted to  take into account the recommendations provided by 
the  implementation  stakeholders.  A  timetable  for  the  preparation,  analysis,  validation,  approval, 
implementation  and  review  of  AWPBs  will  be  prepared  by  the  PMU  and  approved  by  the  National 
Steering Committee at its first meeting. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
11. 
LIFE will develop an M&E system that focuses on results and uses these results for decision-
making  at  different  levels. This  system  will  be  used  to  provide  information  that  is  useful  to measure 
implementation progress, the outcomes and impact of project activities on the target population and to 
steer the project.  It will incorporate a short list of readily verifiable indicators related to IFAD's Results 
and Impact Management System (RIMS). The M&E system will be based primarily on LIFE’s logical 
framework and the indicators will be disaggregated as much as possible by gender and age so as to 
inform the project's contributions to gender equity, women's empowerment and youth inclusion. 
12. 
LIFE’s M&E system will be participatory and will involve several steps, including: 
i. 
If  necessary,  technical  assistance  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  project  to  develop  an 
effective  M&E  system  and  build  the  capacity  for  its  implementation.  This  technical 
assistance should help to develop the implementation of LIFE’s intervention logic. 
129 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
ii.  Quantitative  baseline  surveys,  supplemented  by  data  from  strategic  studies  on  key 
project  themes,  including  sector  analysis,  agribusiness  opportunities  for  young  people, 
issues related to gender, rural finance, etc. This baseline situation would also serve as a 
pre-impact  assessment.  It  will  allow  for  the  development  of  impact  trajectories  that  can 
identify and quantify the effects resulting from project interventions; 
iii.  Ongoing internal M&E of project performance in terms of physical and financial progress 
of  AWPB  activities.  The  collection  of  information  will  be  done  through  a  simple  and 
reliable system, including geographic information systems (GIS) tools for data collection 
and transmission, to feed a data base and a map with real-time project results, that can 
be shared with project partners and the general public; 
iv.  Participatory self-assessments with project stakeholders, such as service providers; 
v. 
Joint  supervision  missions  by  the  Government  and  IFAD,  with  a  frequency  of  two 
supervision missions per year, as well as missions to support implementation; 
vi.  An internal and external midterm evaluation at the end of the third year of the project; 
vii.  Annual outcome surveys after midterm; 
viii.  A  completion  evaluation  based  on  an  impact  study  during  the  final  year  of  the  project. 
The  impact  study  will  use  mixed  methods,  integrating  participatory,  qualitative  and 
quantitative approaches in order to enhance the reliability of the data and to deepen the 
understanding of the results chain; and 
ix.  At  project  completion,  a  final  mission  to  prepare  a  completion  report  and  organize  a 
closing workshop with project stakeholders. 
13. 
LIFE  will  use  participatory  approaches  and  methods,  including  assessments  done  by 
stakeholders, the collection of oral testimonials, participatory social mapping, charts and diagrams of 
causal  relationships,  trends  and  changes,  and  brainstorming  on  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of 
project  interventions.  These  participatory  methods  make  it  possible  to  capture  the  experiences  and 
realities  of  LIFE’s  direct  beneficiaries.  They  will  also  help  to  understand  how  contextual  factors  are 
influencing the implementation and outcomes of the project.  
14. 
If  necessary  towards  the  end  of  the  project,  technical  assistance  will  allow  to  develop 
quantitative  impact  assessment  methods  with  well-structured  statistical  models  to  determine  the 
magnitude  of  impacts,  causal  relationships,  comparisons  with  the  counterfactual  -  what  would  have 
happened in the absence of LIFE, before and after, with and without the project, beneficiary and non-
beneficiary  households,  and  positive  and  negative  impact  on  groups  other  than  the  direct 
beneficiaries.  These  impact  assessments  will  help  to  better  understand  LIFE’s  impact  on  target 
households and its contribution on a larger scale, with direct and indirect outcomes. 
15.  The regional Project Coordination Office will be responsible for M&E, validation, consolidation, 
data analysis and reporting. The project’s M&E system will be integrated with that of the FMARD and 
other partners to ensure sustainability and an effective use.  
16.  The  M&E  system  will  include  social  and  environmental  safeguard  measures  to  support  all 
project activities, especially those expected to have a critical impact. On the basis of the analysis and 
recommendations  of  the  SECAP  note,  the  project  will  finance  the  preparation  of  environmental  and 
social management plans.  
130 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement  
A. 
Financial management assessment (FMA) of the project  
1. 
Methodology.  In  accordance  with  IFAD  guidelines,  a  Financial  Management  Assessment 
(FMA) has been undertaken as part of project design. The objective of FMA is to provide assurances 
that the project will be implemented in an environment with sufficiently strong financial management 
systems and controls in place to properly manage, control and report  on  project finances. The FMA 
involves assessing: (1) the inherent risk at country level; and (2) the project specific risk. 
60.  Country  context  and  inherent  risk.  As  a  whole  Nigeria  remains  a  high  risk  environment 
although some improvements are being noted. Fighting corruption is high on FGN's agenda and the 
corruption  perception  index  published  by Transparency  International  has  shown  a  minor  increase  in 
the  past  years46.  Similarly,  the  World  Bank's  doing  business  report  notes  that  despite  some 
developments  (e.g.  registering  property  and  protecting  minority  investors),  the  country  still  ranks 
relatively low (169 out of 189) with regards to the ease of doing business. Several PEFA assessments 
have  been  conducted  between  2008  and  2013  at  state  level  of  which  only  four  reports  have  been 
made public. The reports reveal that although some minor differences between states can be noted, 
the  overall  quality  of  Public  Financial  Management  systems  in  the  country  is  weak  and  requires 
improvements.  At  the  federal  level,  FNG  is  making  some  progress  in  improving  its  financial 
management  systems  and  practices.  For  instance  in  2016,  FGN  set  up  a  Treasury  Single Account 
(TSA)  in  the  CBN,  improving  the  FGN's  ability  to  monitor  the  flow  of  funds  to  externally  financed 
programmes  and  projects  and  better  control  over  USD  transactions.  FGN  is  also  making  efforts  to 
adopt the International Public Sector Accounting Standard (IPSAS) accrual basis in the coming years.  
3. 
Project  financing.  The  project  will  be  financed  by  IFAD,  FGN,  participating  states  as  well  as 
project  beneficiaries.  The  IFAD  financing  will  be  in  USD  60  million  loan  subject  to  interest  on  the 
principal amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent and shall have a maturity period of twenty 
five (25) years, including a grace period of five (5) years, and in addition a service charge of 0.75 per 
cent, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board. FGN is expected cover for all taxes 
under the project as well as salaries of seconded staff to the RPO. Each participating state will cover 
for  all  salaries  of  SPO  seconded  staff  respectively.  All  directly  hired  project  staff  as  well  as 
compensation allowance for the seconded staff is expected to be covered by IFAD.  
4. 
Taxes.  The  FGN  will  cover  all  taxes  under  the  project.  Consequently,  IFAD  funds  cannot  be 
used  to  pay  VAT,  duties  or  other  taxes  imposed  on  the  project.  However,  as  per  IFAD  procedures, 
taxes paid by the ultimate recipient of an expenditure (e.g. income taxes paid  by a project employee 
or withholding taxes on the profits of a contractor) are not considered to be taxes paid by the project.  
5. 
Project  financial  management.  As  part  of  the  project  IFAD  will  enter  into  a  financing 
agreement  with  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  which  will  represent  the  federal  government  of 
Nigeria. FGN will further enter into sub agreement or MoU with the lead project agency, the Federal of 
Ministry of Agriculture and with the all the participating states.  
6. 
To  ensure  efficient  project  implementation,  the  Regional  Project  Coordination  Office  (RPCO) 
will  assume  overall  responsibility  of  managing  the  project’s  fiduciary  performance  including  sound 
consolidation of financial reports and submission of Withdrawal applications to IFAD and hiring of the 
external  auditor.  The  State  Project  Coordination  Office  (SPCO)  in  each  state  will  have  dedicated 
financial  staff  and  accounting  systems  to manage  the  fund  transferred  to  the  state  level.  In  order  to 
make  full  use  of  country  systems,  in  states  with  solid  Programme  Financial  Management  Units 
(PFMU) already set up under the Accountant General's Office, the FM function of the SPCO may be 
outsourced to the PFMU.  
7. 
Anticorruption  and  good  governance  framework.  In  accordance  with  its  Policy  on 
Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  Activities  and  Operations  (Anticorruption  Policy),  adopted  by 
46 2012 (27);2013 (25);2014(27); 2015 (26) 2016 (28) 
132 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
the  Executive  Board  in  December  2005,  IFAD  applies  a  zero-tolerance  policy  towards  fraudulent, 
corrupt,  collusive  or  coercive  practices  in  Programmes  financed  through  its  loans  and  grants.  'Zero 
tolerance'  means  that  IFAD  will  pursue  all  allegations  falling  under  the  scope  of  this  Policy  and,  if 
allegations are substantiated, appropriate sanctions will be applied on the parties or entities involved.  
Among  the  remedies  available  to  IFAD  under  the  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development 
Financing are the suspension and cancellation of a loan and/or grant.  IFAD may suspend, in whole or 
in  part,  the  right  of  the  Borrower/Recipient  to  request  withdrawals  of  funds  after giving  notice  to  the 
Borrower/Recipient  that  credible  allegations  of  coercive,  collusive,  corrupt  or  fraudulent  practices  in 
connection with the Programme have come to the attention of IFAD, and the Borrower/Recipient has 
failed to take timely and appropriate action to address the matters to the satisfaction of IFAD.  IFAD 
may  cancel,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  remaining  amounts  in  the  Loan  and/or  Grant  Accounts,  after 
consultation  with  the  Borrower/Recipient.  If  IFAD  thereafter  determines  that  coercive,  collusive, 
corrupt or fraudulent practices were engaged in by representatives of the Borrower/Recipient or any 
Programme  Party,  and  no  timely  and  appropriate  action  was  taken  to  remedy  the  situation.  All 
payments  made  relating  to  any  coercive,  collusive,  corrupt  or  fraudulent  practice  by  any 
representative  of  the  Borrower/Recipient  or  any  Programme  Party  shall  be  considered  ineligible  for 
IFAD financing and shall be refunded to IFAD.  
8. 
Under  the  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing,  by  notice  to  the 
Borrower/Recipient, the Fund may require that all bidding documents and contracts for procurement 
of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  by  the  Financing  include  provisions  requiring  bidders, 
suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors and consultants to: (i)  allow full inspection by the Fund of all 
bid documentation and related records; (ii)  maintain all documents and records related to the bid or 
contract  for  three  years  after  completion  of  the  bid  or  contract;  and  (iii)    cooperate  with  agents  or 
representatives of the Fund carrying out an audit or investigation. 
9. 
IFAD  takes  all  possible  actions  to  protect  from  reprisals  individuals  who,  in  good  faith,  report 
coercive,  collusive,  corrupt  or  fraudulent  practices  in  its  Programme  or  grant  activities.  The  primary 
responsibility  for  enforcing  the  Anticorruption  Policy  lies  with  the  Borrower,  and  the  first  defence  for 
controls shall be exercised by Programme staff, Implementing Partners and Counterparts. Pursuant to 
this, the Borrower shall have the responsibility to incorporate pertinent provisions of the Anticorruption 
Policy in its contracts with Programme staff, cooperating/implementing partners, suppliers/consultants 
or  any  other  third  party  entities.  LIFE-ND  will  also  have  a  central  procurement  facility  with  a  regular 
third party audit to limit, misallocation of project resources.  Given IFAD’s zero tolerance described in 
the above paragraph, it is important that the Programme staff and all stakeholders of the Programme 
are familiar with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy as well as the national anticorruption policies and whistle 
blowing procedures. 
10.  Project Financial Management Risk Assessment. As required by IFAD Financial Management 
assessment guidelines, the summarised scoring at design is as shown in the table below.  
Table 1: Risk assessment at design stage 
Type of risk 
Inherent Risk 
TI Index 
Control Risks 
1.  Organisation 
and staffing 
  No FM staff in 
place. 
2.  Budgeting 
  Budget 
approval, budget 
format and 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed mitigation 
28 
H 
H 
  A qualified Financial Controller, Finance 
Officers and Project Accountants to be hired 
to the RPCO and SPCOs through a 
competitive procedure subject to IFAD non 
objection. All FM staff to receive training in 
IFAD FM procedures, policies and systems 
including IFAD anticorruption policy and 
whistleblowing mechanism.  
  The consolidated AWPB to be submitted for 
IFAD non-objection 2 months before the 
beginning of the fiscal year.  
  Proper budget controls to be ensured in the 
133 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
High 
M 
M 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Type of risk 
budget controls 
not established. 
3.  Funds flow and 
disbursement 
arrangements 
  Complex and 
possibly 
cumbersome 
flow of funds.  
4.  Internal controls 
No programme 
specific financial  
procedures in 
place  
5.  Accounting 
systems, 
policies and 
procedures 
  No adequate 
accounting 
software in 
place 
6.  Reporting and 
monitoring 
  Financial report 
formats not in 
place. 
  Financial report 
formats required 
from the 
implementing 
partners need to 
be developed. 
7.  Internal Audit 
  No proper IA 
function in 
place.  
8.  External audit 
  No annual audit 
function in 
place.  Private 
auditors need to 
be selected 
according to 
IFAD procedures 
to conduct 
annual audits. 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed mitigation 
accounting software. 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
  Separate designated accounts to be opened 
for each financing source in the Central Bank 
of Nigeria. Also separate Programme 
accounts for different financing sources will be 
opened at the state level. 
  Procedures for transferring funds to the state 
level to be well documented in the financial 
procedures manual.  
  Complete audit trail for each expenditure item 
to be properly disclosed in the Withdrawal 
Applications. 
  The FM capacity of the implementing partners 
to be assessed and MoU with the 
implementing partners to include clear 
disbursement triggers, reporting requirements 
and audit clauses.  
  A comprehensive financial procedures manual, 
is to be formulated as part of the start-up 
phase.  
 
IPSAS cash accounting standards to be 
adopted.  
  A standalone accounting software is to be 
procured and customized to produce all IFAD 
forms and financial reports and to include 
proper budget controls. 
  Reporting templates to be established and the  
Accounting system to be customized to 
produce these reports automatically by the 
RPCO and the SPCOs 
  RPCO to produce quarterly Interim 
consolidated Financial Statements and annual 
consolidated financial statements.  
 
Internal Auditors to be hired at the RPCO and 
the SPCOs. 
 
  Audit methodology, reporting templates and 
reporting lines as deadlines  to be well 
documented in a IA audit manual. 
 RPCO to provide consolidated audit report 
including all the SPCOs and implementing 
partners 
IFAD non objection required for the Audit 
TORs.  
 
  Auditor to be selected using QCBS approved 
long list and IFAD approved shortlist with 70% 
qualifying mark on quality. 
134 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
Mitigation actions listed above. 
H 
M 
Type of risk 
Fiduciary risk at 
design stage 
  As the RLCPO 
and the SPOs 
and their 
respective FM 
procedures are 
currently not in 
place the initial 
risk rating is 
assessed as 
high risk.  
NB: H/M/L = High, medium and low risk as per the Guideline Note on undertaking Financial Management Assessment at 
design. 
11.  Conclusion.  The  initial  risk  rating  is  considered  to  be  High. The  final  risk  rating  is  expected  to 
become  medium  after  implementation  of  the  mitigation  actions  during  the  first  or  second  year  of 
implementation. 
B. 
Proposed financial management arrangements 
12.  Proposed  financial  management  arrangements.  The  proposed  FM-arrangements  including 
staffing,  budgeting,  accounting,  internal  controls,  flow  of  funds,  financial  reporting,  and  audit 
arrangements  are  summarized  below  and  will  be  outlined  in  detail  in  the  Project’s  Financial 
Procedures Manual. 
13. 
 Staffing.  The  project  will  recruit  qualified  FM  staff  through  a  transparent  and  competitive 
process. The RPCO will have a financial controller, two project accountants, and an internal auditor. 
Each  SPCO  is  to  have  a  finance  officer,  a  project  accountant,  and  an  internal  auditor.  The  financial 
controller,  finance  officers  and  project  accountants  will  have  a  degree  in  accounting  as  well  as  past 
experience in project financial management. As part of the project start up, the FM staff will be trained 
in IFAD FM procedures and systems. 
14.  Budgeting and budget control. The FGN's fiscal year runs from 1st January to 31 December. 
Based on inputs from SPCOs and stakeholders, the RPCO will prepare a consolidated Annual Work 
Plan and Budget (AWPB) based on input from the SPCOs in a format acceptable to IFAD and submit 
it to IFAD for its non-objection at least two months before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year. As 
there will be no state specific allocation of the IFAD financing, the transfer of funds from the RPCO to 
the states, will be performance based and decided during implementation based on AWPB and their 
financial performance. The format of the AWPB will indicate at least the following: expenditure items 
by activity, by component, by expenditure category, and by implementing entity, physical indicators by 
activity  as  well  as  funding  requirements  by  financier  on  a  quarterly  basis.  In  addition  the AWPB  will 
contain a detailed list of any staff hired by the project and their salary scale. Any incurred expenditures 
as  part  of  the  project  will  have  to  be  part  of  the  approved AWPB  to  be  considered  eligible  for  IFAD 
financing. 
15.  Accounting. Although FGN is making efforts in adopting IPSAS accrual basis, due to capacity 
limitations,  it  is  expected  that  the  project  will  record  its  transactions  in  accordance  with  IPSAS  cash 
basis  of  accounting.  A  standalone  accounting  software  (e.g.  flexible  accounting)  will  be  procured 
during the start-up phase and installed in the RPCO and the SPCOs. The accounting software will be 
customized to produce all IFAD reports and Withdrawal application forms automatically.  Software that 
currently  satisfy  IFAD's  requirements  in  the  country  include  Flexible Accounting  which  is  also  being 
used  by  two  ongoing  IFAD  programmes  VCDP  and  CASP.    The  accounting  software  will  include  a 
budget  module  with  proper  budget  controls,  accounting  module,  financial  reporting  module, 
procurement  module,  fixed  asset  register  etc.  and  will  be  customized  to  automatically  produce  all 
necessary reports and IFAD withdrawal application forms. 
Internal  controls.  In  order  to  ensure:  (a)  efficiency;  (b) reliability  of  financial  reports;  and 
16. 
(c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations including the conditions set forth in the financing 
agreement, the RPCO and the SPCOs will ensure that adequate internal controls including: 
135 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
-  Adequate  policies  and  procedures  including  a  financial  procedures  manual,  and  accounting 
manual which are to be revised once a year;  
-  Sufficient segregation of duties;  
-  Monitoring of fixed assets including tagging of all assets, maintaining of a fixed asset register 
and annual inventory exercises; 
-  Periodic monitoring and review including comparison of physical and financial progress; 
-  Proper authorization and access levels are maintained through the project parties; 
-  All project sites are clearly identified and mapped including GPS-coordinates (as appropriate) 
to  facilitate  supervision  and  that  this  information  is  shared  with  other  donors  supervising 
projects in the same sector; 
-  All trainings will be duly documented including a list of participators. 
-  All  distributed  goods,  agricultural  inputs  etc..,  reconciled  against  procured  goods  and 
supported by distribution lists of sufficient detail. 
-  All  implementing  partners  FM-capacity  will  be  properly  assessed  before  the  awarding  of  the 
contract and their financial performance will be continuously assessed.  
17.  Flow of funds.  Separate Designated Account  will be opened for the IFAD  loan in the Central 
Bank of Nigeria in USD and will not be mingled with other funds. In order to allow the FGN to monitor 
the income of funds the DA will be a sub account under the FGN treasury single account (TSA). From 
the Designated account the funds will flow to the project loan account (project account A) in naira. The 
federal counterpart funds will be deposited in a separate federal counterpart fund account. The RPCO 
will be authorized to manage both the DA and the federal counterpart account.   Each state will open 
two accounts in NGN: i) a state project account (project account B) to receive IFAD loan funds from 
the project account A, and ii) a state counterpart fund account to receive state counterpart funds. The 
SPCOs will be authorized to manage the project account B, and the state counterpart fund account. 
Chart 1: Proposed flow of funds 
136 
IFAD Loan account in SDR or USDIFAD Loan TSA subaccount “Designated loan account”  (USD) in CBN managed by RPOIFAD loan programme account A – (draw down  account)  (Naira) in CBN managed by RPO Sate Programme Account B (Naira) managed by SPOFGN FGN counterpart account (Naira) in CBN managed by RPOContractors, Suppliers, Service providers,  Implementing partners, Local governments, Programme staffState counterpart account  (Naira) managed by SPO1237456Community organizationsParticipating states66 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
1:  RPCO prepares separate Withdrawal Applications according to IFAD disbursement procedures for the IFAD 
loan, - and submits the WAs to IFAD as soon as the minimum WAs thresholds have been reached (30% of the 
AA or once a quarter). All WAs must be approved by the Authorized Signatories as determined by MoF. IFAD 
disburses the funds in US$ to the Designated account in CBN. 
2: RPO will transfer the funds to the "project account A" in NGN.  
3: FGN will deposit counterpart financing in a separate account "federal counterpart account". 
4: The  RPCO will transfer funds to the SPCO "project account B" based on AWPBs and duly authorized 
disbursements request with all necessary supporting documentation attached.  SPCO will justify the advances on 
a quarterly basis by submitting SOEs and original supporting documentation to the RPO as required by IFAD 
disbursement procedures. 
5: Participating states will deposit counterpart financing in a separate "state counterpart fund account". 
6: The RPCO and the SPCO will pay/transfer funds to contractors, service providers and suppliers, community 
organizations etc as part of the project activities and transfer the funds in accordance with the relevant 
agreements. 
7: In case the payment exceeds US$ 100 000, The  RPCO may request IFAD to pay directly to the contractor, 
supplier, service provider or implementing partner using the Direct Payment method. 
18.  Transfers  to  community  organizations.  The  project  is  to  transfer  funds  to  community 
organizations to implement selected activities under the project. The FM arrangements related to the 
community organizations is expected to be as follows: 
i. The RPCO/SPCO will send out a call of interest outlining the eligibility criteria. 
ii. All interested community organizations will submit a proposal to the RPCO/SPCO. 
iii. The  RPCO/SPCO  will  conduct  a  due  diligence  check  of  the  community  organization 
including the financial management capacity.  
iv. Subject  to  IFAD  non  objection,  the  RPCO/SPCO  will  enter  into  a  tripartite  agreement 
contract with the selected community organization and the incubator  
v. The performance milestones, criteria for measurement and the triggers for disbursement 
will be clearly specified in the contract/MoU. In addition, the contract/MoU will specify the 
reporting  requirements  and  the  associated  timelines.  All  payments  to  the  community 
organization  will  be  made  against  a  duly  certified  disbursement  request,  business  plan 
and  other  supporting  documentation  as  defined  in  the  disbursement  schedule  of  the 
agreement.  The  payment  request  will  be  reviewed  by  the  technical  officer  in  the 
RPCO/SPCO ensure that the performance milestones have been reached. Subject to the 
technical  officers  clearance  the  payment  is  prepared  by  the  State  Finance  Officer  and 
approved by the State Project Coordinator. 
vi. Once the payment is approved, the funds are transferred to the community organizations 
and  duly  recorded  in  the  RPCO/SPCO  accounting  software.  All  contracts/agreements 
with  the  community  organizations  will  include  a  provision  requiring  them  to  permit:  i) 
IFAD  and  the  project  internal  auditors  to  inspect  their  accounts,  records  or  other 
documents  as  part  of  the  supervision  missions,  ii)  to  have  them  audited  by  the  project 
auditors as part of the annual project audit exercise and iii) promptly refund any ineligible 
expenditures or unused funds to the SPCO/RPCO. 
19.  Financial Reporting. The SPCO will produce periodic financial reports in an agreed standard 
format  and  submit  these  to  the  RPCO.  The  RPCO  will  produce  its  own  financial  reports  and 
consolidate  all  the  financial  reports  for  the  whole  project.  The  RPCO  will  provide  IFAD  with 
consolidated financial reports prepared in compliance with International Accounting Standards (IPSAS 
cash) and IFAD requirements within agreed timeframes as follows: 
  Quarterly consolidated interim financial reports (IFRs).   
  Annual consolidated Financial Statements within four months after the end of the fiscal 
year.  
  Annual consolidated audit report and a management letter within six months after the 
end of the borrower’s fiscal year.  
20.  All of the financial reports outlined above will in include at least the following reports: i) sources 
and  uses  of  funds  by  financier  ii)  incurred  expenditures  by  component  and  financier,  iii)  Actual 
expenditures  vs  budgeted  expenditures  by  financier  by  component,  iv)  designated  account 
reconciliations,  v)  Statement  of  Expenditures  -  Withdrawal  Application  Statement,  vi)  a  fixed  asset 
register. In the notes of the financial reports, the following additional information will be disclosed: a)  
137 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Sources  and uses of funds by state, b)  beneficiary  contributions  and c) implementing  partner report 
disclosing  expenditures  incurred  by  the  different  implementing  partners  and  any  advances  still 
unjustified.  
21. 
Internal audit. Internal Audit will have an integral function in FM arrangements of the project. 
As a result there will be an IA function in the RPCO and in every SPCO. The internal auditing function 
shall ensure the orderly and efficient conduct of operations including, among others, the adherence to 
project  management  policies,  rules  and  regulations,  safeguarding  of  project  assets,  prevention  and 
detection  of  errors  and  irregularities  and  promoting  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  the  accounting 
records. 
22.  The internal auditor in the RPCO will ensure that the following internal audit cycle is followed at 
the SPCO level: 
  An audit work plan is produced two months before each calendar year. 
  Checks  are  performed  according  to  the  audit  work  plan.  Methodology:  document  review, 
interviews with RCPO/SPCO staff and field visits.  
  Past years audit recommendations are followed up on  
  Quarterly reports are produced and the draft report is shared  with management for comments  
  Finalize the report – quarterly audit reports to be shared with RPCO and IFAD within 4 weeks 
after the  end of each quarter. The RPCO IA  will then consolidate  the IA reports and submit 
them to IFAD within 8 weeks after each quarter. 
23.  External  audit.  The  RPCO  will  appoint  an  independent  private  audit  firm,  procured  in 
accordance  with  the  method  and  criteria  set  forth  in  IFAD's  Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  (for 
Borrower's  Use).  The  auditors  will  be  required  to  audit  the  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the 
entire  project  for  each  fiscal  year  in  accordance  with  International  Standards  on Auditing  (ISA). The 
terms of reference for the audit will be agreed with IFAD on annual basis. The auditor will be required  
to issue a separate opinion on i) the project financial statements, ii) SOE-WA statement including the 
adequacy  of supporting  documentation,  iii) operation  of the  designated  account, iv) compliance  with 
loan  covenants  and  v)  compliance  with  procurement. The  auditors  will  also  prepare  a  Management 
Letter giving observations and comments on the internal control systems of the RPCO, the SPCOs, 
and  providing  recommendations  for  improvements  in  accounting,  records  management,  systems, 
controls,  compliance  with  financial  covenants  in  the  Financing  Agreement  and  compliance  with 
previous  year’s  auditors’  recommendations.  The  audit  report,  including  the  management  letter 
covering the audit observations on internal controls, will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the 
end  of  the  fiscal  year.  The  appointment  of  the  auditor  shall  be  for  a  maximum  period  of  3  years, 
subject to satisfactory performance. 
24.  Records management. The RPCO will maintain adequate filing and ensure proper back up of 
all  project  records.  In  accordance  with  IFAD  General  Conditions,  the  borrower  has  to  maintain  the 
original records for a minimum of 10 years after the project completion. 
C. 
IFAD disbursement procedures 
25.  The  IFAD  financing  shall  be  disbursed  against  duly  certified  withdrawal  applications  in 
accordance with the IFAD disbursement procedures. 
26. 
IFAD  disbursement  procedures.  In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  disbursement  procedures 
between the date of entry into force of the Financing Agreement and the Financing Closing Date, the 
RPCO may request withdrawals from the Loan Account and/or Grant Accounts of amounts paid or to 
be paid for eligible expenditures. Accordingly four standard disbursement procedures may be used for 
withdrawal of financing:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Advance withdrawal; 
Direct payment; 
Special commitment; 
Reimbursement. 
27.  Authorized  allocation  of  the  Designated  Account.  The  Designated  Accounts  for  the  IFAD 
financing  will  be  operated  and  replenished  following  the  Imprest  Account  arrangements.  After  the 
IFAD  financing  has  entered  into  force  and  the  conditions  for  first  disbursement  have  been  duly 
138 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
complied with and upon request by the borrower, IFAD will make an initial deposit to the Designated 
Accounts  equal  to  the  requirements  of  eight  months  implementation  (Authorized  Allocation).  The 
authorized allocation will be outlined in the Letter to the Borrower and is expected to be as follows: 
  US$ 6 million under the IFAD loan with an initial allocation of US$ 3 million until the project has 
incurred a cumulative expenditures of US$ 2 million 
  US$ 250 000 under the IFAD grant 
28.  Start-up  funds.  The  project  is  estimated  to  receive  US$  500  000  from  the  loan  to  incur 
expenditures  related  to  the  project  start  up  before  the  satisfaction  of  the  conditions  precedent  to 
withdrawal, The start-up funds will be used to for: i) recruitment of the key staff, ii) finalizing the project 
implementation manual including the financial procedures, accounting and  procurement manual,   iii) 
preparation  of  the  first  AWPB  and  procurement  plan,  iv)  organization  of  a  start-up  workshop,  v) 
procure,  install  and  fine  tune  the  accounting  software,  vi)  finalization  of  the    Agreement/MoUs 
templates with the implementing partners. 
29.  Conditions for first withdrawal. The following conditions related to financial management are 
to be met before the first withdrawal can be realized:  
- 
- 
IFAD  has  received  from  the  Minister  of  Finance,  –  a  letter  designating  the  name(s)  of 
official(s)  authorized  to  sign  withdrawal  applications,  which  includes  their  authenticated 
specimen signature(s); 
IFAD  has  received  documentation  evidencing  the  opening  of  (i)    treasury  subaccounts 
designated to receive IFAD  Loan and grant proceeds; and (ii) the project account A and B  to 
be  managed  by  the    RPCO  with  advice  of  the  persons/titles  authorized  to  operate  these 
accounts; 
-  Key  Staff  including  the    RPCO  coordinator,  Financial  Controller,  the  project  accountant,  and 
the procurement specialist have been duly appointed; 
-  A  project  Implementation  Manual  including  the  Financial  Administration  and  Accounting 
manual, has been approved by IFAD; 
-  The IFAD no-objection on the first AWPB and procurement plan for the first 18 months of the 
Programme has been obtained. 
30. 
Notwithstanding the above, no transfers can be made to the states until each state has: 
-  Opened  the  project  account  C  and  submitted  to  RPCO  and  IFAD  the  advice  of  the 
persons/titles authorized to operate these accounts; 
-  Hired key staff including the SPCO coordinator and Finance officer and the Accountant. 
-  Entered into sub agreements with FGN regarding the project and these have been submitted 
to IFAD. 
31.  Withdrawal applications. The RPCO will compile and consolidate, on  a timely  basis, eligible 
project  expenditures  for  activities.  From  these  expenditures  the  RPCO  will  prepare  withdrawal 
applications  (WAs) for  eligible  project  expenditures  for  submission  to  IFAD  for  reimbursement  or 
replenishment. All WAs will be signed by the authorized signatories. 
32.  Minimum  withdrawal  amounts.  In  order  to  minimize  transaction  costs,  the  minimum 
withdrawal amounts are set as follows:  
-  Withdrawal Applications requesting replenishments of the Designated Account should at least 
cover a minimum amount of thirty per cent (30%) of the initial advance. 
-  Direct Payment method should only be used for payments of US$ 100,000 and above while 
expenditures below US$ 100,000 should be financed from the Designated Account if possible 
and claimed through the replenishment of the Designated Account. 
33.  Statement of Expenditure (SOE). The SOE thresholds shall be determined in the light of the 
associated  risk  for  each  expenditure  category  and  will  be  duly  documented  in  the  Letter  to  the 
Borrower. The initial estimate is that the SOE threshold will be US$ 100,000 for all expenditure items 
under  all  categories.  The  project  will  retain  the  relevant  support  documents  and  make  them  readily 
available for inspection and review by supervision missions and the auditors. These thresholds may 
be revised from time to time based on project performance and risk assessment. 
139 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
D. 
Supervision, Implementation Support and Implementation Readiness  
34.  Project  supervision.  The  project  will  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD.  Supervision  will  not  be 
conducted as a general inspection or evaluation, but rather as an opportunity to assess achievements 
and  lessons  jointly,  and  to  reflect  on  ways  to  improve  implementation  and  impact.  It  is  important  to 
highlight  that  the  decentralized  nature  of  the  project  poses  challenges  to  the  supervision  process; 
Instead of supervising an FM unit in one location, financial activities are spread across the RPCO and 
several SPCOs located far away from each other. To mitigate the challenge  of decentralization,  and 
reduce  the  associated    transaction  cost,  the  following  measures  will  be  implemented:  i)  centralizing 
the  project  audit  function  (i.e.  one  auditor  hired  at  the  federal  level  to  audit  the  whole  project),  ii) 
centralization of the flow of funds (i.e. one designated account at federal level), iii) providing regular 
and  centralized  FM-training  and  implementation  support  to    project  staff,  iv)  introducing  quarterly 
interim financial reporting at state level and consolidated reports at federal level as well as v) requiring 
all state level  SPCOs to submit all supporting documentation (regardless of the SOE thresholds) to 
the  RPCO  to  facilitate  inspection.  In  addition,  risk  based  field  visits  are  being  piloted  to  ensure  the 
limited resources are focused on the high risk states with weaker FM capacity.  
35.  Supervision  and  implementation  support  plan.  A  financial  management  specialist  will 
participate  in  missions  annually  to  supervise  and  provide  implementation  support  to  the  project  and 
follow  up  the  fiduciary  risk  at  various  levels  including  the  use  of  the  SOE.  In  light  of  the  risk 
assessment residual (initial High FM risk), in the first two years of implementation the supervision plan 
of the project will especially focus on the following actions: 
-  At  least  two  on-site  visits  that  will  involve  visits  to  the  implementing  partners  (if  any)  and 
conducting/updating  the  FM  assessment  and  conducting  an  FMA  assessment  of  the 
implementing partners; 
-  Detailed  review  of  adequacy  of  the  staffing  arrangements  at  the  FM  unit  of  the    RPCO, 
including the TOR’s and performance of the financial staff and training needs identification;  
-  Detailed review of the project financial management and accounting procedures in use; 
-  Detailed review of the accounting software and financial reports produced by the accounting 
software and the use of budget controls; 
-  Review of overall flow of funds (and resolving  any bottlenecks) and a detailed  review  of the 
operation of the designated and project accounts (including monthly reconciliations). 
-  Detailed review of the fixed asset register and verification of a) inventory reports and b) assets 
through spot checks; 
-  Detailed  review  of  the  use  of  the  Statement  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  procedure  and  the 
adequacy  of  supporting  documentation  for  all  expenditure  items  incurred  by  the  RPCO, 
SPCOs and by the implementing partners;  
-  Detailed review of records management, filing and  information back up  
-  Follow-up on contracting the project (independent) external auditors and the ToRs; 
-  Follow-up on work performed by the internal audit function. 
36.  The  supervision  process  will  be  complemented  by  desk  review  of  progress  and  financial 
reports, the project’s annual financial statements, internal audit reports, and annual audits.   
Table 2: List of key tasks for implementation readiness  
Action 
By Whom 
When 
Conditionality 
Agree on the Start-up funds (if any)  
IFAD and the 
Borrower 
As part of design 
Negotiations 
Project implementation manual, financial 
procedures manual, and procurement manual 
duly updated   
IFAD &  RPCO  Start up 
Opening of Designated Account, and 
operational  account 
Borrower/ 
RPCO 
Start up 
Start Up and 
disbursement 
condition. 
Disbursement 
condition 
Format of the quarterly/semi-annual financial 
reports and Annual Financial Statements to be 
agreed. 
IFAD & RPCO  Start up 
N/A 
140 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Action 
By Whom 
When 
Conditionality 
Finalise project draft LTB 
IFAD 
As part of design  
Negotiations 
Prepare first AWPB & procurement plan. 
 RPCO 
By start-up 
Disbursement 
condition 
Appointment of auditor under ToR and 
conditions acceptable to IFAD 
 RPCO 
Not later than 3 
months after entry 
into force 
Financing 
agreement schedule 
3 
Procure the accounting software  
 RPCO and 
SPCO 
Start up 
Agree on the scope of work and the ToRs of 
the internal auditor as well as report format 
 RPCO,SPCO 
& IFAD 
Start up 
Agree on  FM covenants to be included in the 
Agreement/MoUs with implementing partners 
 RPCO&IFAD 
Start-up 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
141 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
I. 
Introduction 
1.  The IFAD procurement guidelines and handbook require an assessment of national procurement 
systems  as  part  of  the  project  design  process.  This  is  done  in  order  to  determine  the  extent  to 
which  country  systems  are  in  alignment  with  international  best  practice,  and  can  be  relied  upon 
during  project  implementation.  IFAD’s  General  Conditions  provide  for  the  use  of  the  Borrower's 
procurement  regulations  to  the  extent  that  they  are  consistent  IFAD’s  procurement  guidelines. 
This  is  in  line  with  the  commitments  of  the  international  donor  community  to  work  towards 
increasingly  using  national  systems  where  partner  countries  either  have  public  financial 
management  (PFM)  systems  that  are  in  line  with  broadly  accepted  good  practices  or  have 
credible reform programmes in place to establish reliable PFM systems. 
2.  Accordingly  this  appendix  consists  of  two  interrelated  sections:  (i)  an  overarching  country 
assessment; and (ii) recommendations as to project-level procurement processes to be followed 
during implementation. 
II.  Overarching Country Assessment:  
3.  The  latest  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  Public  procurement  system  in  Nigeria  was  carried 
out  by  the  World  Bank  in  the  year  200047.  The  assessment  concluded  that  there  were  serious 
weaknesses  in  the  procurement  system  including  a  lack  of  appropriate  legislation,  shortage  of 
basic skills and inadequate organisation.  
4. 
Indeed,  at  the  time  of  the  Country  Procurement  Assessment  Report  (CPAR),  there  were  no 
specific  laws  specifically  governing  public  procurement.  The  regulatory  environment  lacked 
systematic  and  permanent  measures  for  the  effective  surveillance  and  control  of  public 
procurement  actions. A  lack  of  detailed  rules  for  application  of  procurement  methods  led  to  an 
abuse of single sourcing and direct contract negotiation. Highly onerous eligibility requirements for 
contractor/suppliers further curtailed competition. The lack of guidelines for contract amendments 
opened  up  the  doors  to  poor  contract  management  and  corruption  leading  to  unnecessary 
contract  extensions  and  expenditures.  The  lack  of  regulations  for  the  formalised  treatment  of 
complaints  lodged  by  suppliers/contractors  in  response  to  procurement  decisions  meant  that 
rights of suppliers and contractors were only protected by the goodwill of the government in power 
at  any  given  time48.  In  summary,  the  public  procurement  system  at  the  time  was  considered 
seriously  weak,  and  unable  to  meet  its  goals  of  competition,  transparency,  integrity,  best  value 
and efficiency49.   
5.  The  Federal  Government  of  Nigeria  (FGN)  has  made  significant  strides  in  reforming  the  public 
procurement  regime  since  the  CPAR.  As  soon  as  2001,  a  dedicated  unit  was  set  up50  to 
implement  the  Federal  Government's  Public  Procurement  Reform  Policy  aimed  at  minimizing 
openings for abuse to known rules, processes and standards in the award and execution of public 
sector  contracts.  In  2003/04  a  Public  Procurement  Act  was  articulated  and  presented  to  the 
National Assembly. The Public Procurement Act was thereafter passed by the National Assembly 
on the 30th of May, 2007 and subsequently signed into Law by the President on the 4th of June, 
200751.  
6.  Public  Procurement  in  Nigeria  is  governed  by  the  Public  Procurement Act  (2007)  which  defines 
the  responsibilities,  principles  and  processes  applicable  in  the  public  procurement  of  works, 
goods and services in Nigeria. The Act estalished the Public Procurement Board (PPB) with a role 
47 World Bank - Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), 30 June, 2000 
48 Williams-Elegbe, 2010 
49 World Bank, 2000 
50 Budget Monitoring and Price Intelligence Unit (BMPIU a.k.a Due Process) 
51 Bureau of Public Procurement, 2017 
142 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
to  supervise  the  established  laws  and  policies,  and  report  to  the  National  Council  on  Public 
Procurement,  comprised  of  high  level  government  officials,    representatives  of  professional 
associations and technical experts.  
7.  While the reforms in the Nigerian Public Procurement Regime over the last 15 years have largely 
responded  to  the  deficiencies  identified  by  the  Bank.  The  lessons  learned  from  IFADs  country 
programme's  implementation  over  the  last  few  years  appear  to  emphasize  that  capacity  of 
procurement officials remains a major challenge.  Lack of capacity  in many cases constrains the 
ability  of  procuring  entities  to  properly  follow  procurement  and  contract  management  rules  and 
thereby obtain the desired outcome from a procurement procedure. 
8.  Specifically,  several  issues  have  been  recurrently  highlighted  by  IFAD  supervision  missions 
including  a  combination  of:  (i)  ineffective  procurement  planning;  (ii)  ineffective  bid  evaluation 
procedures; (iii) weak contract management, and (iv) poor record keeping. Experience has shown 
that the incidence of such weaknesses can be mitigated by intense implementation support and 
close and continuous supervision.  
III.  LIFE Specific Project-level recommendations: 
9.  LIFE will adopt a hybrid approach to procurement which combines all PPA requirements as well 
as  additional  IFAD  requirements;  such  to  ensure  that  project  procurement  is  carried  out  in 
accordance with best practice. IFAD with FMARD plans to establish a national level PMU for all 
projects and it is further intended that this PMU will employ independent professional procurement 
staff  who  will  be  audited  regularly.    Detailed  procurement  processes  and  responsibilities  will  be 
further elaborated in the Project Implementation Manual to be prepared during the start-up phase 
of project implementation. The following paragraphs identify the key additional IFAD requirements 
to the PPA  which will apply for LIFE: 
10.  Procurement  Planning52:  In  addition  to  the  requirements  under  sections  16  (b)  and  19  of  the 
PPA, procurement plans in a format acceptable to IFAD will be submitted annually to the various 
steering  committees  (from  state  level  to  national  level)  and  then  to  IFAD  for  final  No  Objection. 
Procurement Plans  will form an integral part of the Annual Work Plan  and Budget (AWPB). Any 
revisions to the Procurement Plan will require No Objection by IFAD and the steering committees 
prior to becoming effective. 
11.  At the end of each year of project implementation a new 12-month procurement plan53 should be 
prepared  by  each  State  Office  and  included  as  part  of  the  State's  AWPB.  By  30  September  of 
each  year,  State-level  procurement  plans  will  be  submitted  to  the  RPCO  for  consolidation. 
Following this the RPCO will be required to submit the same to IFAD by 31 October to IFAD for 
No Objection.  
12.  All  procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  strict  accordance  with  the  approved  procurement  plan, 
whereas  any  procurement  actions  inconsistent  with  the  approved  procurement  plan  will 
considered  as  mis-procurements  and  related  expenditures  ineligible.  At  a  minimum,  annual 
procurement plans will include all goods, services and works to be procured  during the year, units 
required  and  unit  costs,  prior/ex-post  review  requirements  (both  internal  and  with  IFAD), 
procurement methods, and target dates for each key procurement activity.  
13.  Packaging  of  Procurements:  With  a  view  to  increase  efficiency  of  procurement,  all  of  LIFE's 
NCB  and  ICB  procurements  will  be  carried  out  and  managed  centrally  by  the  RLPCO.  Local 
shopping may be carried out at the State level in cases where bulking opportunities at the regional 
level  are  not  practicable.  In  this  regard,  efforts  should  be  made  by  the  RLPCO's  Procurement 
Specialist  to  ensure  the  most  ideal  packaging  of  procurement  is  obtained  in  the  consolidated 
procurement  plan.  Splitting  of  contracts  to  circumvent  set  thresholds  should  be  strictly  and 
52 A draft first 18-month procurement plan is attached to this appendix. 
53 The first procurement plan will cover a period of 18 months.  
143 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
explicitly avoided. Thresholds that will determine the applicable procurement methods are detailed 
below. 
14.  Adoption of BPP's Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs):  Following a preliminary review, the 
SBDs developed by  the  BPP,  were found to be consistent  with  best practice. Currently, ongoing 
projects  in  the  Nigerian  portfolio  have  been  using  the  SBDs  developed  by  the  World  Bank.  For 
LIFE,  in  an  effort  to  increase  the  use  of  (and  thereby  strengthen)  country  systems,  the  SBDs 
developed  by  the  BPP  will  be  used.  The  only  exception  will  apply  for  procurements  that  follow 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) procedures, where World Bank SBDs will continue to be 
used. During project start-up, minor modifications and revisions will be required to BPP's SBDs to 
adapt  them  to  IFAD-financed  projects.  Likewise,  during  start-up,  on-the-job  training  will  be 
provided  to  IFAD-LIFE  management  by  PPB  and/or  IFAD  for  the  implementation  of  these 
documents.  
15.  Contract Administration: In addition to the provisions under the PPA (Section 19.16) for contract 
management,  improved  systems  and  tools  will  be  used  to  facilitate  effective  monitoring  of 
contractual obligations and invoking necessary actions such as penalty clauses in cases of failure 
on  the  part  of  the  contractor/supplier  to  uphold  contractual  obligations.  In  this  regard, 
comprehensive contract registers  will be maintained  and shared  with IFAD periodically. Contract 
monitoring forms will be used to strengthen the monitoring of milestone-based contracts requiring 
more than one payment. Updated versions of these documents will be made available to IFAD on 
a quarterly basis and form an integral part of project progress reporting (as described below). As 
part of start-up activities contract administration training will be provided to the entire LIFE project 
management team. 
16.  Evaluation: Each bid/proposal will be evaluated as provided for in the tender documents. An ad-
hoc tender board will be appointed bya designated personnel in consultation with the procurement 
specialist and the subject-matter specialist. The tender board members will be formally appointed 
by the RPCO, or designate, and will be required to sign a confidentiality agreement as well as an 
affidavit  indicating  that  they  are  not  in  a  position  of  conflict  of  interest.  The  selection  and 
appointment  of  members  of  the  tender  board  will  consider  technical  expertise  requirements  to 
ensure the required mix of skills is available for specialised evaluations.  
17.  Reporting  Requirements  for  Procurement:  The  Programme  Coordinators  and  Procurement 
Officers  shall  maintain  all  procurement  information,  from  planning  to  contract  awards  and 
subsequent  performance  of  contracts.  As  procurement  plans  can  change  quite  often,  either  by 
delay or advance procurement with consequent effect on programme implementation, the RPCO 
and  the  SPCOs  will  be  required  to  closely  monitor  the  progress  of  procurement  actions  against 
plans. Quarterly  procurement reports (QPRs) will be submitted to IFAD for information  within 15 
days  following  the  end  of  the  quarter.  At  a  minimum,  the  QPRs  will  include  the  following 
information:  
  Updated Procurement Plan; 
  Updated Contract Register; 
  Open Contract Monitoring Forms; 
  Narrative explaining significant variances between actual and planned implementation   
18.  Review of Procurement Decisions by IFAD and & Procurement Methods: The BPP provides 
the approved thresholds for service wide application. LIFE will comply fully with internal approval 
procedures.  The  table  below  presents  the  recommended  procurement  methods  and  thresholds 
that will initially be applicable for the IFAD financed LIFE. These thresholds will be finalised and 
formally  communicated  to  the  Government  through  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LtB),  upon  entry 
into  force  of  the  loan.  During  implementation,  they  may  be  unilaterally  reviewed  (raised  or 
lowered) by IFAD. Where there is disagreement between BPP's provisions and those in the LTB, 
the latter shall supersede the former. All contracts regardless of value will be subject to IFAD's ex-
post review.  
144 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Procurement Type 
Value of Procurement (USD equivalent) 
Procurement 
Method 
IFAD Prior review 
thresholds 
More than or equal to 500,000 
ICB 
1  Works 
2 
Goods 
NCB 
equal to or less than 499,999 and more 
than 100,000 
NS 
less than or equal to 99,999 
Direct 
only in exceptional cases where sufficient 
Contracting 
justification is provided 
More than or equal to 500,000 
ICB 
Less than 500,000 and more than 100,000  NCB 
less than or equal to 100,000  
Only in exceptional cases where sufficient 
justification is provided 
NS 
Direct 
Contracting 
International 
RFP 
National RFP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All contracts above USD 
50,000 equivalent 
All Direct Contracts  
All contracts above USD 
20,000 equivalent 
All Direct Contracts 
All contracts above USD 
10,000 
All Single Sourced 
Service contracts 
All training with aggregate 
values above USD 
20,000  
 
All international trainings 
 
All Contracts above USD 
5,000  
SSS 
N/A 
N/A 
3 
Services (Consultancy 
and Non Consultancy)*  
More than or equal to 70,000 
less than 70,000 
Only in exceptional cases where sufficient 
justification is provided.   
*The default selection method will be QCBS 
4 
Trainings, 
Workshops and 
Study-Tours 
Trainings/Workshops are not procurement 
items as they are, but rather management 
issues. This may involve Services 
Procurement if hiring of a trainer is 
involved, it may involve the procurement 
of Goods if they buy training materials, it 
can be Non-consultancy Services 
Procurement if they rent a venue. 
5 
Community-led 
Procurement 
N/A 
145 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
A.  Assumptions 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
LIFE-ND  will  comprise  of  two  phases,  each  with  a  duration  of  six  years.  Implementation  is 
foreseen to commence in  2018 upon approval of  the financing by IFAD's  Executive  Board  in 
December 2017.  
The  cost  tables  account  for  IFAD's  and  FGN's  intention  to  set  aside  and/or  mobilise  an 
additional  US$  30  million,  from  either  a  subsequent  PBAS  cycle54  or  though  co-financing,  to 
fund  activities  during  the  second  phase  (2024  –  2029).  The  specific  activities  that  will  be 
financed during Phase 2 will be a replication and up-scaling of those Phase 1 activities that de 
will have demonstrated sustainable results. 
Unit costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing at the time of the first design 
mission fielded  in March 2017. Documentation from on-going projects (RUFIN,  VCDP, CASP) 
were  consulted  to  ground-truth  cost  estimates.  Given  the  prevailing  volatility  of  the  Nigerian 
Naira (NGN) on the foreign exchange market (having lost half its value in the last 4 years), the 
input currency used for these cost tables is the US$. Costs are also expressed in NGN at the 
current exchange rate of US$ 1:NGN 305 - applied throughout the project life.  
Local Inflation in Nigeria today stands between 16 and 18 per cent55. Price contingencies have 
been calculated based on a constant: (i) local inflation rate of 11.5% (ten year average); and (ii) 
two per cent foreign inflation rate, based on the World Bank’s Manufactures Unit Value (MUV) 
Index56.. 
Taxes  and  duties  were  estimated  using  information  made  publicly  available  by  the  Federal 
Inland  Revenue  Service  of  Nigeria57. All  good  and  services  are  subject  to  five  per  cent  value 
added tax, Imported vehicles carry a 70 per cent import duty.   
For the following expenditure categories, a five per cent physical contingency has been added 
to  cost  allocations  under  the  following  expenditure  categories:  (i)  Civil  Works,  (ii)  Equipment 
and Material; (iii) Training; and (iv) Operating Costs. 
It  is  estimated  that  50  per  cent  of  expenditures  under  categories:  Civil  Works;  Vehicles  and 
Motorcycles; Consultancies; and Equipment and Material, will be made in foreign currency (i.e. 
for imported goods and services).  
B.  Project costs 
II. Programme Costs 
8. 
Total programme costs to be incurred during the 12-year implementation period, including price 
and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at US$ 130.015 million. Base costs 
amount to US$ 121.747 million. Estimated physical contingencies amount to US$ 1.805 million; 
price  contingencies  are  estimated  at  US$  6.463  million.  The  estimated  foreign  exchange 
element of project costs is US$  19.795 million representing approximately  15 per cent of total 
project costs. Duties and taxes are equivalent  to US$ 3.057 million (two per cent of total project 
costs).  Investment  costs  US$  111.587  million  -  account  for  86  per  cent  of  base  costs;  total 
54 Financing terms to be determined and subject to IFAD's internal Procedures and Executive Board Approval 
55 Central Bank of Nigeria, 2017 
56 World Bank, 2017 – MUV is a Measure of the price of developing country imports of manufactures in U.S. dollar 
terms.  
57 http://www.firs.gov.ng  
146 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
recurrent costs are estimated at US$ 10.161 million. Programme coordination and Management 
(Component  2)  costs  amount  to  US$  21.508  million,  representing  16  per  cent  of  total  project 
costs.  
9. 
Total Project Costs by component is shown in tables 1 and 2 below: 
Table 1: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Year (USD) 
Table 2: Programme Cost Summary by Component/Expenditure Account (USD) 
147 
 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Project Components by Year -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base Cost201820192020202120222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth 1. Sub-Component 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 1 9562 0519 2239 5688 6778 5615467103 1613 4402 9562 95653 8042. Sub-Component 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses -8 8278 5048 5041 124837-2 8432 7232 72332332336 7303. Sub-Component 1.3: Financial inclusion support for agri-enterprises 5756996756756996751752222102102222105 2474. Sub-Component 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 4239197947146876871362882302552302235 586Subtotal 2 95412 49519 19619 46111 18610 7598574 0636 3246 6283 7313 713101 367B. Component 2: Project management and coordination 3 8281 9241 9342 1511 9342 4241 5229139139139131 01320 380Total BASELINE COSTS 6 78114 41921 13021 61213 12013 1832 3794 9777 2377 5414 6444 726121 747Physical Contingencies 3329133734498971614717017051501 805Price Contingencies Inflation Local 1561 4572 7654 0572 3923 0271 1162 9114 0814 7703 1213 70233 556Foreign 1210216423044836327329732659781 730Subtotal Inflation 1681 5592 9294 2872 4373 1101 1793 1844 3785 0963 1803 78035 285Devaluation -127-1 196-2 289-3 389-2 019-2 574-955-2 507-3 545-4 174-2 757-3 291-28 822Subtotal Price Contingencies 413646398984175362246778339224234896 463Total PROJECT COSTS 6 85515 07422 10622 85413 63513 8152 6195 8008 2408 6335 1185 265130 015  Taxes 184426470476189218912432672661101183 057Foreign Exchange 1 1733 4733 3903 4275208045201 9781 9141 89831438319 795 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
C.  Project financing 
10. 
11. 
LIFE-ND will be financed by: (i) the Federal Government of Nigeria,(ii) the six participating State 
governments,  (iii)  The  Niger  Delta  Development  Corporation  (NDDC),  and  (iv)  IFAD.  The 
Federal  Government  will  provide  financing  in  foregone  tax  revenue  and  through  payment  of 
salaries  of  RPCO  staff.  State  governments  will  finance  salaries  for  all  SPCO  staff.  Moreover, 
State  governments  will  aggregately  make  30,000  ha  available  to  the  project  (not  monetised) 
and will contribute to 50 percent of the cost of land preparation on the 6,000 ha earmarked for 
incubators. The NDDC will provide US$ 30 million in  parallel co-financing to replicate LIFE-ND 
in the three states not covered by IFAD financing. IFAD  will  provide a US$ 60 million  loan for 
the  first  phase,  and  anticipates  a  further  US$  32  million  for  a  second  phase  depending  on 
performance, allocation and co-financing.  The tables that follow show the financing plan by (i) 
component, and (ii) by expenditure account.    
IFAD financing for the first phase (2018 – 2024)  will provided as a US$ 60 million loan subject 
to (i) interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent; (ii) a maturity 
period of twenty five (25)  years; (iii)  a grace period of five  years; and (iv) a service charge of 
0.75  per  cent  incurred  by  the  Borrower  as  of  the  date  of  approval  by  the  Executive  Board.  A 
further  US$  30  million  in  financing  will  be  allocated  by  IFAD  for  the  second  phase  (2025  – 
2029).  The  financing  terms  and  conditions  for  the  second  phase  will  be  subject  to  IFAD's 
internal procedures and approval by its Executive Board.   The financing plan by component is 
Disbursement Account is presented in tables 3 and 4 below:  
Table 3: Programme Financing Plan by Component (US$'000) 
Table 4: Programme Financing Plan by Disbursement Account (US$'000) 
148 
 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Components by Financiers(US$ '000)FederalStateLocalIFAD Loan 1IFAD Loan 2NDDCGovernmentGovernmentsTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth 1. Sub-Component 1.1: Support to Rural Agribusiness Incubation 27 87450.514 33926.012 49622.65220.9--55 23042.51 15753 5515222. Sub-Component 1.2: Production and marketing infrastructure support to agribusinesses 17 20141.69 68623.410 46225.31 5443.72 4585.941 35131.815 44524 3621 5443. Sub-Component 1.3: Financial inclusion support for agri-enterprises 2 52643.91 42224.71 59427.72083.6--5 7504.42935 2492084. Sub-Component 1.4: Rural Institution Strengthening 2 78445.11 56925.41 59425.82293.7--6 1764.83545 593229Subtotal 50 38446.427 01624.926 14624.12 5032.32 4582.3108 50783.517 24888 7552 503B. Component 2: Project management and coordination 9 61644.75 06623.63 85417.95532.62 41911.221 50816.52 54618 408553Total PROJECT COSTS 60 00046.132 08124.730 00023.13 0572.44 8773.8130 015100.019 795107 1633 057 Federal Republic of NigeriaLivelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta (LIFE-ND)Disbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)FederalStateLocalIFAD Loan 1IFAD Loan 2NDDCGovernmentGovernmentsTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesInputs ---------------Civil Works 16 73243.79 42124.68 21121.41 5063.92 4586.438 32829.515 05921 7631 506Vehicles and Motorcycles 1 29349.952920.563724.61295.0--2 5882.01 2941 165129Consultancies 3 55041.62 24926.42 31127.13143.71001.28 5246.63 1375 074314Equipment and Materials 39956.113418.914720.7314.3--7110.530537531Salaries and Allowances 3 59240.81 53717.51 35015.30-2 31926.48 7976.8-8 797-Operating Costs 90033.468925.61 02037.9843.1--2 6922.1-2 60984Grants and Subsidies 21 45049.510 72524.811 14625.7----43 32133.3-43 321-Training 5 73747.73 23126.92 58921.54723.9--12 0299.3-11 557472Workshops 6 34848.73 56627.42 58919.95224.0--13 02410.0-12 503522Unallocated ---------------Total PROJECT COSTS 60 00046.132 08124.730 00023.13 0572.44 8773.8130 015100.019 795107 1633 057 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Exchange rate NGN 305 = USD 1 
Discount rate = 14% 
Project projected life = 25 years 
1) The  economic  life  of  some  tree  crops  including  cocoa,  oil  palm  and  plantain/bananas;  and 
some processing equipments such as hydraulic press and rice haulers is up to 25 years and 
beyond: consequently the analysis was projected for 25 years. 
2) For all tree crops including cocoa, oil palm and plantain production investment on seedlings is 
made in the second year of the project.  
3) In year zero of the project it was assumed that the  youth/woman was not employed, however 
he/she gets his/her upkeep from relatives. The opportunity cost of this upkeep which he/she 
will  lose  when  he/she  is  gainfully  employed  in  the  second  year  was  estimated  as  a  third  of 
maize  output  of  a  maize  farmer  (this  is  a  simplifying  assumption  to  generate  incremental 
benefit “with” and “without” LIFE intervention. 
4) In  the  first  year  the  youth/woman  is  on  tutelage  and  receives  equivalent  of  his/her  upkeep 
without the project but in addition receives the start-up amount of his/her chosen enterprise. 
5) In the second year the youth/woman develops his/her enterprise: (planting the seedlings if tree 
crops) 
6) The  duration  for  incubation  and  gestation  and  the  start-up  amount  for  each  enterprise  were 
obtained from descriptive analysis of the baseline data 
7) For  those  that  are  mentored,  starting  from  end  of  programme  year  2  they  will  be  provided 
N250,000  (though  a  revolving  credit  fund)  per  enterprise).  This  amount  is  recorded  as 
financial  inflow  in  the  financial  analysis.  It  has  one  year  moratorium.  It  starts  being  repaid 
(financial  outflow)  on  equal  amount  for  3  years  without  interest  from  the  third  year  after 
collection.  
8) Upgrading of the technology of the master could be supported. As a matter of fact, the master 
is a service provider and will be remunerated for rendering the service. It is assumed that this 
intervention  will  increase  the  area,  yield  or  quantity  of  raw  material  processed  by  about  10 
percent by project year 5. 
For food crops such as cassava and rice: 
9) Before the project, the beneficiaries were not employed. But they were alive consequently it is 
assumed  that  they  received  some  income  for  their  upkeep.  We  may  not  assume  that  the 
income was N5000 unemployment benefit of FGN rather we take it that they were nursing the 
enterprise that they have chosen and were practicing it in a very low scale ie 10 percent of the 
going scale. Consequently for projects year zero and year one, the scale of operation is only 
10 percent of the going scale. 
10) Analysis  is  based  on  the  first  six  years  of  the  LIFE  project  as  funding  for  this  phase  is 
assured. 
11) 
LIFE  will  identify,  strengthen  or  create  25,500  youth  agri-enterprises  during  its 
programme duration.  
Based  on  (9)  and  (10)  the  following  table  of  project  achievement  was  computed.  Column  1 
stands for the project years. Column 2 coded the rate of project implementation which started 
building up gradually up to the 3rd and 4th years of the project, then declined gradually till the 
6th  year.  Column  3  shows  the  proportionate  rate  of  project  implementation  per  project  year. 
Column  4  shows  the  total  achievement  of  the  project  and  column  5  shows  the  project’s 
achievement with respect to each project year. 
150 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
TABLE 1: LIFE PROJECT,S ACHIEVEMENTS PER ANNUM 
Project Year 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Rate 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
1 
12 
 Proportion 
0.08 
0.17 
0.25 
0.25 
0.17 
0.08 
Achievement  
25500 
25500 
25500 
25500 
25500 
25500 
Achievement w.r.t project year  
2125 
4250 
6375 
6375 
4250 
2125 
25500 
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE SELECTED ENTERPRISES FOR FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
ANALYSIS 
The  relative  importance  of  the  selected  enterprises  for  economic  and  financial  analysis  was 
determined  based  on  the  number  of  responses  obtained  from  the  baseline  survey  and  the  result  is 
presented  in  table  2.  The  fourth  column  of  table  2  shows  the  proportion  of  responses  for  the 
enterprises (their relative importance) in the region. 
TABLE 2: RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE SELECTED ENTERPRISES 
 S/No 
 Selected Enterprises for Financial and Economic Analysis  Total Response  Proportion 
1  Cassava Production 
2  Plantain Producer 
3  Fish Processor 
4  Poultry Producer 
5  Rice Production 
6  Oil Palm Producer 
7  Cocoa Producer 
8  Cassava Processing 
9  Fish Producer 
10  Rice Processor 
11  Oil Palm Processor 
Total 
122 
111 
86 
82 
77 
59 
56 
44 
42 
31 
28 
738 
0.17 
0.15 
0.12 
0.11 
0.10 
0.08 
0.08 
0.06 
0.06 
0.04 
0.04 
1.00 
The relative importance of the selected enterprises for economic and financial analysis  was used to 
allocate  the  Achievement  of  the  LIFE  project  per  year  (table  1) to  the  selected  enterprises  and  the 
result is presented in table 3. For instance in project’s year one, a total of 2125 youth and women will 
be incubated in various enterprises. Out of this number (2125), 351 or 17 percent will be incubated in 
cassava  production;  320  incubated  in  plantain  production;  248  incubated  in  fish  processing;  236 
poultry production; 222 rice production; 170 oil palm production; 161 cocoa production; 127 cassava 
processing;  121 fish production;  89 rice processing and 81  will be incubated  in  oil palm processing. 
Other details are in table 3. Essentially, elements of table 3 were used as aggregation weights to sum 
up  the  incremental  net  benefits  from  the  selected  enterprises  in  order  to  obtain  the  total  project’s 
incremental benefits. The LIFE project’s incremental benefits were used to compute the interim IRR. 
Table 3: Aggregation Weights for summing the Incremental Benefits 
Share 
Enterprises 
0.17 
Cassava Production 
0.15 
Plantain Producer 
0.12 
Fish Processor 
0.11 
Poultry Producer 
0.10 
Rice Production 
0.08 
Oil Palm Producer 
0.08 
Cocoa Producer 
0.06 
Cassava Processing 
0.06 
Fish Producer 
0.04 
Rice Processor 
0.04 
Oil Palm Processor 
1.00 
Total 
Response 
122 
111 
86 
82 
77 
59 
56 
44 
42 
31 
28 
738 
Total 
4215 
3835 
2972 
2833 
2661 
2039 
1935 
1520 
1451 
1071 
967 
25500 
PY6 
351 
320 
248 
236 
222 
170 
161 
127 
121 
89 
81 
2125 
PY2 
703 
639 
495 
472 
443 
340 
322 
253 
242 
179 
161 
4250 
PY4 
1054 
959 
743 
708 
665 
510 
484 
380 
363 
268 
242 
6375 
PY3 
1054 
959 
743 
708 
665 
510 
484 
380 
363 
268 
242 
6375 
PY1 
351 
320 
248 
236 
222 
170 
161 
127 
121 
89 
81 
2125 
PY5 
703 
639 
495 
472 
443 
340 
322 
253 
242 
179 
161 
4250 
151 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Financial Analysis 
The estimated overall financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) for the LIFE project is 43 %; with a NPV 
of NGN 53,646,174,700 or USD 175,889,100; and incremental net benefit of NGN 15,148,983,800 or 
USD 49,668.800, assuming an opportunity cost of capital of 14%.  
The details for the project enterprises are in table 4. 
The  LIFE  project’s  incremental  benefits  were  used  to  compute  the  financial  IRR  for  the  project  and 
this  is  presented  in  table  4.  The  estimated  financial  IRR  and  the  Net  Present  Value  (NPV)  for  the 
enterprises  and  the  project  are  presented  in  table  4.  The  LIFE  project’s  estimated  NPV  is  equal  to 
NGN 53,646,174,700. If we assume an exchange rate of USD1 = NGN 305. The current project cost 
of USD 60 000 000 will be equal to 18,300,000,000. 
Table 4: Estimated Financial IRR And NPV 
Project Enterprises 
Cocoa Production 
Plantain Production 
Oil Palm Production 
Cassava Production 
Rice Production 
Layer Production 
Fish Production 
Fish Processing 
Palm Fruit Processing 
Rice Milling 
Garri Production 
Project 
Percent 
IRR 
0.41 
0.60 
0.73 
0.39 
0.64 
0.77 
0.64 
1.00 
0.35 
0.85 
0.89 
0.43 
000 Naira 
000 USD 
NPV 
2431.78 
3442.47 
6622.36 
439.04 
881.41 
2073.70 
1424.29 
1156.89 
3338.70 
3919.18 
456.00 
53646174.7 
INCR BENEFIT 
1152.95 
1144.31 
2034.06 
160.70 
246.97 
535.28 
407.39 
291.71 
1331.20 
989.76 
672.64 
15148983.8 
NPV 
7.97 
11.29 
21.71 
1.44 
2.89 
6.80 
4.67 
3.79 
10.95 
12.85 
1.50 
175889.1 
INCR BENEFIT 
3.78 
3.75 
6.67 
0.53 
0.81 
1.76 
1.34 
0.96 
4.36 
3.25 
2.21 
49668.8 
The cash flow worksheet developed for the LIFE project was used to compute:  
  The Total Project Financial Net Incremental Benefit;  
  The Total Project Unallocated Cost/Overheads; (the unallocated/overhead costs were assume 
to be 30 percent of the project loan amount. The proportion in column 3 of table 1 was used to 
allocate the unallocated/overhead costs to the six years of the project’s life) and  
  The Project Financial Net Incremental Benefit after all Costs 
These  are  presented  in  table  5.  The  Stream  of  Project  Financial  Net  Incremental  Benefit  after  all 
Costs was used to compute the financial IRR and the Net Present Value at 14 percent discount rate. 
Table 5: Stream of Project Financial Net Incremental Benefit after all Costs 
Project 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Total Project Financial Net 
Incremental Benefit 
Financial Analysis 
Total  Project 
Unallocated Cost 
0 
-1107065966 
-1932140039 
-2293652670 
-801135888.6 
2914760375 
7346770837 
12105448630 
15148983825 
17151730192 
-508333333.3 
-1016666667 
-1525000000 
-1525000000 
-1016666667 
-508333333.3 
152 
Project Financial Net Incr. 
Benefit after all Costs 
-508333333.3 
-2123732632 
-3457140039 
-3818652670 
-1817802555 
2406427041 
7346770837 
12105448630 
15148983825 
17151730192 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Project 
Year 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
Total Project Financial Net 
Incremental Benefit 
Financial Analysis 
Total  Project 
Unallocated Cost 
18150202786 
18358446605 
18427803610 
18427803610 
18433971293 
18439332743 
18444694429 
18443888904 
18443890321 
18444698679 
18439945779 
18435193116 
18429634220 
18429637053 
18435201616 
18440766179 
Project Financial Net Incr. 
Benefit after all Costs 
18150202786 
18358446605 
18427803610 
18427803610 
18433971293 
18439332743 
18444694429 
18443888904 
18443890321 
18444698679 
18439945779 
18435193116 
18429634220 
18429637053 
18435201616 
18440766179 
153 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Economic Analysis 
Economic  analysis  involves  estimating  the  economic  ratios  (NPV  and  IRR)  while  visualizing  the 
Nigerian economy as if: 
1. There are no ownership rights to resources;  
2. No resources’ underutilization is permitted;  
3. All constraints to free trade of resources and outputs are assumed away;  
4. No monopoly effects exist in the economy; and  
5. Government  interference  was  limited  to  ensuring  free  competitive  enterprises  such  that  the 
economy tends to a perfect competitive market situation. 
In transmitting estimates made in the financial cash flow to estimates for economic cash flow: (1) all 
possible  institutional  constraints  are  removed;  (2)  all  transfer  payments  namely:  taxes,  subsidies, 
loans,  interest  repayment  and  grants  are  removed  from  the  financial  flows;  (3)  inputs  are  valued 
(shadow priced) at their opportunity cost while outputs are valued (shadow priced) at their willingness 
to pay.  
The numeraire used for the economic analysis is ‘the domestic currency at domestic price level’ that is 
the prevalent market prices of the naira as at mid June constant prices 2016. Essentially moving from 
financial to economic analysis involves adjusting market prices to economic (accounting) prices that is 
opportunity  cost  pricing  for  inputs  and  willingness  to  pay  for  output.  This  price  adjustment  is  not 
carried out mechanically but with sensuous feel of the economy of interest. In the LIFE project it was 
carried out as follows.  
In converting from financial to economic accounts we adopted the accounting practice of the doctrine 
of  materiality  by  striking  a  balance  between  analytical  elegance  and  getting  the  true  picture  by 
applying  rough  approximations  and  ignoring  trivial  adjustments  that  will  not  make  any  substantial 
difference in the investment decision. Financial prices were converted into economic prices by making 
four groups of adjustment namely: (i) adjustment for direct transfer payments; (ii) adjustment for price 
distortions  in  the  exchange  rate;  (iii)  adjustment  for  price  distortions  in  traded  items;  and  (iv) 
adjustment for price distortions in non-traded items. 
(1)  Adjustment for Direct Transfer Payments 
All  direct  transfer  payments  (payments  that  represent  not  the  use  of  real  resources  but  only  the 
transfer  of  claims  to  real  resources  from  one  person  in  the  society  to  another)  were  expunged  from 
the  analysis.  These  transfer  payments  included  taxes,  direct  subsidies,  credit  transactions  such  as 
grants/loans,  receipts  and  repayment  of  principal  as  well  as  interest  payments.  To  this  end  the 
following subheads were expunged from the financial cash flow accounts: 
1) Taxes 
2) Financial inflows including disbursements from project grant/loan 
3) All Transfers from previous period 
4) Contribution from own savings   
5) Debt Service with respect to loans and grants; principal amounts; amounts due and interests 
6) All transfers to next period  
(2)  Adjustment for price distortions in Exchange rate 
In this section adjustment was made to the exchange rate. Given the Official Exchange rate58 as NGN 
305 = USD 1 and the average rate of import duties59 as 16.9 percent the Import Exchange Rate (IER) 
is  estimated  at  NGN  356.55  =  USD  1.  Since  there  is  no  tax  on  exports  the  Export  Exchange  Rate 
58/Project Concept Document 
59/Nigeria Customs service. ... CET Tariff - Act No. 4. 
154 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
(EER) remains at the official exchange rate (NGN 305 = USD 1). Taken the elasticity of imports as 0.7 
and  the  elasticity  of  exports  as  0.3,  the  weighted  average  exchange  rate  (imports  and  exports)  or 
Shadow  Exchange  Rate  (SER)  is  estimated  at  NGN  341.08  =  USD  1.  The  Premium  on  Foreign 
Exchange (PFE) emanating from distortions generated by trade policies is estimated at 0.12 and the 
Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) is estimated at 0.89. 
Table 1: Adjustment for price distortions in Exchange rate 
Statistic 
Official Exchange rate 
Average import duties 
Import Exchange Rate 
Export Exchange rate 
Description 
 National Statistics 
 National Statistics 
 National Statistics 
 National Statistics 
Estimate 
305 
0.169 
356.545 
305 
Description 
Import (National average) 
Export (No duty on agric 
prod) 
Shadow Exchange Rate 
Standard Conversion Factor 
Premium on foreign exchange 
Duty 
17% 
0% 
Effective 
price 
356.545 
Elasticity 
0.70 
Economic values 
249.58 
305 
0.30 
91.50 
341.08 
0.89 
0.1183 
(3)  Adjustment for price distortions in major imported inputs  
In this section adjustment was made to the prices of major imports in the project. 
The  major  traded  inputs  in  the  project  are  imported  organic  fertilizers  particularly  Triple  Super 
Phosphate (TSP) and  Urea. The economic prices of these fertilizers  were  estimated  at TSP  = NGN 
5,221.7 and Urea = NGN 4,682.9 based on the following assumptions:  
World Bank Commodities Prices Data (Pink Sheet Feb 2017)60: FOB TSP61 = USD 269; FOB Urea62 = 
USD241 
Freight and Insurance = 8 percent 
Shadow Exchange rate = NGN 341.08 = USD 1.0 
Standard Conversion Factor = 0.89 
Port handling and Clearance rate = 10 percent of Cost Insurance and Freight (CIF) 
Distance from port to project state capital = 820 Km and mileage cost = NGN1.0 per Mt per Km 
Intrastate movement = 40 Km and mileage cost = NGN5.0 per Mt per Km 
The  Free  on  Board  (FOB)  prices  of  the  fertilizers  were  first  converted  to  CIF  prices  with  respect  to 
Lagos  port  (Apapa).  Secondly  the  CIF  prices  were  converted  to  local  currency  using  the  shadow 
exchange rate. Thirdly, port handling and clearance charges and transportation (inter and intra state) 
costs  were  estimated  and  added  to  the  border  prices  to  arrive  at  farm  gate  parity  prices  of  the 
fertilizers.   
Table 2: Adjustment for price distortions in major imported inputs  
Details 
S/N
o 
1 
World Price CPT = FOB 
Item Description 
US$ /Mt 
Unit 
World Bank Commodities Prices 
Data (Pink Sheet Feb 2017) 
Freight and Insurance 
US$ /Mt 
0.08 
2 
3 
4 
CIF, Apapa Lagos 
Sum of 1 and 2 
CIF, Apapa Lagos 
Convert 3 to Naira using 
Shadow exchange rate 
($1=N341.08) 
US$ /Mt 
N/Mt 
Rate 
CF 
WP TSP  WP Urea 
269.0 
241.0 
21.5 
19.3 
290.5 
260.3 
341.08 
99091.0 
88776.7 
5 
Port handling and Clearance 
 (Rate* Conversion Factor*CIF)  N/Mt 
0.05 
0.89421 
4430.4 
3969.3 
60 / http://www.worldbank.org/commodities 
61 /TSP (triple superphosphate), bulk, spot, granular, fob Tunisia. 
62 /Urea, (Black Sea), bulk, spot, f.o.b. Black Sea (primarily Yuzhnyy). 
155 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
S/N
o 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Item Description 
Details 
Unit 
Rate 
CF 
WP TSP  WP Urea 
From Port to Inland Towns 
Project State Capital 
Transportation Cost 
Interstate transport 
Farm gate price 
Farm gate price 
Farm gate price 
820  Km  x  Milage  rate  x  0.763 
(SCF) (add to imports) 
40KmxMilage  (N4.7)  x    0.763 
(TCF) ) (add to imports) 
Sum (4+5+6+7) 
Divide by 1000 
Multiply by 50 
N/Mt 
N/Mt 
N/Mt 
N/kg 
N/50 Kg bag 
1.00 
0.89421 
733.3 
733.3 
5.00 
0.89421 
178.8 
178.8 
104433.
5 
104.4 
93658.1 
93.7 
5221.7 
4682.9 
(4)  Adjustment for price distortions in major import substitution outputs produced from 
the Project 
In  this  section  adjustment  was  made  to  the  prices  of  major  import  substitution  outputs  that  will  be 
produced  by  the  project.  The  major  import  substitution  outputs  that  will  be  produced  by  the  project 
are: maize, rice, cocoa, palm oil and plantain/banana. 
The estimated Economic prices per Mt. for Maize  =  NGN 62,031.2, Rice  = NGN 14,737.4, Cocoa  = 
NGN 86,430.0, Palm oil = NGN 316,091.3, Plantain = NGN 37,254.5. The World Prices (FOB) per Mt. 
for the traded outputs (Maize63, Rice64, Cocoa65, Palm oil66, Plantain/banana67) are as follows Maize = 
USD  160,  Rice  =  USD  377,  Cocoa  =  USD  2200,  Palm  oil  =  USD  806,  Plantain  =  USD  97.  The 
economic prices of major traded outputs were estimated based on the following assumptions:  
Official Exchange Rate (OER) = NGN 305 = USD 1.0 
Average Import Duties (AID) = 16.9 
Import Exchange Rate (IER) = 365.55 
Export Exchange Rate (EER) = 305 
Elasticity of imports = 0.7 
Elasticity of exports = 0.3 
Freight and Insurance = 8 percent 
Shadow Exchange rate = NGN 341.08 = USD 1.0 
Standard Conversion Factor = 0.89 
Freight and Insurance Rate = 8 percent of FOB 
Port Handling and Clearance Charges = 10 percent of CIF 
Distance Port to Project State = 820 Km 
Mileage rate Port to Project State = NGN 1.0 per Km  
Distance Intra state transport in Project State = 40 Km 
Mileage rate Intra state transport in Project State = NGN 5.0 per Km  
The FOB prices of the exportable outputs (maize, rice, cocoa, palm oil and plantain/banana) were first 
converted to CIF prices with respect to Lagos port (Apapa) by adding Freight and Insurance charges 
as  well  as  port  handling  and  clearance  charges.  Secondly,  the  CIF  prices  were  converted  to  local 
currency  using  the  shadow  exchange  rate.  Thirdly,  transportation  (inter  and  intra  state)  costs  were 
estimated and  deducted from the border prices to  arrive at farm gate parity prices of the exportable 
outputs.   
63 /Maize (US), no. 2, yellow, f.o.b. US Gulf ports. 
64 /Rice (Thailand), 5% broken, white rice (WR), milled, indicative price based on weekly surveys of export transactions, 
government standard, f.o.b. Bangkok. 
65 /Cocoa (ICCO), International Cocoa Organization daily price, average of the first three positions on the terminal 
markets of New York and London, nearest three future trading months 
66 /Palm oil (Malaysia), 5% bulk, c.i.f. N. W. Europe 
67 /Bananas (Central & South America), major brands, US import price, f.o.t. US Gulf ports. 
156 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Table 3: Adjustment for price distortions in major import substitution outputs  
+ 
price 
Apapa, 
World 
FOB 
Freight 
Insurance 
CIF 
Lagos. 
CIF 
Lagos. 
Port  Handling  + 
Clearance(10%) 
of value 
Apapa, 
S/No  Description 
1 
Unit 
US$/Mt 
Rate 
CF 
Maize 
160.0 
Rice 
377.0 
US$/Mt 
0.08 
12.8 
30.2 
Bank 
Details 
World 
Commodities 
Prices Data (Pink 
Sheet Feb 2017) 
Import Substitutes 
Palm oil 
Export 
Plantain  Cocoa 
806.0 
64.5 
97.0 
7.8 
2200.0 
176.0 
Sum ( 1 + 2) 
US$/Mt 
172.8 
407.2 
870.5 
104.8 
2376.0 
No  3  x  Shadow 
Exch. rate 
(CIF*0.1)  x  0.85 
(SCF) 
Value 
Border 
at 
the 
N/Mt 
341.08 
58938.9 
138874.7 
296904.6 
35731.7 
810409.6 
N/Mt 
0.10 
0.89421 
5270.4 
12418.4 
26549.6 
3195.2 
72468.0 
64209.3 
151293.1 
323454.3 
38926.9 
882877.6 
Port to Inland town in Port Harcourt  
820  Km  x  1.0  x 
Transportation 
0.763  (minus  for 
Cost 
exports) 
x 
Km 
Reference Mkt. Price  
40 
Interstate 
5.0*0.763 
Transport 
(TCF)(minus  for 
exports) 
Sum ( 4 - 6-7) 
Farm  gate  Price 
Excluding 
transport. 
Storage Losses 
Farm  gate  Price 
Excluding 
transport 
Storage Losses 
Farm gate Price 
Farm gate Price  Multiply 9 by 50 
Divide by 1000 
Net out 2% 
and 
and 
N/Mt 
1.00 
0.89421 
733.3 
733.3 
733.3 
733.3 
733.3 
N/Mt 
5.00 
0.89421 
63476.0 
178.8 
150559.9 
178.8 
322721.0 
178.8 
38193.6 
178.8 
882144.4 
178.8 
N/Mt 
N/Mt 
N/Kg 
63297.2 
150381.0 
322542.2 
38014.8 
881965.5 
62031.2 
62.0 
3101.6 
147373.4 
147.4 
7368.7 
316091.3 
37254.5 
37.3 
864326.2 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
(5)  Adjustment for price distortions in the wage rate 
Following  Gittinger  (1982),  the  annual  shadow  wage  receipt  for  agricultural  labour  is  the  number  of 
days in the year when most rural labour can expect to find employment multiplied by the daily wage 
rate at such times reduced by a conversion factor. In the project area agricultural labour is employed 
for about 5 months only in a year. In the remaining 7 months, unemployment of agricultural labour is 
the order of the day, no wonder the soaring youth restiveness in the area. An expedient approach to 
convert  financial  wage  rate  to  economic  wage  rate  is  to  weight  the  financial  wage  rate  by  the 
proportion of the months of the year that agricultural labour is employed and apply a conversion factor 
to the estimate. The weight is derived as in table 4.  
Table 4: Adjustment for price distortions in the wage rate 
Item description 
Number of months in the agricultural calendar 
Number of months in the year labour is employed 
Weighting factor  
Standard conversion factor 
Weighting factor for converting financial to economic wage rate 
Estimate 
12 
5 
0.417 
0.894 
0.373 
Given the financial wage rage of NGN 1000, the economic wage rate was estimated at NGN373.0. 
(6)  Adjustment for price distortions in the non-traded items (inputs and outputs) 
Nigeria  is  a  developing  country  and  the  markets  are  operating  as  second  best  model  fraught  with 
market imperfections and cannot be assumed to operate perfectly competitive economic model where 
government intervenes only to ensure perfect competition and equitable distribution of resources (first 
157 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
best  model).  In  reality  the  Nigerian  economy  implements  policies  that  distort  the  economy.  These 
included:  import  bans,  restrictions,  duties,  taxes,  quota.  Within  the  economy  there  is  immobility  of 
resources, lack of information about market signals and imperfections in knowledge about the working 
of the economy. All these conspire to drive a wedge between market and economic prices. In order to 
adjust  for  these  distortions,  the  prices  of  non-traded  commodities  were  weighted  with  the  SCF.  The 
recorded financial prices which represent the opportunity cost in case of inputs or willingness to pay in 
case of outputs were deflated with the standard conversion factor.  
In summary, in transmitting estimates made in the financial cash flow to estimates for economic cash 
flow we adjusted for:  
i)  direct transfer payments 
ii) distortions in exchange rate 
iii) price distortions in major imported inputs 
iv)  price distortions in major import substitution outputs produced from the project 
v) price distortions in the wage rate 
vi)  price distortions in the non-traded items (inputs and outputs) 
 After  casting  the  economic  cash  flow,  the  financial  ratios  were  estimated  and  the  results  are 
presented in table 5. 
Economic Analysis 
The estimated overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the LIFE  project is 35 %;  with  a 
NPV  of  NGN  31,758,741,400;  or  USD  104,120,000;  and  incremental  net  benefit  of  NGN 
13,089,456,900 or USD 42,916,300, assuming an opportunity cost of capital of 14%.  
The details for the project enterprises are in table 5. 
Table 5: Estimated Economic IRR and NPV 
Project Enterprises 
Cocoa Production 
Plantain Production 
Oil Palm Production 
Cassava Production 
Rice Production 
Layer Production 
Fish Production 
Fish Processing 
Palm Fruit Processing 
Rice Milling 
Garri Production 
Project 
Percent 
IRR 
0.46 
0.16 
0.64 
0.42 
0.50 
0.50 
0.52 
0.57 
0.42 
0.33 
0.71 
0.35 
000 Naira 
000 USD 
NPV 
4962758.94 
95153.33 
7777915.91 
853389.35 
1141545.27 
2275868.89 
1699522.23 
1180349.98 
6224022.53 
1335822.52 
3116239.75 
31758741.4 
INCR BENEFIT 
1662223.17 
190863.18 
1981124.06 
218488.16 
268529.78 
545310.29 
411578.91 
267628.19 
1731160.87 
416477.12 
698839.58 
13089456.9 
NPV 
16271.34 
311.98 
25501.36 
2798.00 
3742.77 
7461.87 
5572.20 
3870.00 
20406.63 
4379.75 
10217.18 
104127.0 
INCR BENEFIT 
5449.91 
625.78 
6495.49 
716.35 
880.43 
1787.90 
1349.44 
877.47 
5675.94 
1365.50 
2291.28 
42916.3 
The Economic cash flow worksheet developed for the LIFE project was used to compute:  
  The Total Project Economic Net Incremental Benefit;  
  The Total Project Unallocated Cost/Overheads;  
  The Project Economic Net Incremental Benefit after all Costs 
These  are  presented  in  table  6.  The  Stream  of  Project  Economic  Net  Incremental  Benefit  after  all 
Costs was used to compute the Economic IRR and the Net Present Value at 14 percent discount rate. 
158 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Table 6: Stream of Project Economic Net Incremental Benefit after all Costs 
Project 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
Total Project Economic Net 
Incremental Benefit 
0 
-1692718206 
-2933559553 
-3633636629 
-1824699149 
2347917249 
6731786267 
11070563321 
13089456907 
14545464691 
15332175312 
15623213626 
15725120851 
15725120851 
15731288534 
15736649984 
15742011670 
15741206146 
15741207562 
15742015920 
15737263021 
15732510358 
15726951461 
15726954295 
15732518858 
15738083421 
Economic Analysis 
Total  Project Unallocated Cost 
-508333333 
-1016666667 
-1525000000 
-1525000000 
-1016666667 
-508333333 
Project Economic Net Incremental 
Benefit after all Costs 
-508333333.3 
-2709384872 
-4458559553 
-5158636629 
-2841365815 
1839583915 
6731786267 
11070563321 
13089456907 
14545464691 
15332175312 
15623213626 
15725120851 
15725120851 
15731288534 
15736649984 
15742011670 
15741206146 
15741207562 
15742015920 
15737263021 
15732510358 
15726951461 
15726954295 
15732518858 
15738083421 
Sensitivity Analysis 
Sensitivity  analysis  in  this  exercise  involved:  (1)  simulating  some  percentage  changes  in  output 
prices,  input  prices,  investment  and  total  costs  and  determining  the  impact  of  the  changes  on  the 
estimated Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and (2) determining the switching values at 14% 
cost of capital for costs, benefits and simultaneous increase in costs and decrease of benefits.  
Simulation 
Sensitivity  tests  indicate  that  the  estimated  EIRR  for  the  LIFE  project  is  stable  given  a  variety  of 
assumptions. The tests indicate that the LIFE project remains viable under a variety of price and cost 
changes.  In  general,  most  the  enterprise  models  were  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  output  price, 
investment  and  operating  costs.  A  10%  drop  in  the  output  prices  reduces  the  project  ERR  by  10%, 
and  a  10%  increase  in  investment  cost  reduces  the  project  ERR  by  5%,  and  a  10%  increase  in 
operating costs reduces the project ERR by 6%. The details for each enterprise model are on Table 8.  
Table 8: Simulation of 10% Fall In Output Prices,10% Rise In Investment and Operating Costs 
PROJECT ENTERPRISES 
Base IRR 
COCOA PRODUCTION 
PLANTAIN PRODUCTION 
OIL PALM PRODUCTION 
CASSAVA PRODUCTION 
RICE PRODUCTION 
LAYER PRODUCTION 
46% 
16% 
64% 
42% 
50% 
50% 
Output Price fall 
(10%) 
Investment Cost 
Rise 
IRR 
46% 
16% 
61% 
37% 
50% 
41% 
% 
Change 
0% 
0% 
5% 
12% 
0% 
18% 
IRR 
44% 
14% 
61% 
38% 
46% 
45% 
% 
Change 
4% 
8% 
5% 
9% 
9% 
9% 
Operating Costs Rise 
IRR 
% Change 
46% 
15% 
64% 
41% 
49% 
50% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
2% 
2% 
0% 
159 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
PROJECT ENTERPRISES 
Base IRR 
Output Price fall 
(10%) 
Investment Cost 
Rise 
Operating Costs Rise 
FISH PRODUCTION 
FISH PROCESSING 
PALM FRUIT PROCESSING 
RICE MILLING 
GARRI PRODUCTION 
Project 
52% 
57% 
42% 
33% 
71% 
35% 
44% 
22% 
42% 
33% 
59% 
32% 
14% 
61% 
0% 
0% 
17% 
10% 
47% 
52% 
39% 
30% 
66% 
33% 
9% 
9% 
7% 
8% 
7% 
5% 
50% 
28% 
41% 
8% 
66% 
33% 
4% 
50% 
3% 
76% 
8% 
6% 
There may be delays in project implementation due to a variety of reasons especially in the payment 
of  counterpart  fund  contributions  to  enable  draw-down.  These  delays  will  result  in  delays  in  the 
project’s  benefit  and  will  affect  the  estimated  ERR  adversely.  We  simulated  the  impact  on  the 
estimated  ERR  if  the  project’s  benefits  are  delayed  from  one  year  up  to  three  years.  Results  are 
summarized in Table 9 and indicate that the project remains economically viable even with up three 
years' delay in project benefits.  
Table 9: Sensitivity Analysis against changes in total project costs, benefits and time lag  
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Project costs 
1 year lag in benefits 
2 years lag in benefits 
3 years lag in benefits 
IRR 
NPV (Naira) 
Base scenario: 
35% 
   31 758 741 377  
Change: 
-10% 
-20% 
-50% 
10% 
20% 
10% 
20% 
50% 
34% 
33% 
29% 
36% 
36% 
34% 
33% 
32% 
32% 
30% 
28% 
   28 190 860 535  
   24 622 979 693  
   13 919 337 167  
   35 326 622 219  
   38 894 503 061  
   31 366 734 673  
   30 974 727 969  
   29 798 707 856  
   26 919 496 613  
   22 674 706 874  
   18 951 368 911  
NPV (USD) 
   104 127 021  
     92 429 051  
     80 731 081  
     45 637 171  
   115 824 991  
   127 522 961  
   102 841 753  
   101 556 485  
     97 700 681  
     88 260 645  
     74 343 301  
     62 135 636  
Switching values were calculated for total benefits and total costs. The ENPV for the project becomes 
zero when there is a 90% reduction in benefits or an eight-fold increase in costs.   
Molokwu Christopher C. 5th April, 2017 
160 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 11: Draft project implementation manual 
This draft PIM brings together relevant information detailed in the Appendices. The PIM will be revised 
at the early implementation stage of the project, incorporating the operational procedures that may be 
developed.    
Purpose of the Project Implementation Manual 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
The  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  provides  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Livelihood  Improvement  Family  Enterprises  Project  (LIFE)  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  of  Nigeria.  It 
provides  detailed  descriptions  of  the  structures  and  steps  required  in  the  implementation  of  the 
project.  The  PIM  also  provides  guidance  on  the  project  coordination,  financial  management, 
procurement, audit, planning monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management and communication. 
The PIM is a living document and will be revised from time to time on the basis of emerging project 
implementation experience.   
LIFE in Summary 
Nigeria,  Africa's  most  populous  country,  has  42%  of  the  youth  and  36%  of  the  women  either 
2. 
unemployed  or  underemployed.  Oil  exports,  which  account  for  95%  of  export  earnings  and  70%  of 
government revenue, have been declining since 2014 due to reduced oil production caused by falling 
international prices, and increasing sabotage of oil infrastructure in the Niger Delta region by restive 
youth.  As  a  result  of  these  issues  and  policy  uncertainty,  the  overall  GDP  growth  rate  has  steadily 
decreased  from  6.7%  in  2014  to  negative  1.8%  in  2016.  Thus,  Nigeria  is  in  recession.  Further, 
agriculture which contributed 21% to the GDP in 2015 remains underdeveloped. Nigeria's production 
of food has not kept pace with population growth and the costly importation of food has resulted in rise 
in food prices placing pressure on the poor.  
3. 
Nigeria is predominantly a rural economy with over 60% of the population living in rural areas, 
90%  of  whom  are  engaged  in  subsistence  farming.  Rural  poverty  was  estimated  at  44.9%  in  2013 
against  an  urban  poverty  incidence  of  12.6%.  Inadequate  access  to  land,  private  sector  exclusion, 
and  lack  of  initial  capital  and  reliable  market  outlets  discourage  youth  and  women  from  engaging  in 
agriculture  to  improve  their  livelihood.  Rural  youth  and  women  face  limited  alternative  employment 
opportunities.  The  current  agricultural  sector  policy,  Green  Alternative  Roadmap  for  Agriculture 
prioritizes  four  pillars:  food  security,  job  creation,  import  substitution  and  economic  diversification, 
while  the  Strategic  Framework  for  Youth  Employment  and  Job  Creation  emphasizes  youth 
employment in agriculture. 
4. 
The Niger Delta region, comprising of nine out of the 36 states of Nigeria, is a major producer of 
cassava, plantain  and rice, with fish,  cocoa, oil  palm and  poultry  also featuring  prominently  in some 
states. However, few  value addition enterprises  exist  to create meaningful jobs  and  employment for 
youth  and  women.  Absolute  poverty  incidence  ranges  from  45%  to  65%  in  the  Niger  Delta  states; 
malnutrition  is  prevalent  with  5.3%  acute  malnutrition,  12.3%  underweight,  20%  stunting  among 
children  under  five  years  of  age,  and  4.1  percent  acute  malnutrition  among  women  of  reproductive 
age  (15-49  years).  Household  level  food  insecurity  affects  87.8%  of  crop  farm  households  in  the 
region. Rising temperatures due to climate change are projected to result in increased rainfall which 
could worsen soil erosion and flooding.  
5. 
The LIFE project will use the incubator model for agri-enterprise development and job creation 
successfully  demonstrated  by  the  closed  IFAD-assisted  Community  Based  Natural  Resource 
Management  Programme  (CBNRMP),  to  promote  youth  employment.  The  project  will  also  build  on 
the successes of other IFAD-assisted projects on value chain development (linking rural smallholders 
to private off-takers) and rural finance (promoting local level savings to raise investment funds).  The 
LIFE project targets the first strategic objective of inclusion of young people (and women) in profitable 
agribusiness in the 2016-2021 Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (COSOP), and is aligned 
to the national LIFE programme which covers the entire nation.  
6. 
Project  area  and  target  group.  LIFE  will  be  implemented  in  the  nine  Niger  Delta  states  (Abia, 
162 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Akwa  Ibom,  Bayelsa,  Cross  River,  Delta,  Edo,  Imo,  Ondo  and  Rivers),  as  with  the  predecessor 
CBNRMP,  but  IFAD  support  will  be  focused  on  six  of  the  states,  Abia,  Bayelsa,  Cross  River,  Delta, 
Edo and Ondo, in line with the recommendations of the 2015 Country Programme Evaluation (CPE) 
for  a  coverage  of  a  smaller  number  of  states  under  one  project  for  better  results.  The  Niger  Delta 
Development Commission (NDDC) which has a mandate for the development of the region, and had 
co-financed the predecessor IFAD-assisted CBNRMP, will finance the implementation of LIFE in the 
remaining  three  states.  The  selection  criteria  for  the  six  states  for  IFAD  financing  include:  (a)  clear 
focus on community development and smallholder agriculture; (b) willingness to work with the private 
sector; and (c) demonstrated commitment and political will (as expressed in the level of participation 
in  the  former  CBNRMP)  to  support  a  joint  programme  with  IFAD.  In  each  state,  LIFE  will  cover  10 
LGAs  and  10  communities  per  LGA  based  on  defined  criteria.  Overall,  the  project  will  work  in  60 
LGAs  and  600  communities  across  the  six  states.  Consideration  will  be  given  to  high  performing 
states for additional two LGAs during the midterm review (MTR) of the project. 
7. 
LIFE will primarily target 25,500  youth and women beneficiaries as apprentices that will come 
out  of  the  incubation  system  with  their  own  profitable  enterprises  and  decent  jobs,  and  eventually 
serve  as  incubators  themselves.  It  will  also  target  about  600  established  and  potential  enterprise 
incubators as a pathway for job creation for the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will be youth aged 18 
to 35  years  and  women headed households  with children under the age  of 15  (50% male and  50% 
female),  while  the  incubators  will  be  identified  on  the  basis  of  their  involvement  in  market  linkage 
activities,  adoption  of  out-grower  model,  experience  in  the  incubation  of  new  enterprises,  and 
technical, financial, managerial and infrastructure capacity to provide enterprise incubation services to 
apprentices. The gender targeting strategy will include the grouping of women into enterprise clusters 
to  leverage  services  from  input  suppliers  and  organized  produce  buyers;  the  promotion  of  women 
responsive  enterprises;  sensitivity  on  the  time  and  venue  for  events  to  encourage  women 
participation;  self-targeting  of  women’s  only  groups;  provision  of  at  least  40%  slot  for  women  in  the 
benefiting community, 30% of leadership positions in commodity associations, and 30% of women in 
the  project  management  team;  and,  promotion  of  the  use  of  the  Gender  Action  Learning  System 
(GALS).  The  nutrition  activities  on  integrated  homestead  food  production  and  home  grown  school 
feeding  initiative  will  specifically  target  the  women  groups  in  order  to  create  better  opportunities  for 
engagement of women and adolescent girls. 
 The overall goal of LIFE is to realize a transformed rural economy in which the rural population 
8. 
can  derive  prosperity  and  equal  benefit.  The project  development  objective is  to enhance  income, 
food  security  and  job  creation  for  rural  youth  and  women  through  agri-enterprise  development  on  a 
sustainable basis in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria. The project has two components with outcomes 
specified below.  
Component 
1. Enhancement of 
economic opportunities 
for rural youth and 
women 
2. Project management and 
coordination 
Outcome 
  Market driven rural business incubators are strengthened  
  Production, productivity and marketing of agro-entrepreneurs are improved 
through public-private producer partnership (PPP) models 
  Market participation and profitability of beneficiaries enhanced through 
sustainable enterprises, improved market infrastructure, access to financial 
services, access to land as well as use of improved technologies 
Increased ease of beneficiaries doing agribusiness 
 
  Efficiently and effectively managed project achieving results with 
communication and knowledge management integrated in all aspects of 
operations 
9. 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities for rural youth and  poor women 
aims  at  facilitating  the  establishment  of  profitable  agribusiness  by  beneficiaries.  It  comprises  four 
mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents.  The  subcomponents  include:  (i)  Support  to  rural  agribusiness 
incubation to generate about 25,500 agri-enterprises; (ii) Support to rural agribusiness production and 
marketing infrastructure; (iii) Promotion of financial services for rural agribusiness; and (iv) Institutional 
strengthening and knowledge management to support capacity building of rural institutions. 
10.  Total project cost is estimated at US$ 95 million (NGN 28.9 billion) comprising US$ 60 million 
IFAD loan to finance six states, US$ 30 million from NDDC as a parallel co-financing for three states, 
states,  as  well  as  US$  5  million  from  Federal  and  State  Governments  to  finance  salaries  and  office 
163 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
accommodation. Component 1 will receive US$ 52 million (representing 86.7% of the IFAD financing, 
while component 2 will receive US$ 8 million, 13.3 percent of the IFAD financing. NDDC financing for 
the three states will be in the same ratio.   
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
Project governance 
11.  The  lead  governance  body  for  the  project  will  be  the  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC), 
chaired by the Minister of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD).  The 
NSC  will  be  responsible  for  oversight  of  the  project  and  providing  policy  guidance  to  project 
implementation. Other members of the NSC will include the Permanent Secretary of the FMARD, and 
representatives  of  NDDC,  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  (FMF),  Federal  Ministry  of  National  Planning 
and  Budget,  Federal  Ministries  of  Women  Affairs,  Water  Resources,  Environment,  and  Labour, 
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) and Manufacturers Association of Nigeria (MAN). The NSC will meet 
twice in a year to review progress, review lessons learned and good practices, and approve AWPBs. 
At  the  regional  level,  a  Technical  Support  Committee  (TSC)  chaired  by  the  Managing  Director  of 
NDDC,  and  comprising  of  the  NDDC  Director  of  Agriculture  and  Fisheries,  the  National  Programme 
Coordinator of LIFE, Regional Project Coordinator (who serves as Secretary), representative of FMF, 
representatives  of  recognised  youth  and  women  organisations,  and  a  representative  of  the 
Commodity  Alliance  Forum  from  each  participating  state,  and  co-opting  when  necessary,  relevant 
financial  institutions  and  research  institutions,  will  meet  quarterly  to  review  progress  of  project 
implementation,  assess  management  effectiveness,  decide  on  corrective  measures  where 
appropriate,  provide  guidance  for  the  smooth  implementation  of  project  activities,  and  review  the 
annual work plan and budget (AWPB) before its submission to the NSC for approval. A State Project 
Steering  Committee  (SPSC)  chaired  by  the  Commissioner  of  Agriculture  and  composed  of  the 
commissioners  of  Finance,  Budget  and  Planning,  Women  Affairs,  representatives  of  government 
agencies  and  departments  responsible  for  youth  and  women  empowerment,  representatives  of 
selected commodity associations in the state, representatives of youth and women organisations, and 
relevant financial institutions, will oversee the implementation of the project and approve the AWPB at 
the state level. In addition, the SPSC will facilitate the effective participation of relevant actors in the 
project. The State Project Coordinator shall serve as Secretary to the SPSC which shall meet at least 
twice in a year.  
Project management and coordination  
12.  Day-to-day management of the project will be undertaken by the Regional Project Coordination 
Office  (RPCO)  headed  by  the  Regional  Project  Coordinator,  and  housed  in  NDDC  Headquarters  in 
Port  Harcourt.  The  RPCO  will  be  responsible  for  supervision,  technical  support  and  coordination  of 
the  activities  at  the  state  level.  The  RPCO  will  have  the  competitively  recruited  key  staff  indicated 
below, and will also be able to engage short term consultants as needed to supplement the resources 
of the team. The terms of reference of the RPCO staff are presented in Annex 1 of Appendix 5. 
RPCO staff 
SPCO staff 
  Regional Project Coordinator 
  Agribusiness Promotion Coordinator 
  Rural Infrastructure Coordinator 
  Rural Institutions Coordinator 
  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Coordinator 
  Knowledge Management and Communication (KMC) 
  State Project Coordinator 
  Agribusiness Promotion Officer 
  Rural Infrastructure Officer 
  Rural Institution/Gender and Youth Officer 
  M&E Officer 
  KMC Officer 
Coordinator 
  Project Financial Controller 
  Regional Project Accountant 
  Procurement Coordinator 
  Administration and Logistics Officer 
  Project Internal Auditor* 
  State Project Accountant 
  State Finance Officer 
  Procurement Officer 
  Administration and Logistics Officer 
  State Project Internal Auditor* 
13.  A State Project Coordination Office (SPCO) will be responsible for project implementation within 
the  state. The  team  will  be  headed  by  a  State  Project  Coordinator  (SPC)  and  will  comprise  the  key 
164 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
staff  indicated  above,  who  will  be  recruited  on  a  competitive  basis.  The  SPCO  will  also  be  able  to 
engage  short  term  consultants  as  needed  to  supplement  the  resources  of  the  team.  The  terms  of 
reference  of  the  SPCO  staff  are  presented  in  Annex  1  of  Appendix  5.  A  Desk  Officer  from  the 
Department of Agriculture will be the focal point for the project in each participating local government 
area (LGA). 
Project planning and budgeting 
LIFE  will  prepare  the  annual  work  plan  and  budget  (AWPB)  in  a  participatory  manner  by 
14. 
involving the various actors in priority agricultural commodities and strategic partners. Each state will 
develop an annual action plan with the participation of strategic partners and service providers. These 
plans will then be consolidated into a single AWPB, which will be submitted for analysis and validation 
to  the  regional  Technical  Support  Committee  and,  then  submitted  for  approval  by  the  National 
Steering Committee. 
15.  Each  AWPB  proposal  will  include:  (i)  a  detailed  description  of  the  activities  planned  for  the 
coming  year,  together  with  the  monitoring  indicators  and  modalities  for  implementation;  (ii)  an  18-
month procurement plan; (iii)  a  disbursement plan;  and (iv)  expected results. From the second  year 
onwards,  the  AWPB  should  include  a  summary  presentation  of  the  results  obtained  and  the 
constraints encountered during the  previous  year. A flexible approach to  the  possible revision of the 
AWPB during the fiscal  year  will be adopted to take into  account the recommendations  provided  by 
the  implementation  stakeholders.  A  timetable  for  the  preparation,  analysis,  validation,  approval, 
implementation  and  review  of AWPBs  will  be  prepared  by  the  RPCO  and  approved  by  the  National 
Project Steering Committee at its first meeting.  
16. 
In general, the AWPB should cover the following areas: 
  Summary of progress and performance including: (i) physical progress made in the previous 
year,  including  quantitative  data;  (ii)  financial  progress  in  the  previous  year  including  cost 
overruns  and  savings  and  analysis  of  flow  of  funds  from  financiers;  (iii)  procurement 
performance;  (iv)  constraints  and  problems,  and  recommendations  to  resolve  them;  and  (v) 
lessons learned and rationale for activities proposed. 
  Description  of  work  plan  of  current  year  including:  (i)  objectives  (why?);  (ii)  activities  (how, 
where?):  (iii)  deliverables  and  outputs  (what?);  (iv)  required  inputs;  (v)  implementation 
arrangements  and  responsibilities  (when,  who?);  (vi)  key  M&E  indicators,  including  those 
indicated in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
  M&E/KM activities; impact oriented data, studies, action learning, expected outputs etc. 
  Quantitative  data  of  planned  inputs  in  table  format  showing  detailed  physical  and  financial 
targets, sources of funding and budget summary tables. 
  Monthly activity schedules and timelines (implementation schedule). 
  18-month procurement plan. 
Roles and responsibilities of implementing agencies 
17.  Table  1  of  Appendix  5  summarizes  the  roles,  responsibilities,  strength  and  major  capacity 
issues for the implementing agencies. Annex 1 of Appendix 11 presents the organization chart. 
III.   DETAILED ANALYSIS AND INTERVENTION PLANNING 
Overall project approach  
18. 
LIFE  will  be  implemented  over  a  six-year  period  with  IFAD  financing  the  project  in  six  states.  
The NDDC  will finance, manage and supervise activities in the remaining three  states. Thus, all the 
nine Niger Delta states will be covered by the project. Investments will cover 10 LGAs per state and 
10 communities in each LGA targeted on the basis of poverty level, youth unemployment, community 
involvement, conflict-free nature, level of agricultural activities and private sector involvement.  
19.  Through a PPP arrangement, the project will address the identified constraints that affect youth 
and  women  involvement  in  agriculture,  low  production  and  profitability,  and  employment.  LIFE  will 
support:  hands-on  practical  training  on  agribusiness  production;  access  to  resources  for  production 
including land; marketing support for enterprises through bulk contracts with the private sector; and, 
access  to  finance  and  market  infrastructure  to  improve  beneficiary  market  participation  in  the 
165 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
commodity value chain systems. These interventions will stimulate the development of agribusinesses 
leading to employment for the beneficiaries at on-farm and off-farm levels. 
Phasing 
20. 
LIFE will be implemented in two phases.  
  Phase  1  (prior  to  midterm):  This  will  be  for  the  first  three  years  till  midterm.  During  this 
phase LIFE will launch the project on a limited scale by selecting 25 incubators per state 
each  of  which  will  incubate  five  enterprises  per  year  for  three  years.  This  will  generate 
1,500  paid  jobs  in  phase  1.  Phase  1  incubators  will  continue  to  generate  enterprises 
throughout the life of the project adding another 6,000 jobs.  
  Phase  2  (post  midterm):  Capitalising  on  the  lessons  learned  during  phase  1,  LIFE  will 
upscale  the  model  to  include  an  additional  75  incubators  per  state  each  generating  10 
enterprises per year. This will generate an additional 18,000 paid jobs.  
21.  The selection of Phase 1 incubators will be based on the criteria already stated. In Phase 2 the 
selection  criteria  may  be  refined  based  on  the  lessons  learned  from  Phase  1.  A  total  of  25.500 
enterprises  which  represent  paid  jobs  will  be  generated  during  the  life  of  the  project.  The  outreach 
projections from the two phases are presented in the table below.  
Incubators 
per 
state 
25 
25 
75 
Phases 
Phase 1 
Phase 2* 
Phase 2 
  Total enterprises generated  
Number 
of 
states 
6 
6 
6 
Total 
number of  
incubators 
150 
150 
450 
Apprentices 
per 
incubator 
5 
10 
10 
Enterprises 
per 
year 
750 
1,500 
4,500 
Active 
project 
life 
2 
4 
4 
Enterprise 
LOP 
targets 
1,500 
6,000 
18,000 
25,500  
Note: * The 25 incubators from phase 1 which will continue to participate in phase 2 
The incubator model  
22.  The  incubator  will  be  the  entry  point  for  LIFE.  Based  on  the  experience  of  the  IFAD-financed 
CBNRMP  which  successfully  supported  over  6,000  rural  youth  and  poor  women's  enterprises,  the 
project  will  adopt  an  incubator  model  to  achieve  its  objectives  of  enterprise  and  employment 
development. Since some of the enterprises created were active in training and helping other farmers 
to  establish  their  business,  CBNRMP  coined  the  name  of  these  enterprises  as  incubator.  LIFE  will 
replicate  and  scale  up  the  Incubator  Model  to  foster  the  development  of  new  enterprises  through 
training, capacity building, backward linkages and investments. The incubators will be selected based 
on the following criteria: (i) demonstrated strong growth in profitability over the previous two years; (ii) 
evidence of market linkages to input suppliers and services as well as linkages to retail and wholesale 
buyers both inside and outside their LGA; and (iii) financial, technical, infrastructural (land, machinery, 
etc.)  and  managerial  capacity  in  the  subject  business  so  as  to  incubate  at  least  10  apprentices  per 
cycle. 
 The  figure  below  explains  the  process  of  incubation.    Broadly:  (i)  applicants  from  the  target 
23. 
group are identified by business development service (BDS) providers based on the selection criteria 
in  Box  1;  (ii)  successful  applicants  become  trainees  and  undergo  a  10-day  business  planning  and 
management training; (iii) successful trainees are seconded to willing incubators where they become 
apprentices  and  undergo  practical  orientation  for  one  to  two  weeks;  (iv)  following  the  orientation, 
apprentices  execute  two  production  and  sales  cycles  under  the  mentorship  of  the  incubator;  (v) 
following  the  two  apprenticeship  cycles,  the  apprentices  start  their  own  enterprises  and  are  
encouraged to agree with their incubator a number of cycles during which they will market their output 
with the incubator; (vi) following this process, new enterprises may themselves become incubators. 
166 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
24.  To  strengthen  the  incubator  model  the  project  will  engage  with  government,  community  or 
individuals to make land available to the beneficiaries for production and marketing.  As a quick-win, 
the project will secure farm settlements and warehouse/storage facilities from states for development 
for  use  by  the  incubators  and  apprentices.  Further  the  project  will  engage  with  market  operators  to 
broker  marketing  relationships  with  the  beneficiaries.  Where  appropriate,  the  arrangement  will  be 
guided  by  an  MoU  clearly  defining  the  obligations  of  each  party  and  responsive  to  the  project 
performance indicators and project development objective.  
25.  Selection  of  incubators:    A  state  level  enterprise  survey  will  be  conducted  to  identify  strong 
enterprises/entrepreneurs and those with existing or potential out-grower linkages in the project areas. 
The  survey  will  also  specify  if  some  potential  incubators  lack  adequate  facilities  to  service  ten 
apprentices.  In  such  circumstances,  LIFE  will  facilitate  the  minimal  required  assistance  to  develop 
them  into  fully  capable  incubators.  The  survey  will  include  a  review  of  the  1,800  Commodity  Apex 
Development  Associations  (CADAs)  affiliated  enterprises  supported  and  categorised  as  strong  by 
CBNRMP. 
26.  Building  on  the  technical,  financial  and  infrastructural  gaps  identified  during  the  incubator 
selection  process,  a  service  provider  will  be  engaged  by  the  project  to  support  the  incubators  to 
develop their business plans. These business plans will inter alia specify the desired financial growth 
projections of the incubator that will justify their capacity to absorb the apprentices.  
27.  Selection  of  apprentices:  LIFE  will  engage  a  service  provider  to  screen  applicants  in 
consultation with the incubators and other key stakeholders such as community based organisations, 
civil society entities and LGA representatives. The selected apprentices will receive a maximum of 10 
days’ business planning and management training  by  hired  business development service providers 
(non-individual)  to  provide  them  entrepreneurial  knowledge  and  skills.  The  business  orientation 
training will also include village level group formation, savings mobilisation and agri-entrepreneurship 
development  activities.  By  the  end  of  this  training  course  the  apprentices  will  have  a  bankable 
business plan, developed in consultation with the incubators, to guide their business operations during 
the incubation period.  
Incubation process: Upon successful completion of the training the apprentice will be attached 
28. 
to the incubator to gain hands-on experiences on best practices in the activity of his/her choice. The 
apprentice will start-up an enterprise which will remain attached to the incubator for an agreed period 
not  to  exceed  two  production  cycles.  It  is  expected  that  the  apprentices  will  raise  start-up  capital 
during  this  period  as  the  person  will  own  a  module  of  the  enterprise.  An  enterprise  module  is  a 
minimum economic scale of agri-investment that allows a net profitability of at least US$ 5 per day per 
capita, as indicated in the table below. 
 Key commodities and benchmark enterprise scale for support by LIFE 
Commodity 
Cassava 
Rice 
Plantain 
Oil Palm 
Cocoa 
Vegetable 
Fishery 
Poultry (broiler/layer) 
Piggery 
Bee keeping 
Enterprise unit 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Ha (number of hectares) 
Fish (number of fingerlings) 
Bird (number of chicks) 
Pig (number of pigs – Sow, Boar) 
Hive (number of hives) 
Scale of enterprise 
4 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
1,500 
500 
15 
60 
29.  The incubators will be paid a service charge of not more than N100,000 per apprentice to cover 
the costs of training and extension services to the apprentice. Given the labour intensive nature of the 
short  duration  enterprises,  apprentices  engaged  in  such  enterprises  will  receive  N15,000  per  month 
for  six  months  while  those  engaged  in  long  duration  enterprises  will  receive  50  percent  of  this 
allowance  for  12  months.  The  project  will  provide  N500,000  per  apprentice  as  (reimbursable)  seed 
capital  to  the  incubators  to  invest  in  the  initial  financing  needs  of  the  business  started  by  the 
apprentice attached to the incubator.   
167 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
30.  The apprentice will vacate the incubator facility after the produce from the two-cycle production 
period is sold, thus generating the capital for the apprentice to set up an independent enterprise. Any 
gap  in  this  capital  for  starting  the  new  enterprise  will  be  financed  by  the  incubator  from  the  seed-
capital funds. The incubator will continue to provide marketing support to the independent enterprise 
through re-negotiated off-taker contracts. The new enterprises can serve as village resource persons 
supporting the project to facilitate group formation, savings mobilisation and enterprise development. 
Market, financing and institutional support for agri-enterprise development  
31.  Beyond the incubator model, LIFE will opportunistically increase the number of market linkages 
between  smallholder  farmers  and  large  scale  off-takers.  In  the  Niger  Delta,  commodities  such  as 
cocoa, fish, rice, and palm oil are already traded on a large scale and, frequently, it may be possible, 
without  additional  incubation  to  augment  purchasing  arrangements  and  MOU-based  agreements 
between  buyers  and  out-growers  to  include  project  beneficiaries.  Drawing  from  the  successful 
ongoing VCDP model, the project will support rural out-growers to better supply off-takers. 
32.  The project will facilitate appropriate finance to the incubators, apprentices, related businesses, 
individuals  and  catchment  area  businesses.    This  will  be  achieved  through  various  means  during 
project implementation, including: (i) promoting savings and self-finance by beneficiaries; (ii) matching 
grants to incubators and apprentices; (iii) vendor/supplier finance driven by off-taker relationships; (iv) 
matching grants to the existing BOA leveraging loans to project beneficiaries; and possibly (v) tapping 
into CBN's MSMEDF Refinancing to project areas to increase liquidity. 
33.  The project will also implement a number of activities at national and state levels to strengthen 
the  capacity  of  relevant  civil  society,  public  and  private  sector  institutions  to:  (i)  improve  the  policy 
framework  for  youth  and  women  producers  and  marketers;  and  (ii)  support  learning,  knowledge 
sharing and communication network and activities, to incentivise youth and poor women to engage in 
agriculture.  
Partnerships  
34.  With  the  stronger  focus  on  enterprise  development  under  LIFE  and  drawing  from  the 
experience  of  CBNRMP,  the  development  of  synergies  and  partnerships  with  the  private  sector  will 
critical  to  the  success  of  LIFE.  Many  partnerships  were  established  under  CBNRMP  on  ad  hoc  and 
opportunistic  bases.  Fearing  a  loss  of  their  jobs,  CBNRMP  staff  missed  the  opportunity  to  engage 
extensively  with  private  extension  providers  early  enough  during  the  period  of  refocusing  on 
agriculture.  The  situation  affected  the  quality  of  service  delivery  until  two  years  to  programme 
completion  when  a  mind-set  change  occurred  among  the  staff.  The  design  of  LIFE  draws  from  the 
experience  of:  (i)  the  ongoing  VCDP  where  results-based  partnership  agreements  are  enabling 
stronger  synergies  and  resulting  in  programme  impact,  especially  in  the  areas  of  input  delivery, 
financial  access,  reliable  market  outlet,  economic  and  social  empowerment  for  small  farmers, 
knowledge  sharing,  leveraging  of  resources  and  scaling  up  of  proven  results;  and  (ii)  the  CBRNMP 
partnership with the Songhai Centre, National Root Crop Research Institute (NRCRI), USAID funded 
MARKETS  II,  and  World  Bank-assisted  Fadama  III  involving  memorandum  of  understanding  (MoU) 
for accountability. LIFE has provided for a business promotion adviser in the project coordination team 
to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  the  private  sector  and  civil  society  organisations  (CSOs)  in  project 
implementation.  Project  management  will  adopt  more  of  a  coordinating  approach,  by  doing  less 
directly and more through engaging partners.  
Revolving fund for seed capital  
35. 
LIFE  will  facilitate  financial  assistance  to  the  beneficiaries  in  the  following  areas:  (i)  business 
training fees for the beneficiaries; (ii) hands on business orientation service charges to the incubator; 
(iii) apprentices’ living expenses during the incubation period; (iv) seed capital for the apprentices to 
start their businesses in the incubation center; and (v) financing any gap in the accumulated capital of 
the  apprentices  to  establish  independent  enterprises.  Similarly,  some  of  the  incubators  will  require 
financial assistance to upgrade their production and processing facilities and make them suitable for 
the incubation process. 
36.  Business training fees for the beneficiaries: The service provider engaged by the project to train 
the apprentices on entrepreneurial knowledge and skills acquisition will be paid directly by the project. 
The  cost  of  training  a  batch  of  60  apprentices  has  been  estimated  at  NGN100,000  per  apprentice 
168 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
including training fees, transport, food and accommodation needs. Every apprentice will pass through 
this stage as a qualifying criterion to receive the full range of incubation support. 
37.  Hands-on  business  orientation  service  charges  and  technology  upgrading  assistance:  The 
service fee of NGN100,000 per apprentice to the incubator to provide an initial practical orientation to 
the apprentice during the first 1-2 weeks of receiving the apprentice, will be paid in two stages. The 
first  payment  will  be  made  at  the  point  of  attaching  the  apprentice  to  the  incubator.  The  second 
payment will be made at the end of the practical orientation. LIFE expects that the incubator will use 
this charge to upgrade any observed gap in the production and processing facilities and make them 
suitable for the incubation process. 
38.  Apprentices’  living  expenses  during  the  incubation  period:  The  apprentices  living  expenses 
allowance  during  the  first  two  cycles  of  their  attachment  to  the  incubator  shall  be  NGN15,000  per 
month for six months for those engaged in short duration enterprises, and 50 percent of this amount 
for  12  months  for  those  engaged  in  long  duration  enterprises.  This  payment  will  be  made  to  the 
apprentices on monthly basis as a transfer upon satisfactory performance.  
39.  Seed capital for the apprentices to start their businesses in the incubation center: NGN500,000 
per  apprentice  shall  be  paid  to  the  incubators  as  (reimbursable)  seed  capital  to  invest  in  the  initial 
financing  needs  of  the  business  started  by  the  apprentice.  This  will  cover  the  apprentices’  working 
capital  financing  needs  during  the  first  two  production  cycles.  It  will  be  a  one-off  capital  stimulation 
injection to the apprentices, and is owned and managed by the community organisations active in the 
villages  from  where  the  apprentices  are  selected.  The  project  will  facilitate  an  agreement  between 
itself,  community  organisations  and  the  incubators  stating  their  mutual  responsibilities  including  the 
supervision/ oversight roles of the project. The community organization will manage the seed capital 
as a revolving fund for more apprentices subsequently selected from the community.  
Integration with national LIFE and FMARD planning processes  
40.  Through  the  use  of  the  National  Project  Steering  Committee  (NPSC)  which  will  oversee  the 
implementation of LIFE in all the states and 774 LGAs of Nigeria, there would be full integration of the 
LIFE project in the Niger Delta with LIFE nationwide as well as the planning and budget processes at 
the FMARD. Among others, the NSC will approve the LIFE AWPB and incorporate it into the ministry’s 
budget. 
IV.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTING 
41.  The details are in Appendix 7. 
42.  The details are in Appendix 8.  
V.   PROCUREMENT 
43.  The details are in Appendix 6.  
VI.   MONITORING AND EVALUATION  
169 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
Coherence with IFAD Policies 
IFAD’s overarching development goal for 2016 to 2025 is to invest in rural people to enable them to 
overcome  poverty  and  achieve  food  security  through  remunerative,  sustainable  and  resilient 
livelihoods. The principles of engagement set forth by IFAD to achieve its over-arching goals include 
(a) Targeting; (b) Empowerment; (c) Gender equality; (c) Innovation, learning and scaling up; and (d) 
Partnerships.  Below  is  a  summary  of  how  LIFE  has  been  designed  to  respond  to  the  principles  of 
engagement. 
IFAD Principle of 
Engagement:  
Targeting: Target 
rural poor people 
Empowerment: 
Empower rural poor 
people by building 
capacity, productivity 
and market 
participation of the 
rural poor  
LIFE’s Alignment with IFAD’s Principles of Engagement:  
LIFE is targeting the vulnerable groups in the Niger Delta who are mainly youth, women and 
the migrant returnees, using the instrument of profitable agribusinesses to economically 
empower them to live decent lives. This aims at providing decent work and impact on 
economic growth in compliance with SDG 8. In doing this, LIFE has emphasized in 
developing the skills and productivity capacity of marginalized women and vulnerable youth 
A key element of LIFE is to build on the CADA and Youth Groups success of the closed 
CBNRMP and using the rural institutions as development platforms for social and economic 
engagement of the target groups. LIFE has identified CADA as the entry point to benefiting 
communities. Where they do not exist, LIFE is set to facilitate their establishment as an 
enabling environment to promote inclusiveness.  
LIFE has also emphasized on clustering, developing and strengthening of rural producers’ 
organizations to have a bargain power for their economic needs, as well as take advantage of 
their strengthen to benefit from economies of scale in its engagement with the private sector.  
The CADA, FO and youth groups have become a successful platform for engaging with 
government on policy debate to improve on governance. In the area of market participation, 
provision and improvement of rural market infrastructure (farm-to-market roads, land, storage 
facilities and wholesale market places) is a well-defined set of key activities of LIFE under 
subcomponent 1.2 to increase farmers’ participation in the market.  
The PPP arrangement of LIFE is also designed to enhance technologies and processing 
facilities and enable participating women to diversify the range of their farm products for 
increased income. The service expansion is consistent with IFAD policy and SDG 8 aimed at 
creating decent work for the rural people.  
Access to agricultural technologies and production services using the PPP is to ensure that 
small farmers benefit from the strength of the government, private sector and research 
institutions to access productivity enhancing technologies, services and hence their return on 
investment (profitability). 
Gender equality and 
gender inclusion in 
decision making 
LIFE will use GALS as a reliable gender inclusion tool for equality. Proactively, LIFE has also 
set a target of 44% of beneficiaries to be women, and emphasized on working with women-
only groups as a targeting strategy to address the inequality gap among men and women.  
A clear gender targeting strategy, which promotes women involvement in the activities of 
LIFE is well reflected in the targeting section. This includes: (a) women responsive 
enterprises, (b) time, venue and environment friendly events to ensure women participation, 
(c) direct targeting of women-only groups, (b) provision of up to 44 per cent slot for the 
benefiting community, (d) ensuring that women hold at least 30% of leadership positions in 
commodity associations, (e) engagement of a minimum of 35% of women in the project 
management team; (f) use of GALS, among others. 
LIFE uses an innovative enterprise incubation system and CADA model of the closed IFAD-
CBNRMP. LIFE has also adopted the innovative community alliance forum (CAF) of the 
ongoing IFAD-assisted VCDP in the Middle Belt of Nigeria. LIFE will build on models to 
leverage knowledge, using the platform of the PPP (e.g. CAF) to up-scale results as reflected 
in component 1.1.  
LIFE will also emphasize the development of partnership with the private sector and research 
institutions such as IITA and Cassava Harvest Plus of CGIAR Group to leverage knowledge 
on the emerging bio-fortified nutrition responsive cassava varieties. The incubation agri-
enterprises  have been integrated in the M&E system to provide reliable feedback on the 
Innovation, learning 
and scaling up: IFAD 
will place a premium 
on innovation, 
learning and scaling 
up of successes and, 
in the process, 
leverage effective 
and efficient 
partnerships where 
170 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
comparative 
advantages are 
exploited 
Partnerships. 
Strengthening the 
environmental 
sustainability and 
climate resilience of 
their economic 
activities (IFAD’s. 
SO3) 
Improve country-level 
capacity for rural 
policy and 
programme 
development, 
implementation and 
evaluation 
performance of innovative approaches to the central M&E system.  
The innovative CAF/PPP model will help to leverage additional resources from partners to 
scale up women and youth participation in the project. 
As reflected in component 1.1 and the overall programme approach, partnership is at the 
centre of the LIFE implementation strategy. The LIFE project will forge an estimated 50 PPP 
arrangements between government, private sector operators and producers in each state 
during the 7 years duration to facilitate knowledge, credit, input and technology access to up-
scale performance and to ensure sustainability.  
The entire project has been designed to benefit from partnerships at different levels. For 
instance, for land access, LIFE partners with state government will provide and develop mini-
bulk land and improve women and youth access to land. 
For connecting the women/youth to service markets and ensure market participation, LIFE is 
pursuing a PPP arrangement with clear obligations for each party to enable the benefiting 
groups to engage in profitable enterprises. In this context, LIFE aims to build on the 
commodity alliance forum (CAF), which is a business transaction platform of key stakeholders 
including private sector, small-scale rural producers, governments, and civil society to ensure 
sustainable value chain financing for smallholder farmers.  
LIFE has an in-built arrangement to partner with government at the national and regional level 
on areas of sustainability, co-financing and policy dialogue in order to create an enabling 
environment and improve the regulatory framework to help agribusiness to thrive. Under 
component 1.1, LIFE aims to partner with CORY certified training organizations to leverage 
on their knowledge and provide initial business orientation to new entrants in the project. 
LIFE’s strategic goal is driven by two key components. The second key component is 
“Enabling institutional environment for youth and women employment in agribusiness 
development”.  
LIFE aims to implement activities that mainstream climate change smart measures 
comprising (a) the use of climate-resilient agricultural practices to enhance productivity 
sustainability, (b) efficient use of weather resilient and productivity enhancement 
technologies, such as drought-resistant varieties, water tolerant varieties; (c) climate change 
resilience infrastructure, and (d) reduction in greenhouse gas emission through support to 
plantation/tree crops.  
Component 1.1 also emphasizes the use of crop insurance to help rural people improve their 
financial security against extreme weather events and natural disasters.. 
A SECAP review and related Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
have been prepared to guide implementation regarding interference with forest land and 
establishment of related infrastructure. LIFE advocates selection of agribusinesses and value 
chains based on their agro-ecological suitability and emphasizes the use of smart 
technologies found in the existing staple crop processing zones to reduce climate impacts.  
Agro-entrepreneurs will be encouraged to adopt a ‘no regret’ strategy, including agricultural 
insurance to mitigate climate impacts. LIFE will avoid significant negative effects on the 
environment by discouraging the opening of virgin forests and wetlands and unsustainable 
secondary value chains such as the use of charcoal in fish kilns. LIFE will strengthen 
advisory/extension services (including the local meteorological office) to improve their 
capacities to generate and disseminate critical climate information to farmers to guide on-farm 
activities. LIFE will encourage Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) from land preparation to 
harvest and storage and processing. 
As reflected in component 2 sub-component 2.2, LIFE has a provision to provide technical 
and policy support to the FMARD to strengthen the extension system, develop a M&E 
framework as well as a coordination system to ensure harmonization of donor initiatives with 
the national systems. 
171 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 13: Contents of the Project Life File 
PRIOR DOCUMENTS 
COSOP 
OSC minutes 
CPMT Minutes 
WORKING PAPERS 
1.  Project cost tables 
2.  Financial and economic analysis  
3.  Baseline Survey 
MISSION DOCUMENTS 
Terms of Reference for Detailed Design Mission 
Terms of Reference for Design Completion Mission  
PDR after Detailed Design Mission 
PDR after Design Completion Mission 
Minutes of the meeting of the State Selection 
IFAD REVIEW DOCUMENTS 
QE Memo 
Reviewers’ Recommendations Note 
QE Panel Report 
172 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 14: Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure 
(SECAP) Review for LIFE Niger Delta  
I.  Background 
1.   Major landscape characteristics and Issues (social, natural resources, and climate)  
The Niger Delta Region (NDR) 
1. 
The focus area of the LIFE-Niger Delta (LIFE-ND) is the nine (9) southern oil producing States 
of Abia, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross-River, Edo, Delta, Imo, Ondo and Rivers, referred to as the Niger 
Delta Region (NDR) or Niger Delta States (NDS). The NDR is situated in the southern part of Nigeria 
and  bordered  to  the  south  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  to  the  East  by  Cameroon,  and  covers  about 
110,624 km2 (about 12% of Nigeria’s land area). The nine states of NDR consist of 184 LGAs (Fig 1). 
Cross  River  State  has  the  largest  landmass  of  21,787km2  followed  by  Edo  19,187km2,  Ondo 
15,820km2,  Rivers  10,575km2,  Bayelsa  9,059km2,  Akwa  Ibom  6,900km2,  Imo  5,288km2  and  Abia 
4,900km2 in that order. 
Figure 1: Niger Delta Region 
1.1 Socio-Cultural Context 
2. 
Population: The combine population for the nine states was  31,267,901 in 2006 consisting of 
15,847,359  male  (51%)  and  15,420,542  (49%)  female.  The  estimated  population  as  at  2011  was 
36,515,429  (NBS  2012).  Rivers  State  has  the  highest  population  estimated  at  6,162,063  in  2011 
followed by  Delta  4,825,999, Akwa Ibom 4,625,119, Imo 4,609,038, Ondo 4,020,965, Edo 3,700,706, 
Cross  River  3,344,410,  Abia  3,256,642  and  Bayelsa  1,970,487  in  that  order.  Like  the  rest  of  the 
Nigeria, the NDR consists mainly of very young population with 62% of the population below the age 
173 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
of 30 years (NDDC Niger Delta Regional Master Plan - NDRMP http://nddc.gov.ng/masterplan.html). 
The combine population density for the NDR is 330.1 person per square kilometer (ppkm 2) which is 
far  higher  than  the  average  national  population  density  of  201.7ppkm2.  Imo  State  has  the  highest 
density at 871.6ppkm2 followed by Akwa Ibom 670.3, Abia 664.6, Rivers 582.701, Delta 282.1, Ondo 
254.2, Bayelsa 217.5, Edo 192.9 and Cross River 153.5 respectively. Table 1 summarizes the basic 
facts of the NDR.  
Table 1: Basic facts about the Niger Delta states 
No 
of 
LGA
s 
Land 
Area 
(km2) 
Population 20062 
Male  
Female  
Population 
(projected 
2011)2 
Density 
TFR
3 
Public pry sch 
enrolment (2014)1 
Male  
Female  
Project
ed HIV 
populat
ion 
(2014)1 
Unemployment 
rate2 
2007 
2011 
17 
4,900 
1,420,298 
1,415,082 
3,256,642 
664.6208 
31 
6,900 
1,983,202 
1,918,849 
4,625,119 
670.3071 
4 
4 
100,879 
97,600 
81,853 
25.1 
11.2 
448,032 
479,062 
245,489 
18.0 
18.4 
8 
9,059 
874,083 
830,432 
1,970,487 
217.5171 
6.7 
61,647 
61,739 
30,858 
21.9 
23.9 
18 
25 
18 
27 
18 
23 
21,787 
1,471,967 
1,421,021 
3,344,410 
153.5048 
17,108 
2,069,309 
2,043,136 
4,825,999 
282.0902 
19,187 
1,633,946 
1,599,420 
3,700,706 
192.8757 
5,288 
1,976,471 
1,951,092 
4,609,038 
871.6033 
15,820 
1,745,057 
1,715,820 
4,020,965 
254.1697 
10,575 
2,673,026 
2,525,690 
6,162,063 
582.701 
5.8 
5.3 
5.3 
4.6 
3.9 
4.3 
101,402 
95,538 
83,596 
32.8 
18.2 
187,825 
95,538 
34,717 
22.9 
27.2 
170,998 
451,984 
22,821 
14.8 
35.2 
718,141 
672,039 
93,822 
28.3 
26.1 
629,257 
630,543 
49,281 
6.7 
12.5 
128,438 
130,845 
121,351 
66.4 
25.5 
State 
Abia 
Akwa 
Ibom 
Bayel-
sa 
Cross 
River 
Delta 
Edo 
Imo 
Ondo 
Rivers 
Region 
185 
110,624 
15,847,359 
15,420,542 
36,515,429 
330.086  4.87 
2,546,619 
2,714,888 
763,788 
26.3 
22.0 
Nigeria 
774 
909,890 
71,345,488 
69,086,302 
183,600,000 
in 2015 3 
201.7826 
5.5 
12,145,96
8 
10,983,959 
3,070,1
74 
12.7 
23.9 
1NBS (2016): Social statistics report 2016. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
2NBS (2012):  National Bureau of Statistics Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. Available at  
http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library Access 16 March 2017 
3NBS 2015 Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017 
3. 
According to the NDDC-NDRMP, there are 13,329 settlements in the NDR with about 13,231 of 
these  (99%  of  the  total)  falls  having  less  than  20,000  people.  Settlements  of  fewer  than  5,000 
inhabitants constitute nearly 94% of the total number of settlements and only 98 settlements, that is 
less than 1% of the settlements, can be truly regarded as urban centres according to their population 
sizes. Like the rest of Nigeria, the NDR is a growing region with an average total fertility rate (TFR) of 
4.8 which is lower than the national average of 5.5. However, Bayelsa and Cross River have  a TFR 
higher than the national average, while Edo and Delta have a TFR higher than the region’s average. 
The other states, Abia, Imo, Akwa Ibom, Ondo and Rivers have a TFR that is lower than the region’s 
average. The total children enrolment into public primary school as at 2014 stood at 5,261,507 (23% 
of  national  enrolment)  with  males  accounting  for  48%  and  female  52%  (NBS  2016).  Imo  and  Ondo 
states accounted for the highest public primary school enrolment with over one million children each. 
Bayelsa,  Abia,  Cross  River  and  Rivers  in  that  order  accounted  for  the  lowest  figures.  The  projected 
population  of  HIV  population  as  at  2014  is  763,788,  which  is  25%  of  the  total  national  projected 
population. Akwa Ibom has the highest population of people with HIV of 245,489, while Edo has the 
least with 22,821 people. The average unemployment rate for the region declined from 26.2% in 2007 
to 22% in 2011 (while the national unemployment rate increased from 12.7 to 23.9% within the same 
period)  (NBS,  2012).  However,  states  such  as  Edo,  Ondo  and  Bayelsa  recorded  an  increase  in  the 
unemployment rate within the period, by as much as 20.4% for Edo. 
4. 
Cultural Diversity: The very rich culture and heritage of the region is based on the presence of 
about  40  different  ethnic  groups  speaking  250  dialects  (NDDC-  NDRMP).  The  numerous  ethnic 
174 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
groups  (often  referred  to  as  ‘communities’)  include  the  Ijaws,  Ogonis,  Ikwerres,  Etches,  Ekpeyes, 
Ogbas, Engennes, Obolos, Isoko, Nembes, Okrikans, Kalabaris, Urhobos, Itsekiris, Igbos, Ika-Igbos, 
Ndoni,  Oron,  Ibeno,  and  Yorubas,  Ibibios,  Annangs  and  Efiks.  Other  groups  include  Ibibios,  Anang, 
Efiks, Bekwarras, Binis, etc. The heritage of the people is reflected in modes of dressing, marriages, 
traditional  culture  and  festivals.  These  ethnic  groups  have  co-existed  and  peace  and  harmony  for  a 
very long period.  
5. 
Land: Land, in relation to the population, is relatively scarce in the NDR especially, especially 
in the interior coastal mangrove zones that consist of creeks and inlets. As population increases, the 
pressure on land for all purposes including agriculture increases accordingly. The highest pressure on 
land is in the coastal mangrove vegetation zone with a population density of 0.46 ha/person followed 
by the derived savannah zone with 0.49 ha/person (NDDC-NDRMP). Like the rest of the nation, the 
people of the NDR also face the challenges of access to land. The ownership of land in Nigeria, by 
virtue of the Land Use Act 1978, is vested in the governor of the state. Only usufruct right is granted to 
the  citizens  through  certificate  of  occupancy  (in  urban  area)  and  statutory  or  customary  right  of 
occupancy (for rural lands). Thus, the governor must assent to this certificate before the ‘use rights’ 
on the land becomes legal. The access to land typologies available in the Niger Delta region include 
individual  holdings  from  family  inheritance  or  purchase  from  communal  or  other  family  land;  family 
land derived from communal holding of  the progenitor; communal land owned by the community and 
customary tenure, where family or community grants a right of occupation of land to another person or 
group  of  persons,  who  are  usually  strangers  or  immigrants  to  live  on  or  farm  the  land,  in  return  for 
payment  in  cash,  in  kind  or  both.  These  land  holding  typologies  are  fraught  with  danger  of  social 
exclusion and lack formal titles. Most of the land owned by individuals, families or communities in rural 
areas  have  no  statutory  or  customary  rights  of  occupancy.  They  limit  agricultural  investment  to 
improve  and  equip  the  land,  the  risk  of  being  pushed-off  the  land  is  high,  and  the  land  cannot  be 
pledged  as  collateral  for  access  to  credit  to  improve  productivity.  Among  the  Ibo  people  in  Imo  and 
Abia states with a primogeniture inheritance system, the possibility of exclusion of women and youth 
from  access  to  land  is  very  high.  Government  has  also  acquired  land  for  both  agriculture  and 
overriding public interests. These lands do have security of tenure, but not for individuals. Access to 
the  land  may  be  cumbersome  due  to  government  bureaucracy,  and  contentious  because  a 
community can block access to the land or make life difficult for land users  when compensation has 
not been paid by the government on the land. 
6. 
The  land  situation  in  the  NDR  region  especially  in  the  coastal  interiors  is  particularly 
contentious.  By  nature,  50%  of  the  lands  in  the  interior  Niger  Delta  is  not  workable  due  to  the 
drainage, edaphic and physiographic limitations. Secondly, while the land-use Act of 1978 cemented 
state ownership of the land, the Petroleum Act of 1969 and other mineral Acts, through the principle of 
‘eminent  domain’,  placed  all  minerals  and  their  exploitation  in  the  hands  of  the  federal  government. 
Thus,  all  the  lands  in  the  southern  interior  including  agriculturally  productive  lands  have  been 
parcelled into Oil  Prospecting Leases (OPL) (which becomes Oil Mining Leases (OML) once oil has 
been found on the land). By implication, the so-called ‘land owners’, i.e. the local communities using 
the land are only farming the land temporarily. Oil exploration activities on productive lands coupled its 
externalities including oil spills and ecosystems disruption drive the local population to the margin of 
survival. This is the root cause of resource conflicts in the Niger Delta. To some extent in the upland 
areas  of  the  NDR  resource  conflicts  between  crop  farmers  and  pastoralists  over  grazing  lands  and 
destruction  of  crops  is  becoming  more  common.  This  can  be  traced  to  climate  change,  the  Boko 
Haram  insurgency  in  the  northeast  of  Nigeria  and  the  concomitant  dislocation  of  thousands  of 
pastoralists from the region.   
1.2  Natural Resources and NRM 
Drainage: The Niger River is the most defining feature of the physical and human environment 
7. 
of  the  Niger  Delta.  The  river  bifurcates  into  several  mouths  (estuaries)  through  which  fluvial  and 
marine  waters  mix  and  substantial  exchange  of  sediments  take  place.  It  defines  the  physical 
characteristics, resources, economy, settlement and transportation pattern and culture of the region. 
175 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
The  lower  NDR  is  a  low-lying  area  with  a  dense  network  of  intricately  connected  rivers,  creeks  and 
lagoons. Land in the lower delta for most part consists of regularly flooded beach ridges and barrier 
islands (with elevation of 2-4m above the mean sea level). The upper parts of the Niger Delta Region 
are  well  drained  with  highly  consolidated  soil  and  marked  by  lowlands  and  highlands  that  range 
between 600m (in the Yoruba ridges of Ondo state) to above 1,000m (in the Oban and Obudu hills in 
the northern parts of  Cross River state). 
8. 
Flooding  -  The  nature  of  the  topography  of  the  NDR  renders  the  coastline  susceptible  to 
flooding, especially during high tides. Beach elevation averages at 3m above mean low water. Though 
the tidal range is low, large areas of the back beach are perpetually wet and water-logged. The NDR 
also  experiences  very  high  rainfall  and  heavy  f lood  between  August  and  October  when  the  Niger 
River receives  peak discharge. The poor drainage  allows storm waters to collect in the hollows and 
eventually  flood  large  areas  within  the  lower  delta  region  as  witnessed  in  2011  and  2012.  Many 
settlements have had to move upland many times to escape being washed away by floodwaters. The 
adverse  effects  of  flooding  are  more  perceptible  when  stormy  conditions  coincide  with  high  tides. 
Whenever  storm  surges  coincide  with  spring  tide,  most  beaches  at  a  maximum  elevation  of  3  m 
above sea level are usually topped by wave resulting in flooding. Flooding effects include erosion and 
shoreline  retreat,  destruction  of  crops,  low  fish  catch  in  natural  river  channels,  and  social  effects 
including  destruction  of  household  property,  forced  migration  and  trader  having  to  stay  longer  in 
the market. 
9. 
Ecosystem: The Niger Delta region consists of a wetland area,  which has been estimated at 
about  1,794,000  ha  consisting  of  617,000  ha  of  saline  and  1,177,000  ha  of  freshwater  swampland 
(NEST, 1991). The region has a rich and diverse mosaic of ecological types consisting of five distinct 
ecological  types.  These  are:  the  barrier  island  and  mangrove  and  coastal  vegetation,  fresh  water 
swamp  forest,  lowland  rain  forest,  derived  savanna  and  the  montane  forest.  All  the  ecosystems  are 
found  in  gradients  from  the  coast  to  the  hinterland  in  each  of  the  states  with  the  exception  of  the 
montane ecosystems that are localized to the northern part of Cross-River state.  
10.  Barrier island and mangrove forest: A chain of low sandy barrier islands protect the coast of the 
Niger  Delta,  between  the  Benin  and  Imo  estuaries,  less  than  a  meter  above  high-tide  level.  The 
dominant vegetation is freshwater swamp forest with occasional small salt marshes, where seawater 
washes  over  beaches.  The  mangrove  forests  occupy  inter-tidal  land  in  a  broad  zone  of  tidal  creeks 
behind  the  barrier  islands.  Typical  mangrove  forests  in  the  Delta  consist  almost  entirely  of  the  red 
mangrove  tree  with  its  characteristic  stilt  or  prop  roots.  The  trees  grow  tallest  along  creek  edges 
where fresh mud is deposited. The mangrove forest of the NDR, which covers about 9,730km2, has 
been  described  as  the  third  largest  mangrove  forest  in  the  world  and  the  largest  in  Africa  (NEST, 
1991, SEDEC, 2008).  
11.  The fresh water swamp forest zone: covers approximately 17,000 km² or about half of the lower 
delta  region  (NDDC-NDRMP).  The  swamp  forest  zone  is  the  region's  major  source  of  timber  and 
forest products and contains important areas for rare and endangered wildlife. There is great variation 
in  the  ecology  and  development  potential  of  swamp  forest  types,  depending  on  hydrological 
characteristics. The swamp forests, which are subject to the silt-laden 'white water' of the Niger floods, 
have very high fishery and agricultural potential.  
12.  The  Lowland  Rain  Forest  Zone:  This  zone  occupies  the  non-riverine  or  'upland'  areas,  which 
flank  the  delta.  The  natural  rain  forest  of  the  area  has  been  largely  cleared  for  agriculture,  and  the 
dominant  vegetation  types  are  now  farm  bush,  a  mosaic  of  cropped  and  fallow  areas,  usually  with 
many oil palms, and plantations, mainly oil palm and rubber. Open farmed areas lead to the entry of 
invasive grassland or 'savanna' species. Some forest species can survive in old fallow land but most 
have disappeared due to shorter fallow periods attributable to increasing population. 
176 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
13.  Derived  Savannah  Zone:  This  is  found  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  Niger  Delta  Region.  The 
vegetation  type  in  this  zone  appears  as  re-growth  after  the  original  rainforest  has  been  cleared  for 
agriculture. It comprises savanna type grasses and shrub, with a few scattered trees. Due to constant 
human pressure, it is virtually impossible for trees to grow to maturity. 
14.  The Montane Zone:  The zone is confined to the north-eastern part of Cross River State around 
Obudu /Sankwala area. The high-altitude location of the zone - approximately 900m to 1500 m above 
sea  level  means  that  species  diversity  is  not  as  great  as  in  the  other  tropical  high  forests,  although 
floristic diversity is enhanced by the presence of many species of herbs and shrubs. The uniqueness 
of this ecological zone in terms of its natural resource and biodiversity exclusivity makes it one of the 
important areas with high eco-tourism potential. 
15.  Environmental degradation: The State of the Nigerian Environment Report (SOER) prepared 
by  SEDEC  Associates  highlighted  the  loss  of  mangrove  and  other  wetland  ecosystems  as  serious 
environmental degradation in the Niger Delta region especially in Rivers, Bayelsa, Delta, Akwa Ibom 
and Ondo states due mainly to oil and gas exploration activities. Table 2 summarizes some changes 
in the wetland ecosystem between 1976 and 1996. 
Table 2: Degraded lands in the mangrove swamp ecology 
S/N 
Ecology 
1  Alluvial 
2  Forested Freshwater Swamp 
Graminoid/Sedge Freshwater 
Marsh 
Area_km2 
(1976) 
Area_km2 
(1995) 
Change 
1976-1995 
Percent 
change 
Growth/ 
decline 
rate 
523.61 
18,564.71 
282.38 
16,696.51 
-241.23 
-1,868.20 
-46.1 
-10.1 
-80.7 
-0.9 
3,067.50 
-2.43 
-0.53 
-4.25 
-0.05 
161.45 
3 
4  Mangrove Forest 
5  Saltmarsh/Tidal Flat 
Source: SEDEC Associate (2008) State of the Nigerian Environment Report  
1,136.51 
10,067.31 
596.92 
5,882.74 
10,157.12 
18.84 
-4,746.22 
-89.81 
578.08 
16.  The  mangrove  and  forested  freshwater  environment  are  being  degraded  into  saltmarsh  and 
tidal  flats.    As  shown  in  Table  3,  out  of  a  total  land  area  of  87,888  km2,  the  total  lowland  rainforest 
area  is  about  22,171km2,  while  only  17,035km2  is  forest  reserves,  while  47,000km2  has  been 
converted into farmland. 
Table 3: Distribution of lowland rain forest in Niger Delta region  
Land Area (sq. 
km) 
Lowland rain forest 
area(sq. km)(a) 
State 
Forest area 
converted to 
farmland etc.(sq. 
km)(b) 
Area of forest 
reserves(sq. 
km) 
Edo &   Delta 
Cross River 
&Akwa Ibom 
Imo 
Ondo (and Ekiti) 
Rivers & Bayelsa 
TOTAL 
38 882.84 
5 796.86 
14 865.65 
3 964.14 
27 214.15 
11 534.42 
20 070.00 
17 687.51 
87,888.92 
10 345.33  
479.70 
5 414.07 
135.93 
22,171.86 
9 353.18 
9 328.23 
9 607.83 
3 845.31 
47,000.2 
5 140.64 
5 140.64 
2 640.65 
150.01 
17,035.53 
Notes  
(a) forest mature, mature disturbed, immature, riparian and mosaic mature, disturbed/immature. 
(b) Forest areas converted to farmland (excluding swamps, oil palm, and rubber plantations) 
Source: Source: Adapted from SEDEC Associate (2008): State of the Nigerian Environment Report  
17.  Extensive traditional bush fallowing system of cropping has meant that over 60% of the lowland 
rain  forest  has  been  converted  to  farmlands  at  different  stages  of  cultivation  or  regrowth  to  forest. 
There are 12 protected and important bird areas (IBA) in the NDR. These include Obudu Plateau, Afi 
177 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
River  Forest  Reserve,  Okomu  national  park,  Cross  River  National  Park  (Oban  division)  Cross  River 
National Park (Okwango division), and Upper Orashi forest reserve. Others are Biseni forest, Akassa 
forest,  Sunvit  Farms  (Agenebode  Forests),  Ebok-Kabbaken  swallow  root  and  Itu  wetlands.  Other 
protected areas are shown on Table 4 1. 
Table 4: Protected area in the Niger Delta regions 
Name  
Cross River National Park 
Obudu Game Reserve 
Okomu National Park 
Gilli Game Reserve 
Kwale Game Reserve 
Olosu Game Reserve 
Ologbo Game Reserve 
Iybi-Ada-Obi Game Reserve 
Orle River Game Reserve 
Ologolo-Eriourho Game Reserve 
Ifon Game Reserve 
State 
Cross River 
Cross River  
Edo  
Edo 
Edo  
Edo 
Edo 
Edo  
Delta 
Delta  
Ondo  
1.3 Climate 
18.  The climate of the  NDR  varies from the hot equatorial forest type  in the southern lowlands to 
the  humid  tropical  in  the  northern  highlands  and  the  cool  montane  type  in  the  Obudu  plateau  area.  
The wet season is relatively long, lasting between seven and eight months of the year, from March to 
October. 
19.  Rainfall: The NDR region receives the highest rainfall in Nigeria and this is expected to 
continue into the future. The onset of the rain is March and it receives a bimodal rainfall peak in July 
and September respectively (Fig 2).   
Figure 2: Mean monthly rainfall (mm) in the Niger Delta Region 
Source: Computed from data from Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET 
20.  Data  from  the  ten  meteorological  stations  located  in  the  NDR  obtained  from  the  Nigerian 
Meteorological  Agency  (NIMET)  suggest  that  the  mean  annual  rainfall  in  the  region  is  around 
2198mm.  Coastal  stations  such  as  Calabar,  Warri,  Port  Harcourt  and  those  in  the  forest  zone 
including Owerri, Ondo, Ikom, Benin and Uyo receive rainfall that are above the mean rainfall for the 
region. Stations in the derived Savanna zone, including Akure, Ondo and Ogoja, receive rainfall that 
are below the average for the region (Fig 3). 
178 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Figure 3: Mean annual rainfall (in mm) for the Niger Delta Region, 1970-2013 
Source: Computed from data from Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET) 
Figure 4: Temporal pattern of rainfall in the Niger Delta Area (1970-2013) 
Source: Computed from data from Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET) 
21.  The trend of rainfall from 1970 to 2013 shows rainfall in the NDR regions is increasing by about 
2mm  per  annum.  This  is  significant  and  has  both  positive  and  negative  impacts.  Increasing  rainfall 
has a positive impact on the major staple crops in the region including cassava, vegetables, yam and 
rice. It also supports tree crops including oil palm, cocoa, and plantain. On the other hand, increased 
rainfall means increasing flooding with potential to devastate farmlands, fish farms (ponds) and cause 
wilting of cassava and other crops. The increasing trend in rainfall coupled with the number of days 
with extreme rainfall (50 mm/day) is projected to increase by 1-2 days over all the agro climatic zones 
of  Nigeria,  except  over  the  Savanna  zones  by  the  end  of  the  century  (FGN,  2014).  The  projected 
increase  in  extreme  rainfall  events  is  consistent  with  what  is  expected,  especially  in  the  coastal 
regions (where NDR falls).  Furthermore, scenarios show an increase of 1-2 weeks in the length of the 
rainfall  season  over  the  mangrove  and  forest  zones  by  the  middle  and  end  of  the  century.  In  most 
cases, the increase in the length of the rainfall season is due to the early onset of rain. 
179 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
22.  Temperature: The average temperature in the Niger Delta area is about 27oC.  Temperatures 
are generally high in the region and fairly constant throughout the year.  Average monthly maximum 
temperature  range  from  31  to  32oC  and  minimum  temperatures  vary  from  21  to  23oC,  increasing 
northward  and  westward.  The  warmest  months  are  February,  March  and  early  April.  The  coolest 
months  are  the  peak  rainy  months  of  June  through  to  September.  Temperature  has  shown  general 
increasing trend which is consistent with the global rise in surface temperature. The NDR has shown 
a warming trend of about 0.02oC from 1980 to 2013 (Fig 5). This trend is projected to continue into the 
future  as  a  climate  models  based  on  diferent  scenarios  have  projected  an  increase  in  future 
occurrences  of  extreme  temperature  over  Nigeria.  The  findings  in  the  various  scenarios  are  that  by 
the middle of the century, the number of days with temperatures greater than 38oC would increase by 
3 and 5 days over the Mangrove and Rain Forest zones.  In one scenario, the increases would be 7 
and  23  days  respectively  (FGN,  2014).  The  present  net  warming  trend  may  not mean  much for  the 
LIFE-ND  and  agriculture  in  general  in  the  NDR  as  increased  warming  may  be  offset  by  expected 
increasing rainfall. 
Figure 5: Trend of Annual mean maximum temperature for the Niger Delta region 
 Source: computed from data from Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET) 
1.3  Key Issues  
23.  Oil and gas exploration and oil spills: Oil is the major non-renewable natural resource of the 
NDR.  The  oil  sector  is  the  backbone  of  the  Nigerian  economy  and  the  production  of  oil  and  gas  is 
exclusively domiciled in the NDR. This has exerted tremendous impacts on the fragile ecosystems of 
the Niger Delta. According to the CBN report, as at 2015, the  oil revenue (gross) stood at N3,830.1 
billion,  (or  4.0  per  cent  of  GDP,  a  decline  of  13.9%  in  2011),  representing  55.4  per  cent  of  total 
federally-collected revenue. Despite the decline in crude oil export, it remained dominant, accounting 
for 78.3 per cent of total exports, while gas export constituted 14.2 per cent. This means the oil sector 
constitutes 92.5% of Nigeria’s total export in 2015. 
24.  According to the NDDC-NDRMP document, as at 2004, there are 5,284 oil wells drilled in the 
NDR and over two-third of these are on land and swamp environment. In addition, there are 257 flow 
stations  for  crude  processing,  over  7,000km  of  oil  and  gas  pipeline,  10  export  terminals,  and  about 
310,000km2  of  land  area  within  which  the  network  of  pipelines  are  located.  Oil  and  hazardous 
chemical  spills  and  environmental  pollution  remain  the  most  formidable  environmental  threat  to  the 
NDR. For example, the National Oil Spill Detection and Response Agency (NOSDRA) record suggest 
that during the first half of the  year 2007, a total of 424 spill incidents involving 33,799 barrels of oil 
were reported from upstream operations (SEDEC Associates, 2008).  
180 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Figure 6a: Number of Monthly oil spill by SPDC in 
2016 
Source: http://www.shell.com.ng/sustainability/environment/oil-spills.html 
Figure 6b: Amount of monthly oil spill in 2016 
Source: http://www.shell.com.ng/sustainability/environment/oil-
spills.html 
25.  Oil spill incidents have become a regular occurrence due to operational reasons and sabotage, 
theft  and  willful  destruction  of  oil  pipelines  as  shown  in  Figures  6a  and  6b  from  Shell  Petroleum 
Development  Corporation  (SPDC)  –  the  largest  oil  company  operating  in  the  NDR.  Known  and 
potential impacts of oil spills in the Niger Delta region, according to NDES (1997) and UNEP (2011), 
include: 
  Mass mortality and or tainting of animals as well as other aquatic resources 
  Ground water contamination 
  Abandonment of fishing ground and associated livelihood pursuits 
  Vegetation desiccation and other forms of ecological damages 
  Loss of biodiversity in breeding grounds 
  Loss of drinking and industrial water sources 
  Reduction of land area available for agriculture 
  Loss of recreational facilities and aesthetic values of the environment 
 
 
  Worsened rural underdevelopment, poverty and heightened community embitterment 
  Gas flaring 
  Pipeline fires  
  Youth restiveness and loss of social and cultural cohesion 
  Rural poverty  
  Emergence of local bourgeois – selective gratification  h as   pr o duc e d  a  powerful minority who 
Increased economic burdens of pollution clean-up, population rehabilitation  
Impairment of human health 
has become rich at community and environment expense 
Illegal bunkering and refining  
 
26. 
It  should  be  noted  that  oil  exploration  activities  are  concentrated  mainly  in  the  lower  coastal 
zone of the NDR. Thus, people and LGAs located in upland areas especially in states such as Ondo, 
Edo,  Delta,  Cross  River,  Imo  and  Abia  State  do  not  experience  as  much  oil  production  induced 
environmental degradation and social dislocation as those in the lower NDR states of Rivers, Bayelsa 
and Akwa Ibom states. Other non-renewable resources of the Niger Delta include solid mineral, salt, 
tar  sand,  glass  sand,  gravel  and  clay.  Despite  the  dominance  of  oil,  agriculture  remains  the  highest 
employer of labour in the Niger Delta region. 
27.  Land  degradation:  The  NDR  is  one  with  a  lot  of  activities  related  to  oil  exploitation,  mining, 
movement  of  heavy  machinery  and  other  activities,  which  have  a  great  impact  on  the  soil  profile. 
Among  other  environmental  issues,  soil  erosion  stands  out  as  it  affects  soil  health  and  food 
production.  In  the  mangrove  region,  it  is  a  usual  habit  to  excavate  and  transport  soils  for  road 
construction.  Due  to  high  rainfall  experienced  in  this  region,  both  illuviation  and  alluviation  has 
occurred, leading to the loss of essential nutrients needed for crop development. The LIFE-ND project 
181 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
will therefore adopt measures to prevent and mitigate the occurrence of erosion in flood-prone areas. 
Isiukwuato and Arochukwu in Abia state are notable areas with a high presence of gully erosion sites. 
Employing activities based on conservation agriculture will not only minimize the risk but also increase 
the level of productivity in the affected areas.  
28.  Greenhouse  Gas  (GHG)  Emissions:  Although  agriculture  contributes  only  2.8%  of  national 
GHG  emissions  in  the  year  2000,  the  land-use,  land-use  change  and  forestry  (LULUCF)  sector 
contributes about 40% of Nigeria GHG in 2000. The net CO2 emissions for the LULUCF sector were 
derived  mostly  (97%)  from  changes  in  forest  and  other  woody  biomass  stock.  Agricultural 
intensification  is  one  of  the  major  contributors  to  deforestation.  Gas  flaring  from  the  oil  fields  in  the 
NDR  already  contributes  about  40%  of  the  total  emission  from  the  energy  sector  and  24%  of  the 
national emission. This means that the NDR is a significant source of the total GHG emission Nigeria. 
LIFE will thus ensure this is not increased through unsustainable land practices. 
29.  Access to land and social exclusion: Access to land is critical to livelihoods in the NDR. The 
models  of  land  access  available  in  the  area  include  family,  communal,  customary  tenancy  and 
individual (from inheritance) lands. In all, security of tenure remains an issue as most of the lands in 
the  rural  areas  have  no  government  granted  statutory  customary  rights  of  occupancy  which  is  the 
legal document that validates the land and make it tradable in the land market and guarantee security 
of  tenure.  Private  and  communal  land  access  have  high  possibility  of  excluding  women  and  youth, 
particularly  in  those  communities  of  the  Niger  Delta  region  where  inheritance  is  based  on 
primogeniture.  In  some  others,  women  cannot  own  land  independently  of  their  male  partners  and 
youth  have  very  little  say  in  the  community  affairs  (including  land)  because  that  is  considered  the 
exclusive  preserve  of  the  community  leaders  and  elders.  As  much  as  possible  government  land  is 
likely to guarantee more exclusivity to LIFE-ND. 
30.  Youth  aggressiveness,  unrest,  militancy  and  resource  conflicts:  Youth  restiveness  and 
agitation  resulting  from  several  years  of  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  its  concomitant  damage  to  the 
land  and  environment,  neglect  in  the  provision  of  basic  physical  and  social  infrastructure  and  the 
hostile living environment remains a formidable challenge in the Niger Delta area. This has led to loss 
of  social  and  cultural  cohesion  and  the  emergence  of  local  bourgeois  (through  selective  gratification 
wh ic h  has   pr od uc ed   a  powerful minority, which has become rich by collecting money from the oil 
companies  at  the  expense  of  the  community  and  the  environment).  It  has  also  imbued  some  of  the 
youth with a mentality of ‘free flow money’, which is achievable by causing conflicts and holding the oil 
companies  to  ransom.  In  recent  times  the  agitation  assumed  a  new  dimension  such  as  kidnapping 
and  willful  blowing-up  of  oil  and  gas  pipelines  in  the  region.  Again,  conflicts  between  the  various 
actors  in  the  land  resource  space,  especially  between  farmers  and  pastoralists,  is  becoming  more 
common  in  Nigeria  generally  due  to  climate  change  and  the  humanitarian  crisis  in  the  northeastern 
part  of  the  nation.  The  NDR  is  not  immune  to  this  as  the  forest  and  derived  savanna  zone  of  the 
region  are  also  being  invaded  by  pastoralists  fleeing  from  the  north  and  Middle  Belt.  This  has  the 
potential to precipitate conflagration and more crisis in the Niger Delta.  
2. Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
2.1  Key potential impacts:  
31.  The key potential impacts of the project are summarized in the Table 5 below: 
182 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Risk Domain 
Issue 
What and How 
have 
Rainfall  will  be  place-specific.  The 
lower  mangrove  swamp  and  forest 
zones 
experiencing 
been 
increasing  rainfall  and  higher  storm 
intensity.  Rainfall  has  been  projected 
to increase into the future. Rainfall has 
been  declining  the  derived  savanna 
zones in the northern parts of Edo and 
Ondo  states.  Onset  and  cessation 
dates  and  length  of  the  rainy  season 
are very critical for crop production. 
All  parts  of  the  project  area  has  been 
experiencing 
temperature 
which  is  consistent  with  the  rise  in 
global 
temperature.  This  has  been 
projected to continue into the future  
rising 
in 
Climate  
Rainfall 
 Climate 
Temperature 
 Climate 
GHG 
emission 
Risk  
level 
Enterprise 
chain affected 
Moderate 
Production 
Extent 
Impact 
rainfall 
in 
High 
Bayelsa, 
Rivers, 
Delta,  Akwa 
Ibom, 
Cross  River,  Abia 
and 
states. 
Declining  rainfall  in 
northern  parts  of 
Edo 
and  Ondo 
States 
Imo 
Low 
Production 
All  the  states  in  the 
project area 
Increased  rainfall  has  positive  impact  on  the  major 
staple  crops  in  the  project  area  including  cassava, 
vegetables, yam and Rice production. It also supports 
tree crops including oil palm, cocoa, and plantain. 
However, excessive rainfall may lead to flooding which 
can  devastate  farmlands,  fish  farms  (ponds)  and 
cause wilting of cassava and other crops. 
Decreasing  rainfall  in  the  derived  savanna  zone 
means less water for crops crop production. 
Impact of temperature will significantly be crop-specific 
and  to  some  extent  place-specific.  Rice  production  is 
particularly  affected  as  higher  temperature  produces 
sterile  flowers  and  decrease  rice  yields.  Excessive 
heat  may  cause  drought  and  reduce  water  available 
for  crops  in  the  northern  parts  of  Edo  and  Ondo 
States.  Increase  temperature  will  also  increase  insect 
and pest impacts on on-farm and stored products. 
Rice  production  and  wetland  removal  will  increase 
to  s  global 
GHG  emissions 
warming.  Rice  paddies  cultivation  generate  CH4 
emission  (which  has  a  very  high  global  warming 
potential). 
thereby  contribute 
States, 
All 
mainly 
growing enterprises 
but 
Rice 
in 
The  agriculture  and  LULUCF  sector 
contributes  about  40%  of  the  national 
GHG  emissions  in  the  year  2000.  The 
net  CO2  emissions  for  the  LULUCF 
sector were derived mostly (97%) from 
changes  in  forest  and  other  woody 
biomass stock an indication agricultural 
intensification  and  deforestation.  Gas 
flaring  from  the  oil  fields  in  the  Niger 
Delta already contributes about 40% of 
the  total  emission  from  the  energy 
the  national 
sector  and  24%  of 
emission. 
Moderate  
of 
- 
rice; 
Production 
some  crops 
mainly 
Processing 
(machines  and 
equipment); 
Marketing 
(through 
transportation) 
183 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Risk Domain 
Issue 
What and How 
Risk  
level 
Enterprise 
chain affected 
Extent 
Impact 
Environment 
Land  and  soil 
Degradation  - 
from 
poor 
land 
preparation 
 Environment  Water 
Pollution  
 Environment 
and 
Forest 
wetland 
removal  
 Environment 
Flooding  
 Environment 
Erosion  and 
gully 
 Environment 
Bush 
and 
Pipeline fires  
intensification 
rehabilitation  of 
Land  degradation  is  already  a  serious 
issue  in  the  Niger  delta  environment 
due to oil and gas activities resulting in 
oil  spills  and  pipeline 
fires  which 
degrade the environment and results in 
ecosystem  and  biodiversity 
losses.  
Poor  land  preparation  such  as  slash 
and burn agriculture increases the risk 
of land degradation. 
Water  pollution  is  from  oil  exploration 
activities 
is  common.  Unstainable 
management  of  waste  and  use  of 
agrochemical  can  compound 
this 
problem 
and 
Agricultural 
rural 
construction/ 
irrigation  and 
roads,  small  scale 
drainage 
aquaculture 
projects, 
(especially  on  state  farms)  in  wetland 
and  swamp  areas  can  lead  to  forest 
and wetland removals 
Flooding is a serious issue in the lower 
Niger  Delta.  Barring  mass  release  of 
water  from  upstream  dams,  there  are 
two  flooding  regimes  in  the  delta  i.e. 
back  flood  (November  to  March)  and 
white flood (April to October) which are 
modulated  by  the  flow  of  the  Niger 
River 
Erosion and gully from heavy rainfall is 
accentuated by the poorly consolidated 
sandstone  and  shale  soils  in  parts  of 
Abia, Imo,  Edo and part of Cross River 
states 
Bush burning is rampant across in the 
forest and derived savanna zone of the 
the  dry 
Niger  delta  especially 
season.  Pipeline 
fires  are  also 
becoming  rampant  in  the  lower  Delta 
in 
Moderate 
Production 
All States 
forests  and  virgin 
Opening-up  of 
lands  and 
unsustainable  land  preparations  methods  opens  the 
land and soil to erosion and flooding and reduces  the 
climate  and  soil  and  nutrient  support  services  of  the 
environment.  Soil  salinization  and  destruction  of  soil 
engineers 
that  drive  soil 
replenishment  processes)  from  unsustainable  use  of 
agrochemicals. 
(i.e.  microorganisms 
Moderate  
Production, 
processing 
All states 
Unsustainable  waste  management  and  use  of 
inorganic  fertilizers  and  agrochemicals  will  pollute 
drinking water sources and cause eutrophication. 
Moderate  
production; 
processing 
All states  
Unsustainable 
removal  will 
forest  and  wetland 
increase GHG emissions and the risk of  flooding and 
erosion 
Moderate  
Production,  
processing, 
marketing 
All states,- the Niger 
Delta  basin  states  –
Edo,  Delta,  Bayelsa 
and Rivers-are more 
affected 
Increased  rainfall  and  poor  land  management  may 
lead  exacerbate  flooding  and  lead  to  inundation  and 
devastation of agricultural lands and washing away of 
fishing  ponds.  Flooding  of  processing  area  and 
markets   
Moderate  
Production   
Edo,  Abia,  Imo  and 
parts  of  Cross  River 
states. 
Increased  rainfall  and  unsustainable  land  practices 
may  exacerbate  erosion  and  cause  farmlands  to  be 
washed away  
High    
production,  
processing 
All States 
Bush  fires  from  unsustainable  land  preparation  will 
destroys  crops,  processing  facilities,  forests,  and  the 
biodiversity.  For  example,  it  destroys  beehives  and 
scare bees. 
184 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Risk Domain 
Issue 
What and How 
Risk  
level 
Enterprise 
chain affected 
Extent 
Impact 
due to oil pipeline vandalism 
 Environment 
Biodiversity 
loss 
 Environment  Waste 
 Environment 
management 
Use  of  agro-
chemicals 
Social 
Access 
land 
to 
 Social 
 Social 
Social 
exclusion 
and 
Unsafe 
non-healthy 
working 
conditions 
(including  use 
of 
  children 
labourer 
and 
creates 
Production  of  cereals  and  fish  attracts 
birds and may lead to reduction in their 
population  if  an  excessive  force  is 
applied to curtail bird invasion 
Although agricultural waste is generally 
biodegradable,  excessive  waste  may 
cause nuisance on land and water 
Agrochemicals    use  to  improve  crop 
reduce 
performance 
pest 
infestation 
environmental 
externalities in soil and water 
Access to land is critical but most lands 
in rural areas have no title registration. 
Some models of land access available  
such  as  family,  communal,  customary 
tenancy  and  individual  are  likely  to 
exclude women and youth especially in 
the Ibo-speaking part of the Niger delta 
area  due 
to  primogeniture  and 
patrilineal inheritance system 
Women    and  youth  are  most  often 
marginalized 
community 
in  most 
settings  where  decision  making  is  the 
prerogative of the elders 
Due to high level of poverty there is the 
risk  of  using  children  labourers    in  the 
execution  of 
  production  and 
processing of commodities 
the 
Low  
Low  
Production, 
processing 
All states 
Cereal  cultivation  and  fish  farming  attract  birds  and 
can  lead  to  depletion  of  the  birds.  Fires  kill  animals 
and scares birds and bees  
production, 
processing 
All states 
waste  from  rice,  cassava,  maize  and  poultry  may 
create a nuisance in the environment 
Moderate 
Production  
All  states 
Excessive    use  of  fertilizers  and  agrochemicals  can 
potentially  pollute  water  sources  and  render 
the 
produced crop unfit for human consumption 
Moderate  
Production, 
processing 
Imo,  Abia  and  parts 
of Delta states 
The risk of being pushed off land is high, women and 
youth may not have access to land 
Moderate  
production, 
processing 
All states 
women  and  youth  not  adequately  represented  in 
decision making process that concerns them 
Moderate  
production, 
processing 
All states 
Children    may  be  encourage  to  work  for  payment  on 
farms  
185 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Risk Domain 
Issue 
What and How 
 Social 
Youth 
militancy,  elite 
hijack, 
and 
resource  use 
conflicts 
Youth militancy  and  aggressiveness is 
common in the Niger delta area due to 
poverty.  Resource 
conflicts 
between  farmers  and  pastoralists  is 
becoming a common place  
use 
Risk  
level 
Moderate  
Enterprise 
chain affected 
production, 
processing, 
marketing 
Extent 
Impact 
All  states 
Youth  not  admitted  into  the  project  by  attempt  to 
disturb  others  from  participating  fully.  Politician  may 
also  attempt  to  hijack  and  control  the  selection 
process.  
Resource conflicts can lead to crisis and conflagration 
186 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
2.2 Climate change and adaptation 
32.  The  thrust  of  climate-smart  agriculture  entails  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity 
and  incomes,  adapting  and  building  resilience  to  climate  change,  and  reducing  and/or  removing 
greenhouse  gases  emissions,  where  possible.  The  LIFE-ND  project  is  focused  on  seven  major 
enterprise commodities value chain  which are:  cassava, rice, plantain, cocoa, oil palm, aquaculture 
and  poultry.  Based  on  existing  government  guidelines  including  the  Nigerian  Agricultural  Promotion 
Policy  2016-2020,  National  Agricultural  Resilience  Framework  document,  Nigeria’s 
Intended 
Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (INDC)  document,  Nigeria’s  Second  National  Communication 
under  the  UNFCCC  (2014),  and  the  Nigerian  National  Policy  on  Environment  (1998),  the  climate 
change adaptation proposed include the following: 
33.  Awareness  creation,  Training,  and  communication:  Limited  awareness  of  climate  issues, 
and  the  key  changes  required  to  protect  agriculture  and  poor  management  of  land,  water,  soil 
nutrients  and  genetic  resources  are  some  of  the  challenges  facing  the  NDR.  Awareness  creation, 
communication and capacity building for all stakeholders – farmers, incubators, communities, service 
providers, project managers, etc., will be taken very seriously to mainstream climate change into the 
project  execution.  Communication  and  information  dissemination  to  agro-entrepreneur  will  be  a  key 
component  of  the  project.  Through  trainings  and  workshops,  farmers  will  be  equipped  with  the 
knowledge  and  best  practices  for  climate-smart  agriculture  and  to  maintain  a  safe,  secure  and 
environmentally-friendly working environment.  
34.  Appropriate  selection  of  crops:  The  priority  enterprise  value  chain  for  each  state,  local 
government  and  communities  will  be  chosen  based  on  their  agro-ecological  suitabilities  and  the 
existing  staple  crop  processing  zones  found  within  the  country  to  reduce  climate  impacts.  This  will 
also  be  based  on  comparative  advantage  to  reduce  the  quantity  of  inorganic  additives  incorporated 
into the soil and excessive use of agrochemicals.  
35.  No  regrets  options:  Fish  farmers  will  be  encouraged  to  use  nets  and  minimally  open-up 
channels  to  prevent  excessive  flood  during  heavy  rains.  Entrepreneur  will  be  advised  to  adopt  no 
regret strategy including agricultural insurance to mitigate climate impacts. It will also encourage the 
improvement  of  cultivation  practices  and  use  of  organic  fertilizers  to  boost  soil  fertility.  LIFE-ND  will 
discourage unsustainable secondary value chains such as the production of wood charcoal for use in 
fish  kiln.  The  project  will  avoid  significant  negative  effects  by  discouraging  opening  of  virgin  forests 
and wetlands for farming or any enterprises. The project will also support the production of trees crops 
(especially  oil  palm)  in  the  forest  zone  to  improve  the  canopy  ecosystems  and  carbon  sink.  Agri-
enterpreneurs  will  be  advised  to  avoid  lands  in  designated  grazing  reserves,  and  around  known 
grazing  routes  to  avoid  resource  conflicts.  State  governments  will  be  advised  to  set  up  ranches  or 
designated grazing area for herdsmen and also enforce existing laws on grazing. 
36.  Advisory  and  extension  services:  The  LLIFE-ND  will  strengthen  institutions  like  the 
Agricultural Development Programmes (ADP) to (i) liaise with the meteorological agency to generate 
critical threshold  information (e.g.  onset  and cessation of the rains, dry spells,  likelihood of flooding, 
length  of  the  growing  season,  etc.)  (ii)  Provide  advisory  services  including  dissemination  of  climate 
information  to  farmers  to  guide  on-farm  activities  (iii)  provide  quality  assurance;  and  (iv)  support, 
monitor  and  supervise  private  extension  service  providers.  These  extension  providers  will  update 
farmers with information on improved inputs, good agronomic practices and other skill sets required to 
improve the farmers’ efficiency and productivity.  
37.  Soil and water conservation: In the production of field crops, plant soil relationship will thrive 
based  on  the  availability  and  quality  of  water,  nutrient  availability,  and  temperature.  Farmers  will  be 
sensitized  on  activities  which  improve  soil  health  and  water  retention  capacity.  The  use  of  different 
kinds  of  mulch  materials  will  be  encouraged  to  reduce  water  loss.  They  will  be  encouraged  to 
intercrop the major crops with cover crops as this will improve the water retention capacity of the soil 
187 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
and will take care of weeds. For enterprises like plantain production and oil palm, minimum tillage will 
be encouraged. 
38.  Good Agricultural Practices (GAP): From land preparation to harvest and storage, the farmer 
will  be  trained  and  kept  informed  by  extension  service  providers  on  use  of  improved  input  and 
methods for cultural practices. The use of GAP will reduce the incidence  where uninformed farmers 
apply any kind of inorganic fertilizer at any rate. With the increase in production of these enterprises, 
there will be an increase in the availability of organic manure to be used as amendments. Farmers will 
be  educated  on  the  need  to  use  sustainable  land  development  and  preparation  methods  including 
zero or minimum tillage. LIFE-ND will train farmers to drain rice paddies in mid-season to reduce CH4 
emission and improve nutrient management including the retention of rice residues. Farmers will also 
be encouraged use clean energy sources for processing. 
39.  Agrochemicals  and  waste  management:  adequate  training  will  be  conducted  to  sensitize 
farmers on the proper usage of herbicides, fungicides, pesticides and inorganic fertilizers. The use of 
personal protective equipment will be encouraged to keep the farmers safe from their interactions with 
agrochemicals.  Value  chain  businesses  will  be  created  by  training  youth  and  women  in  integrated 
pest  and  agrochemical  management  services  in  order  to  convert  the  risks  of  agrochemical 
management  into  opportunity  and  to  maximize  job  output  and  minimize  the  associated  risks  from 
pesticides and agrochemicals application. Youth and women will also be trained in the conversion of 
farm  waste  and  crop  residue  to  animal,  poultry  and  fish  feeds  to  mainstream  integrated  agriculture 
and create more jobs.  
3. Environmental and Social Category 
40.  Based  on  IFAD  guidelines  on  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment,  the 
Environment and Social risk category for the project is B. 
41.  The  project  is  a  natural  resources-based  value  chain  development  which  may  include 
development  of  agro-processing  facilities.  The  environmental  impacts  are  going  to  be  substantially 
place-based and commodity-specific across enterprise clusters and communities around the NDR and 
most  of  them  are  readily  remedied  by  appropriate  preventive  actions  and/or  mitigation  measures 
already proposed. The project activities may include minimal rehabilitation of rural farm roads but not 
in  protected  or  sensitive  areas  and  will  not  entail  the  total  area  being  cleared  of  above  100  ha.  As 
much as a significant part of the lower Niger Delta area is wetland, the project will discourage opening 
up of wetlands, forest and virgin lands for agribusinesses. There is very low risk of impacting physical 
and cultural resources and the regulation against opening lands in protected areas will be enforced. 
The project has minimal risk of causing land degradation through unsustainable land preparation and 
management  practices  which  will  be  mitigated  through  awareness  and  training  on  sustainable  land 
practices. Moderate risk impact of surface water resources from use of agrochemical and pesticides is 
also expected which will be mitigated by encouraging use of biodegradable farm manure and creation 
of  sustainable  value  chain  in  pesticides  and  agrochemicals  management  to  provide  service  to  the 
farmers. No economic displacement of marginal or indigenous population is envisaged. 
the  second 
the  project  after 
level  beneficiaries  of 
the 
42.  The  communities  are 
incubatees/incubators.  In  addition  to  government  land,  access  to  land  will  also  depend  on  the 
community’s  free-consent  release  of  land  for  the  project  to  the  youth  and  women  (who  are  also 
members of the community). No impact on the use rights of land by the community is envisaged.  No 
unsustainable  natural  resources  management  such  as  fisheries,  forestry  and  significant  increase  in 
use of agrochemicals that exceed the carrying capacity of the ecosystem is envisaged. Fish farming 
and aquaculture business will be on hand-stocked pond. The project will not significantly increase the 
risk  of  erosion  and  flooding.  Generally,  the  project  will  involve  land  use  changes  (agricultural 
intensification and/or expansion of the cropping area) and resources that may have adverse impacts 
on habitats, ecosystems, and/or  livelihoods in  non-sensitive  areas.  A minimal increase in the  use of 
agrochemicals is envisaged. Small dams and water impoundment in non-sensitive and wetland area 
may be constructed to complement rainfall to ensure all-year round cropping for some crops.  
188 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
43.  An  Environmental  and  Social  Analysis  to  develop  an  Environmental  and  Social 
Management  Plan  (ESMP)  is  required  and  to  be  undertaken  during  project  preparation  or 
implementation. 
4. Climate risk category 
44.  Based the IFAD guidelines on the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment, the Climate 
Risk Category for the Project is MODERATE. 
45.  The  major  climate  risks  for  the  project  are  rainfall,  temperature  and  the  possibility  of  some 
crops and activities contributing to GHG emissions. The impacts will be substantially place-based and 
enterprise-specific  across  the  NDR.  The  lower  area  of  the  NDR  is  low-lying  and  subject  to  flooding 
caused by the flow regimes of the Niger River and its very large basin.  NDR is not subject to tropical 
storms. Late onset and early cessation of the rains may affect crops in the derived savanna zone in 
the upper parts of the NDR. Heat  waves are uncommon and not likely. Future  climate scenarios for 
the  project  area  foresee  increase  in  both  temperature  and  rainfall  which  will  increase  flooding  and 
rainfall reduction in the derived savanna zone. However, this is not likely to adversely affect LIFE-ND 
project’s  impact,  sustainability  and  cost  over  the  six-year  lifetime.  As  much  as  possible  location  of 
agribusiness in marginal and highly degraded areas such as location experiencing erosion and mass 
wasting and floodplains will be minimized.  
46.  The project target group (youth and women) entirely dependent on natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rain-fed agricultural plots. Aside from flooding, extreme weather and weather related 
losses and damage in the past in NDR has been very low. However, climate variability is projected to 
affect agricultural productivity (especially crops) and the associated incidence of pests and diseases. 
Weather-related risks including dry spells and floods may  also adversely impact upon key stages of 
identified  value  chains  in  the  project  (from  production  to  markets).  Investment  in  institutional 
development and capacity building for rural institutions (such as farmer groups, cooperatives) will be a 
key  issue  in  this  project  to  strengthen  climate-resilient  development,  indigenous  climate  risk 
management capabilities,  and  adopt  green technologies such  as creating  value  chains  in  integrated 
pesticide  and  agrochemical  management  and  conversion  of  farm  wastes  to  animal/poultry  feeds. 
Policy dialogue is also being introduced to mainstream climate resilience in the agricultural sector. 
47.  A  Basic  Climate  Risk  Analysis  is  required  and  to  undertake  during  project  preparation  or 
implementation. 
5. Recommended features of project design and implementation 
48.  The  thrust  of  the  SECAP  in  the  PDR  is  to  mainstream  Climate  Change  and  Sustainable 
Environmental  Practices  into  the  LIFE-ND  Project  as  one  the  enabling  environment  to  provide 
sustainable,  climate-resilient,  economic  and  financial  inclusion  of  youth  in  profitable  agribusiness  as 
indicated in the COSOP.  
49.  The pillars of climate and environmental mainstreaming in the PDR are:  
Component 2: Strengthening Institutional and Regulatory Framework for Agribusiness  
Subcomponent 2.2: Policy dialogue Support 
Outcome 2.2: Improve regulatory framework for agribusiness 
Output 2.2.3.  Improved environmental/safety protection for agri-enterprises 
50.  Activity proposed: 
189 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
1. 
Environmental  and  social  analysis  and  climate  risk  analysis  of  commodity  clusters  and 
preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Basic Climate Risk Analysis  
2.  Develop crop agro-ecological suitability map 
3.  Create awareness by:  
a. Sensitizing  the  farmers  on  the  need  to  adopt  environment  and  climate-smart  practices  in  all 
aspects  of  the  enterprise  including  undertaken  no-regret  measures  including  agricultural 
insurance 
b. Sensitizing  on  opportunities for value chain  in  environmental mitigation practices e.g. creating 
jobs  in  converting  agric  waste  to  poultry  feeds,  poultry  waste  to  fish  feeds,  etc.;  and  youth 
entrepreneur in integrated pesticide and agrochemical management 
c. Sensitizing  the  project  managers  on  the  need  to  improve  agricultural  resilience  by  selecting 
crops  that  are  naturally  adapted  to  agro-ecological  suitability;  discourage  production  and 
processing  enterprises  that  open-up  virgin  lands/forest/wetlands;  discourage  secondary 
unsustainable  environmental value chains e.g. the use of charcoal for fish drying in kiln 
4. 
Strengthen institution to: 
a. Improve the collaboration between ADP and Nigerian Meteorological Agency 
b. Improve  the  capacity  of  the  states’  environmental  agencies  to  carry  out  environmental 
assessment and monitoring.  
5. 
Build capacity by: 
a. Training  intended  entrepreneur  on  waste  valorization  and  integrated  pest  and  agrochemicals 
management 
b. Strengthening    the  capacity  of  the  Nigerian  meteorological  agency  to  generate  climate 
information 
c. Strengthening  the  capacity  of  ADP/extension  workers  to  perform  climate  services  –  including 
timely dissemination of climate information to farmers and update farmers on best practices 
d. Developing  manual/modules  for  environmental  training  on  sustainable  agricultural  enterprise 
based on state peculiarities 
6.  Carry out M&E through: 
a. Generation  of    baseline  information  for  all  the  specific  project  locations/clusters  using  GPS, 
Remote Sensing and field surveys during project inception 
b. Developing 
  environmental 
information  system  within  a  GIS 
to  monitor 
the  project 
locations/clusters during the project life cycle 
6. Analysis of alternatives 
51.  Environment and climate change mainstreaming in agriculture to build resilient,  climate-smart 
and environment-friendly agriculture is a key government policy intention well captured in the Federal 
Government  documents  including:  the  Nigerian  National  Policy  on  Environment  (1999),  Nigerian 
Agricultural  Promotion  Policy  2016-2020,    National  Agricultural  Resilience  Framework,    Nigeria’s 
Second  National  Communication  under  the  UNFCCC  submitted  in  2014,  and  Nigeria’s  Intended 
Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (INDC)  to  GHG  Emission  Reduction  Targets  submitted  to  the 
UNFCCC in COP 21 in Paris in 2016 and adopted in COP 22 in Marrakech in 2016. The LIFE-ND will 
move in this direction of mainstreaming environment and climate change into the project planning and 
implementation. No alternative is required. 
Institutional  analysis 
7. 
52.  The supervision of the environmental, social and climate change component of this project will 
be  done  by  a  Climate  and  Environmental  Specialist  at  regional  level.  He  will  be  assisted  by  a 
Sustainable  Agriculture/Climate  and  Environmental  Officer  at  the  state  level.  He/she  will  be 
responsible  to  the  Regional  Programme  coordinator.  He/she  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall 
management  of  activities  related  to  mainstreaming  climate  change  adaptation  measures  and 
sustainable  environmental  practices  into  the  production,  processing  and  marketing  of  commodities 
across value chain clusters. He/she  will carry  out the environmental  and social  analysis and climate 
risk analysis and develop environmental and social management plan (ESMP) and basic climate risk 
analysis  to  guide  the  project.  He  will  also  develop  agro-ecological  suitability  map  for  the  states. 
He/she  will  carry  out  assessment  and  identification  of  negative  impacts  and  opportunities  for  green 
190 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
growth in commodities clusters and value chain. He/she  will also sure that recommended mitigation 
and adaptation measures (including no-regret measures) are adhered to and implement opportunities 
for green growth along the value chains and ensure overall environmental sustainability of the project.  
He will also work closely with climate data generating agency and the extension agency to make sure 
climate  information  is  produced  and  deliver  to  farmers  promptly  to  guide  scheduling  of  on-farm 
activities.  He  will  develop  training  schedules  and  manuals  for  capacity  building  purposes  for  related 
institutions, communities and farmer groups on climate change and environment. (See appendix the 
TOR for the Regional Climate and Environment Specialist). 
53.  The Sustainable Agriculture/Climate and Environmental Officer at the state  level  will  have  the 
dual role and will report to both the Climate and Environment Specialist and Sustainable Agriculture 
Specialist.  He  will  coordinate  the  delivery  of  all  climate  and  environmental  activities  at  local/cluster 
levels.  
54.  Awareness and capacity building:   
1.  General  sensitization  and  awareness  campaign  to  sensitizing  the  farmers  on  the  need  to  (i) 
understand past and present climate trends and pattern (ii) integrating and up-scaling local adaptation 
knowledge  (iii)  adopt  environment  and  climate-smart  practices  in  all  aspects  of  the  agri-enterprises 
(iv) undertake no-regret measures including agricultural insurance (v) identify opportunities for value 
chain in environmental mitigation practices.  
2.  Sensitizing  the  project  managers  on  (i)  the  need  to  improve  agricultural  resilience  by  selecting 
crops  that  naturally  adapted  to  agro-ecological  suitability  (ii)  discourage  production  and  processing 
enterprises  that  open-up  virgin  lands/forest/wetlands    (iii)  discourage  secondary  value  chain 
unsuitable enterprises 
3. Training on waste valorization and integrated pest and agrochemicals management 
8. Monitoring and evaluation 
55.  The M&E  will enable the gauging of the progress on  how much resources are translating into 
actual adaptation  and impact reduction by  enterprise clusters across space. The M&E  components 
include:  
56.  Generating baseline data and developing environmental information: Every bit of data about the 
land, water, soil, vegetation, climate, human settlement, human activity and livelihood, infrastructure, 
economic,  social  and  cultural  resources,  sensitive  ecosystems,  etc.  is  important.  These  data  will  be 
generated/sourced, processed, integrated and stored within and GIS-based environmental information 
database for easy interrogation and updates. To reduce the initial cost of developing the GIS data for 
EIS, data will be source from project partners including Federal Ministry of Agriculture (National Land 
Resources Development agency), Ministry of Environment, NDDC and the States. 
57.  Capacity  building:  Although  the  LIFE-ND  information  system  will  be  managed  by  the  Climate 
and Environmental specialist, technical and human capacity for field data collection and GIS input and 
analysis needs to be developed across the States to ensure regular data collection and updates. 
58.  Regular field updates: Updates will be based on field data (attached to location) and collected 
regularly around the sites where enterprises are located to ensure compliance monitoring.  
The TOR 
  Access, acquisition, integration and harmonization of baseline data 
  Acquisition, installation, and test run of GIS hardware and software 
  Training of state Sustainable Agriculture/Climate and Environmental Officers 
  Collection and reporting of field data to update the information systems 
191 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
  Report generation to guide field supervision activities  
9.  Further  information required to complete screening, if any 
59.  No further information is required for the SECAP Screening 
10. Budgetary resources and schedule 
60.  Budgetary resources requirement for the SECAP activities are reflected in the PDR cost 
components. The cost is computed based on the following: 
Activity 
Detailed input/Item of expenditure (can be more than one per activity) 
Environmental and climate 
assessment of clusters  
Develop crop agro-ecological  
suitability maps 
Awareness creation 
Strengthening institutions 
Capacity building 
M&E 
Carrying out  Climate Analysis 
Carrying out Environmental Analysis 
 Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
Preparation of Basic Climate Risk Analysis  
Produce Agro-ecological suitability map for the States 
Training/workshop for farmers 
Training/workshop project managers 
Strengthening the linkage with the Meteorological Agency to generate and 
process farm-related climate information 
Support ADP to establish mini climate station in each of the participating LGA 
Training of would-be entrepreneur in waste valorization and integrated pesticide 
and agrochemical management 
Development of Training modules/manuals 
Integration of  baseline Data 
Acquisition of equipment and Software for converting and storing baseline data 
in EIS 
Training in EIS management 
Field updates and incidentals 
11. Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc. 
61.  This SECAP review note has been developed based on the followings:  
(i) Consultations through stakeholders’ workshop in Port Harcourt, Rivers State on 9th and 10th of 
March 2017. Stakeholders in attendance include: 
  National  and state  project officers, apex community representatives, staff and youth 
champions of the CBNRMP from the 9 states of the Niger Delta 
  Members  from the agricultural establishments (International Institute for Tropical 
Agriculture, African Rice, Harvest Plus) 
  Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
  Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) 
  Civil Society Organization (National Association of Nigeria Traders – NANTS)  
(ii)   Field consultation and observation in Bayelsa and Edo States on 13th and 14th March 2017 
meeting with: 
  Government officials 
  Agricultural Development Programme officials 
  Agri-enterpreneurs 
192 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
References 
National Bureau of Statistics (2016): Social Statistics 2016. Available at 
http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. Access 16 March 2017. 
NBS 2015: Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. 
Access 16 Arch 2017. 
IFAD 2016: Country Programme Evaluation, Available at 
https://www.ifad.org/evaluation/reports/cpe/tags/nigeria/y2016/28783961. 
NBS (2012): National Bureau of Statistics Annual Abstracts of Statistics 2012. 
http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library 
CBN (2015):  Central Bank of Nigeria Draft Annual Report 2015. Available at 
https://www.cbn.gov.ng/Documents/cbnannualreports.asp.  
The World Bank (2016): World Development Indicators: Nigeria Available online at 
http://data.worldbank.org/ country/Nigeria [10th November, 2016]. 
United Nations (2016) World Statistic Pocketbook. New York: United Nations Publication. eISBN: 978-
92-1-058230-8. 
IFAD, https://www.ruralpoverty portal.org/country/ statistics/tags/Nigeria. 
NBS (2015): Demographic Statistics Bulletin 2015. Available at http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/library. 
Access 16 Arch 2017 
NEST (1991): Nigeria’s Threatened Environment – A National Profile. Nigerian Environmental Study 
Action Team, Ibadan, 288pp 
SEDEC Associates (2008):  State of the Nigerian Environment Report. Federal Ministry of 
Environment and UNDP. 
United Nations Environment Programme (2011): Environmental assessment of Ogoniland. UNEP, 
Nairobi. ISBN:    978-92-807-3130-9. 
NDES (1997): Niger Delta Environmental Survey Phase 1 Report, Vol 1- Environment and Socio-
Economic Characteristics, ERML (1997).  
Nigerian Meteorological Agency (2014): 2014 Seasonal Rainfall Prediction. NIMET, Abuja. 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999): Revised National Policy on the Environment. Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved from 
www.unccd.int/actionprogrammes/africa/national/2001/nigeria-eng.pdf. Last accessed 15 August 
2015  
Federal Government of Nigeria (2014): Nigeria’s Second National Communication under The United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Federal Ministry of Environment of the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria Abuja. Retrieved from www.unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/nganc2.pdf . 
Accessed 15 March 2017. 
Federal Government of Nigeria (*): 
http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Nigeria/1/Approved%20Nigeria's
%20INDC_271115.pdf . Accessed 15 March 2017 
193 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 15: Youth and women models 
1. 
Introduction 
The Youth and Women models will enhance the economic empowerment of youth and women, create 
more jobs and contribute to greater gender equality, as well as facilitate the economic development of 
the region. The empowerment of women and youth will increase their sense of self-worth, respect and 
dignity,  with  ability  to  make  their  own  choices  and  decisions,  as  well  as  determine  financial  and 
economic choices. 
2. 
Triggers 
The following are responsible for the marginalization of youth and women in Nigeria: 
i.  Despite the high population percentage of women and youths in Nigeria, they can be said to 
be  marginalized  politically,  economically  and  otherwise.    Consequently  unemployment, 
poverty (64%  NBS 2010) and frustration leading to various social vices –  
In most cases youth and women are not involved in decision making at community level 
ii. 
iii.  Early  marriage  is  common  among  girls  in  some  communities;  hence  access  to  education  is 
limited. 
iv.  Although  women  contribute  over  60%  of  the  labour  in  agriculture,  access  to  productive 
Resource  such  as  Lands  and  capital  is  limited.  The  land  are  usually  owned  by  either  the 
families  or  communities,  hence  land  tenure  system  is  discriminatory  against  women  and 
youth.  
3. 
Factors common to youth and women empowerment models 
Nigeria is currently facing an alarming growth in unemployment, particularly amongst the youth. In the 
last ten years, about 20 million youths have entered into the country’s labour market and a substantial 
percentage of them have not secured decent employment. As a result, youth unemployment doubled 
in  five  years  from  12.7  percent  in  2006  to  23.9  percent  in  2011.  Arising  from  this,  Government  at 
various  levels  (Federal,  State  and  Local  Government)  had  initiated  various  youth  and  women 
empowerment  programmes  with  a  view  to  generate  employment,  increase  income  and  reduce 
poverty.  The  success  recorded  in  some  youth  and  women  empowerment  could  be  attributed  to  the 
factors: 
following 
i.  Awareness creation/sensitization 
ii.  Capacity Building utilizing Specialized Institutions and Vocational Training Centres 
iii.  Utilization of Established Agricultural Enterprise for mentoring after capacity building 
iv.   Provision of Starter Packs (equipment and agricultural inputs)  to the trainees to enable them 
establish their agribusinesses  
v.  Trainees are usually organized into groups along commodity line to enable them have access 
to  financial  services,  inputs,  advisory  services  and  market  linkages.  This  has  been  found  to 
stimulate group cohesion, knowledge sharing including technical and financial sustainability of 
the group. Some good examples are the Women Cooperatives under the Growing Girls and 
Women in Nigeria (GWIN) programme and  Youth Cooperatives under  Youth and Women in 
Agribusiness  Investment  Programme  of  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development  and  also  the  Commodity  Apex  Development  Association  (CADA)  of  the 
completed IFAD/NDDC assisted CBNRMP. 
4. 
Youth and women enterprise models  
There are five major group models as listed below: 
I.     Individual enterprise ownership model 
II.   Incubator/cluster  delivery model 
III.  Youth in Agriculture Foundation  
195 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
IV.  Group enterprise ownership model 
V.  Growing Girls and Women in Nigeria (GWIN) Model 
4.1. Individual enterprise ownership model 
The  use  of  individual  based  group  enterprise  ownership  model  invigorates  interest  among  Niger 
Delta  youths  and  women  in  agriculture.  It  promotes  ownership  of  enterprises  and  self-fulfillment.  
This model in fish enterprise gave rise to a total of 62 groups, 6345 fish farmers (40% are youths) 
and  14,590  ponds.  Each  fish  farmer  has  his/her  own  pond(s)  ranging  between  1-10  ponds  each 
containing  1,000  fishes  and  netting  over  N1million  per  annum.  In  the  individual  enterprise 
ownership, the selected youth or woman is trained for a period upwards of one week depending on 
the enterprise by  the service provider. The service provider could be an individual, an  incubation 
centre,  public  or  private  entity.  The  ownership  of  an  enterprise  starts  from  the  training  as  the 
individual is also expected to practice with their own enterprise. 
4.2 Incubator/cluster delivery model 
Champion/mentor  agri-enterprises  that  serve  as  agribusiness  incubation  centres  for  youths,  Skill 
development,  mentorship,  knowledge  sharing,  job  creation,  service  provision,  replication  and  up-
scaling of successes. The incubator is expected to train and mentor 10 persons at a cycle. There 
will  be  a  working  agreement  signed  between  the  incubator  and  the  incubatee  to  ensure 
harmonious  working relationship  and  adherence  to  laid down regulations. Funds will be provided 
for  the  incubation  centres  for  the  training  and  mentorship.  At  the  end  of  the  cycle  the  capital 
investment is retain by the centre for the training of another set of incubates while the profit arising 
from the investment will be share at a ratio of 40:60 between the incubator (40%) and the incubate 
(60%). This 60 % acts as initial  investment cost to the incubatee on disengagement to individual 
enterprise ownership model.   
4.3  Youth in Agriculture Foundation 
Youth  in  Agriculture  Foundation  -  an  initiative  of  CBNRMP.  It  is  a  network  of  agro-enterprising 
youths  across  the  9-states  of  Niger  Delta.  Founded  on  14th  May  2013.  This  provides  a  viable 
platform  for  promoting  youth’s  interest  in  agribusiness,  knowledge  sharing,  a  platform  for  peer 
review  among  youth  agro-entrepreneurs,  creates  employment  with  a  view  to  eradicate  poverty 
among youths, a voice for youth in Agriculture.  Promotes and supports youth innovators who are 
creating  sustainable  enterprises.  The  platform  can  also  leverage  grant  of  credit  from  financial 
institutions  such  as  Bank  of  Agriculture  (BOA).  Members  can  provide  training  and  mentor  other 
members.  Each  youth  beneficiary  is  a  member  of  the  Youth  in  Agriculture  Foundation.  It  also 
works  towards  creating  a  more  positive  enabling  environment  through      engagement  in  policy 
dialogue  with  Government  regarding  agriculture  and  make  requests  from  Government  and  other 
Institutions on matters affecting their agribusiness. 
4.4 Group enterprise ownership model 
This stimulates engagement with  little capital and group cohesion. Groups have common access 
to  inputs  at  moderate  costs.    This  group  transit  into  cooperatives.  Women  Cooperative  groups 
make  joint  efforts  to  transport  goods  to  market  goods  and  leverage  input.  Membership  of  each 
cooperative  group  should  not  be  less  than  10  or  more  than  15.  The  members  can  easily  cross 
guarantee  one  another  in  order  to  obtain  easy  access  to  credit.  Repayments  of  credits  are 
facilitated by the group. A good percentage of the women prefer group working in groups. 
4.5 Growing Girls and Women in Nigeria (GWIN) Model 
4.5.1 
The  GWIN  programme  is  intended  to  reach  resource  poor  hard-to-reach  women 
especially in the rural areas to engage and empower them in various agricultral value chains. The 
pilot  phase  started  with  50  women  cooperatives  with  over  1000  members  from  36  States  and 
FCT. The programme conducted capacity  building  in enterprise management, entrepreneurship, 
group  dynamics, marketing,  e.t.c.  for  the  beneficiaries.  At  the  capacity  building  and  mentorship, 
they  were  provided  with  equipment  and  relevant  inputs  to  establish  small  scale  agribusinesses 
196 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
involving different enterprises in rice, cassava,  (accha/fonio), groundnut, aquaculture and poultry 
value chains.  
4.5.2 
empowered on  are: 
The  Niger  Delta  State  beneficiaries  in  this  programme  and  the  enterprise  they  were 
Rice processing and packaging 
Rice processing and packaging 
Cassava processing and packaging 
Cassava processing and packaging 
Cassava processing and packaging 
a. Bayelsa State 
b. Ondo State   
c. Edo State 
d. Imo State 
e. Abia State 
f.  Cross River State  Poultry production and marketing 
g. Delta State   
Poultry production and marketing 
h. Akwa Ibom State  Aquaculture production and processing  
Aquaculture production and processing 
i.  Rivers State  
4.5.3 
cover more beneficiaries. 
Arising  from  the  success  recorded,  there  is  high  demand  to  expand  the  programme  to 
In  conclusion  it  is  obvious  that  all  the  models  are  relevant  to  the  youth  and  women  in  their 
5. 
journey  to  generate  income,  create  jobs,  create  wealth  and  maintain  a  sustainable  agricultural 
environment. 
197 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 16: Participating state selection 
199 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
200 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 17: Nutrition mainstreaming in LIFE-ND 
1. 
Introduction 
is 
initiated  by 
the  FMARD 
Improvement  Family  Enterprises  Project  (LIFE) 
Livelihood 
for 
implementation  in  the  Niger-Delta  states.  The  project  aims  to  increase  income  and  employment  for 
rural  youth  and  women  through  profitable  agri-enterprises.  This  project  will  contribute  to  the  four 
pillars  of  the  national  agricultural  policy  (the  Green  Alternative  2015)  of  food  security,  job  creation, 
import substitution, and economic diversification; and the objectives of the youth and gender policies 
of reduced discrimination, increased inclusion, and promotion of access to resources, infrastructure, 
training and finance. The project interventions will give consideration to gender equality and women's 
empowerment, nutrition and climate change adaptation in the implementation at project locations. The 
Project location- the Niger Delta is Africa’s largest mangrove forest area in the world. It comprised of 
nine states (Abia, Akwa-Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross-River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo and Rivers) enriched with 
enormous natural and human endowments, and rich agricultural heritage. The Niger Delta region has 
the largest concentration of forest, tree crop resources and biodiversity in Nigeria. Also it commands a 
significant  position  in  the  country’s  production  of  vegetable,  fruit,  root  and  tuber  crops  and  aquatic 
resources. Aquaculture is the fastest growing non-oil sector in the Niger Delta. 
2.  National policy, strategies and action plans on nutrition 
Nigeria  is  among  the  59  countries  leading  the  global  movement  to  end  malnutrition  in  all  its  forms 
through  the  scaling  up  nutrition  (SUN)  Movement.  The  Nutrition  and  Food  Safety  Division,  Federal 
Department of Agriculture in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture & Rural Development (FMARD), Abuja 
is  responsible  for  convening  various  sectors  and  stakeholders  on  nutrition  issues.  Given  the 
crosscutting nature of nutrition, the National Plan of Action on Food and Nutrition (NPAN) integrates 
several ministries. A multi-sectoral National Committee on Food and Nutrition (NCFN) is chaired and 
facilitated by the National Planning Commission. The NCFN is replicated at the sub-national level as 
the State Committee on Food and Nutrition. The role of nutrition in Nigeria had been recognised as a 
development issue and malnutrition is being addressed with the recognition of nutrition in the National 
Health  Strategic  Development  Plan.  The  Nutrition  Partners  Forum  also  includes  both  government 
ministries and development partners. 
.  
The  National  Strategic  Plan  of  Action  for  Nutrition  (NSPAN)  2014-2019,  highlighted  the  need  to 
strengthen  the  Nutrition  Information  System  (NIS)  in  the  country.  Conducting  food  and  nutrition 
surveys  on  regular  basis  is  one  of  the  plans  to  achieve  this  objective.  The  Agriculture  Promotion 
Policy  (2016  –  2020)  termed  Green  Alternative,  a  guiding  document  of  the  Federal  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD) has Food, Consumption and Nutrition Security as one 
of  the  thematic  areas  of  interventions.  The  policy  highlighted  the  leading  role  of  private  sectors  and 
the  importance  of  coordination  among  relevant  stakeholders  including  government  and  research 
institutes in leveraging the capabilities of Nigeria to ensure food and income security. The policy thrust 
include making nutritious foods available at  local  level through school feeding  programmes and bio-
fortification of foods and to raise awareness about nutritious foods.  
FMARD is actively involved in Home Grown School Feeding (HGSF) initiative which aims at feeding 
over 24 million school children nationwide. HGSF is a school feeding programme that provides food 
produced and purchased within a country to the extent possible. It focuses on linking school feeding 
programmes with local small-scale farmer production by creating an ongoing market for the youth and 
women enterprises.  
3.  Food security and nutrition situation 
Malnutrition  in  its  different  forms  is  prevalent  in  the  Niger  Delta  region.  According  to  the  National 
Nutrition and Health Survey (NNHS 2015)68  the south south zone (comprise of 6 states in the Niger 
Delta)  had  5.3  per  cent  of  acute  malnutrition,  12.3  percent  underweight  and  20  percent  stunting 
(chronic malnutrition) among children under five years of age. At national level, stunting is 33 percent 
and it still remains the largest burden of malnutrition  among children  in Nigeria. The rate of stunting 
reflects  long-term  nutritional  problem  and  inadequate  dietary  intake  over  a  long  period  of  time  with 
68 National Nutrition and Health Survey (NNHS) 2015. The Nutrition and Health Situation in Nigeria November 2015 
201 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
possible consequences of recurrent and chronic illness. Among the women of reproductive age (15-
49 years), acute malnutrition prevalence in south south zone was reported at 4.1 per cent. Maternal 
nutrition,  is a fundamental  cornerstone for  women’s health and  wellbeing  as  well as their children’s. 
Malnourished  women  and  adolescent  girls  (youth)  are  prone  to  giving  birth  to  a  stunted  child, 
increased  susceptibility  to  infections,  slow  recovery  from  illness,  and  a  heightened  risk  of  adverse 
pregnancy  outcomes  –  pre-term,  birth  and  intra-uterine  growth  retardation,  obstructed  labour,  low 
birth  weight,  low  quality  breast  milk,  postpartum  haemorrhage,  and  increased  morbidity  for  both 
herself and her baby. The importance of good nutrition for women and adolescent girls throughout the 
lifecycle is well documented in literatures. This justifies the relevance of nutrition mainstreaming in this 
project interventions. 
According to the DHS (2013)69, only 33.2 percent of children (6-23 months) in south south zone are 
fed  appropriately  based  on  the  minimum  dietary  diversity.  Dietary  diversity  and  feeding  practices 
varies  across  different  states.  Rivers  is  among  the  states  with  high  consumption  of  vitamin  A-rich 
foods  (83.6percent)  while  Akwa-Ibom  had  49.3percent.  Vitamin  A-rich  foods    includes  meat  ,  fish, 
poultry, eggs, pumpkin, red or yellow  yams or squash, carrots, red sweet potatoes, dark green leafy 
vegetables,  mango,  papaya,  and  other  locally  grown  vitamin  A  rich  fruits  and  vegetables,  and  red 
palm nuts. The child feeding  practice  is associated  with the level of mother’s  education and  wealth. 
Mother’s education has a positive relationship with consumption of vitamin A-rich foods. A proportion 
of 44 percent children whose mothers have no education consume vitamin A-rich foods, as compared 
to 62percent of children whose mothers have higher education. A study on the food security status of 
crop  farm  households  in  the  Niger  Delta  showed  that  majority  (87.76  percent)  of  farm  households 
were  food  insecure  while  12.24  percent  were  marginally  food  secure.  More  than  half  of  these 
population (57.03 percent) ate once a day (Ukpe, 2016). 
The  major  constraints  to  food  security  include  low  income  resulting  in  low  purchasing  power  for 
adequate  food;  lack  of  access  to  nutritious  foods;  lack  of  awareness  about  proper  nutrition  and 
importance  of  dietary  diversity;  poor  quality  of  food  due  to  contamination  i.e.  pesticide,  aflatoxins, 
pests.   
As  Nigeria’s  work  and  eating  habits  evolve,  a  striking  rise  in  levels  of  obesity  and  diabetes  is 
emerging  in  both  urban  and  rural  areas;  co-morbidities  including  kidney  disease  and  cardiac 
complications  are  also  emerging.  The  government  is  intensifying  its  efforts  to  help  develop  eating 
habits  in  Nigeria  towards  a  more  balanced  regimen  in  order  to  reduce  overconsumption  of  certain 
classes of foods. The priority commodities for productivity in the Agriculture  Promotion Policy  of the 
FMARD  include  rice,  wheat,  maize,  fish  (aquaculture),  dairy  milk,  soya  beans,  poultry,  horticulture 
(fruits and vegetables). 
States 
Delta Region 
in  Niger 
Stunting 
(NNHS, 
2015) 
17.9 
24.1 
14.1 
18.5 
19.9 
15.1 
12.1 
23.6 
22.3 
20.0 
33.3 
Abia 
Akwa-Ibom* 
Bayelsa* 
Cross-River* 
Delta* 
Edo* 
Imo 
Ondo 
Rivers* 
South south zone 
National 
* States in the South South zone 
Dietary  diversity(≥4  food 
groups)among  children 
(DHS, 2013) 
36.3 
24.1 
25.2 
34.5 
15.2 
17.8 
32.1 
27.4 
63.2 
33.2 
19.3 
Vitamin  A-rich  foods 
(DHS, 2013) 
65.3 
49.3 
75 
66.3 
52.9 
51.7 
56.3 
58.2 
83.6 
63.8 
51.6 
69 Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) 2013 
202 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
4.  Commodity enterprise and value chain  
The  IFAD  supported  Community-based  Natural  Resource  Management  Programme  (CBRNMP) 
conducted  a  baseline  study  in  selected  4  States  (Abia,  Cross  River,  Edo  and  Rivers)  of  the  Niger 
Delta region. The study showed the major commodity enterprise and value chain in the various states.  
Cassava production and processing was a major value chain in Rivers state followed by Cross River 
State.  Plantain  production,  was  a  major  value  chain  in  Cross  Rivers  State  followed  by  River  State. 
Rice production and processing was a major value chain in Cross River and Edo States followed by 
Abia State. Fish processing was a major value chain in Rivers  State followed by Cross River State. 
And  poultry  production  was  a  major  value  chain  in  Rivers  State  followed  by  Edo  State.  The  major 
challenge reported in these enterprises  was mainly labour constraint for production and processing of 
cassava, plantain and rice. Whereas, for fish processing it was funding and cost of feed for poultry.  
5.  Approach for nutrition mainstreaming 
LIFE  will  build  on  the  commodity  development  approach  as  an  entry  point  to  provide  learning  and 
knowledge  among  community  members;  to  facilitate  youth  involvement  and  women  inclusion  in 
agribusiness,  facilitate  access  to  economic  opportunities,  improve  nutrition  and  food  security.  This 
approach  is  anchored  on  the  incubator  model.  Incubation  is  the  period  it  will  take  an  average 
individual  to  understudy  the  management  of  the  enterprise  or  value  chain  and  subsequently  be 
capable of independent employment in that enterprise or value chain.   
Enterprise incubation model is an innovative model that introduces and mentors youth to agribusiness 
and decent jobs and it is associated to knowledge sharing with the universities and colleges. Potential 
collaboration  will  be  explored  with  the  National  Agricultural  Research  System  including  Agricultural 
Research  Council  of  Nigeria  (ARCN)  and Agricultural  Research  Institutes  dealing  with  relevant  sub-
sectors  of  agriculture-  crops,  livestock  and  fishery  production  systems  and  agro-allied  industrial 
research. This will entail synergies and partnerships with the federal colleges of Agriculture in capacity 
building, vocational training sessions, technology transfer on production, productivity, processing and 
value  added  product  development  enterprises.  LIFE 
for  nutrition  will  explore 
collaboration  and  upscale  learnings  and  technologies  generated  from  IFAD  grants  on  nutrition-
sensitive  agriculture  in  Nigeria.  For  instance  IITA  has  worked  on  processing  of  high  quality  cassava 
flour, bio-fortified cassava and various value added product development.    
interventions 
6.  Theory of change 
LIFE interventions primarily focus on creating employment, better market and income for rural youth 
and women. However, the interventions on good agricultural practices and support on labour saving 
technologies  to  increase  food  production,  productivity  and  the  value  addition  will  contribute  to  good 
nutrition  and  food  security.  The  well-established  importance  of  good  nutrition  for  women  and 
adolescent  girls  throughout  the  lifecycle  justifies  the  relevance  of  nutrition  mainstreaming  in  this 
project  interventions  for  improve  nutrition  and  food  security.  Interventions  on  income  generation 
enterprises with cross-cutting initiatives on gender and climate smart production/productivity including 
poultry, fisheries, bio-fortified cassava, vegetables, nutrient rich crop varieties, value added products 
development  and  processing  are  opportunities  for  women  and  adolescent  girls  to  be  engaged  on 
nutrition training and nutrition information to contribute to consumption of nutritious, safe and diverse 
food. 
7.  Pathways: Employment and enterprise (income generating opportunities)+capacity building/trainings 
+  nutrition  education  would  increase  &  improve  food  production,  processing,  marketing  and 
consumption  of  nutritious,  safe  and  diverse  food.  The  approach  for  targeting  and  implementation  of 
LIFE  interventions  will  be  explored  and  tracked  for  relevant  interface  of  nutrition  outcomes  with 
gender and climate mainstreaming.  
8.  Approach: Operational approach for nutrition mainstreaming will be pursued through the engagement 
of private sector and research institutions such as  IITA and Harvest  Plus to leverage knowledge on 
the  emerging  bio-fortified,  nutrition  responsive  cassava  varieties.  The  implementation  of  nutrition 
activities will be facilitated and coordinated at regional level by a nutrition specialist (TORS enclosed). 
At  state  level,  the  project  could  engage  a  nutrition  officer/nutrition  focal  point  to  coordinate  and 
support the implementation of activities at community level. In Delta state, the Ministry of agriculture 
and  natural  resource  has  a  dedicated  nutrition  officer  tasked  with  the  responsibility  to  support 
nutrition-sensitive activities in communities.  
203 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
9.  Recommended Nutrition Activities 
a)  Value added product development: This activity will involve production, processing, promotion and 
consumption  of  nutritious  food  commodities.  The  priority  commodity  selected  for  each  state  will  be 
evaluated  on  the  nutrition  gaps  and  opportunities  along  the  food  supply  chain  (production  to 
consumption). This  will  entail assessment of nutritional quality  of different priority  commodities, food 
products, influence of different local food processing strategies on quality and nutrition along the value 
chains. Given the rapid change in consumption patterns to higher value and more processed products 
this  activity  is  aimed  to  improve  efficiency  of  the  commodity  chain,  add  value  for  processors, 
enterprises, consumers and to ensure access to nutritious foods. It will also offer prospects for income 
gains  and  employment  in  the  broader  food  system  in  rural  areas.  Development  of  value  added 
products  will  be  explored  and  promoted  in  addressing  food  seasonality,  post-harvest  handling  and 
diet  enrichment. The value added products  will  be promoted for consumption at households and for 
marketing for income generation.  
b)  Time  and  energy  saving  technologies:  LIFE  intervention  will  provide  support  on  time  and  energy 
saving  technologies  across  production,  preservation,  processing  and  consumption  to  lighten  the 
burden and multitask of rural women, as well as in addressing the post-harvest loss rates in Nigeria. 
The current post-harvest loss rates in Nigeria is up to 60 percent for perishable crops. The Agriculture 
Promotion Policy recognizes post-harvest handling of agricultural produce as an important component 
of value chain development, and a catalyst for progressive and sustainable expansion of agribusiness 
thereby  eradicating  waste  and  improving  nutrition,  food  security,  wealth  creation,  employment 
generation.  The  time  and  energy  saving  technologies  should  be  gender  responsive  and  nutrition-
sensitive in order to mitigate any unintended adverse impact on feeding and care giving. Women are 
responsible  for  feeding  the  children  and  the  family  and  contending  with  a  very  high  workload  has 
potential for adverse effect on their own nutrition. A reduction in women workload, energy output, time 
spent  on  accessing  food  would  be  reinforced  from  available  technologies  introduced  at  agricultural 
production, productivity and processing activities.  
This  activity  would  be  implemented  by  relevant  research  institutes,  University  of  agriculture  in 
collaboration with the ministry of agriculture in the respective project states. For instance in Abia state, 
LIFE  will  explore  collaboration  with  Michael  Okpara  University  of  Agriculture,  Umudike  (MOUAU) 
which is one the three specialised Universities of agriculture established by the Federal government 
of  Nigeria  to  provide  practical  knowledge  for  agricultural  transformation  for  sustainable  food 
production. MOUAU has an outreach model through agricultural extension services, on-farm adaptive 
research  and  demonstration  communities  (also  known  as  adopted  villages)  for  knowledge  and 
technology  transfer  to  the  smallholder  farming  communities,  the  youth,  women  and  extension 
workers/ADPs  in  Abia  state.  LIFE  will  build  on  the  recent  memorandum  of  understanding  between 
MOUAU  and  the  ministry  of  agriculture  in  Abia  state  which  involved  training  the  youth  on  cassava 
production and processing.        
c)  Nutrition  education:  The  nutrition  officers  and  extension  workers  would  be  responsible  for  the 
implementation  of  Nutritional  education.    Nutrition  education  modules  will  be  developed  for  the 
training  plans  of  the  TOTs,  women  groups,  Youth  groups,  Incubator  centers,  ADP  and  extension 
workers. The content of the nutrition education will  include topics such as: sensitization on nutrition-
sensitive  agriculture,  basic  knowledge  on  different  food  groups,  importance  of  nutritious  food 
production  and  consumption  for  each  priority  commodity.  This  activity  will  also  involve  awareness 
campaign for sensitization and behaviour change communication. The channels for the campaign will 
explore  radio/TV  program,  drama,  social  marketing,  newsletter,  magazines,  songs  local  languages 
and  the  gender  tool  on  household  methodologies.  The  household  methodologies  will  engage  entire 
household  members-  males,  females,  children,  adults  and  the  elderly  to  ensure  common 
understanding  of  the  nutrition  message/education  and  compliance  for  adequate  dietary  intake.  The 
nutrition  focal  point/expert  at  state  level  will  coordinate  the  implementation  of  this  activity  in 
collaboration with relevant stakeholders such as the Civil Society Scaling-Up Nutrition in Nigeria (CS-
SUNN).  Partnership  with  CS-SUNN  should  be  considered  given  their  demonstrated  expertise  in 
Nutrition  Advocacy  and  Community  mobilization  for  improved  nutrition  in  Nigeria  through  holding 
204 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
government  accountable  and  policy  implementation.  Synergy  would  be  leverage  with  UNICEF  and 
ministry of Health on improved sanitation and hygiene awareness campaign.  
d)  Vegetable garden and integrated homestead food production (IHFP): The purpose of this activity 
is  to  facilitate  adequate  food  consumption  at  household  level  and  the  primary  target  is  the  women 
group.  The  activity  will  involve  promotion  of  vegetable  gardens  and  small  livestock/ruminants  to 
improve  diverse  food    production,  primarily  vegetables  and  animal  proteins  foods  for  income  and 
consumption  at  household  level.  The  IHFP  will  integrate  nutrition  sensitization  to  ensure  that  the 
increase  food  production  and  income  rise  is  complemented  with  the  actions  for  adequate 
consumption. Capacity will be developed by supporting training of trainers who can roll-out toolkit on 
‘Integrated  homestead  food  production’  (IHFP)  to  the  communities.  This  activity  would  be 
implemented  by  ADP/extension  workers  in  collaboration  with  the  ministry  of  agriculture  and  other 
relevant stakeholders.  
e)  Home Grown School Feeding (HGSF) initiative: This activity will build on the FMARD’s Agriculture 
Promotion Policy. It  will target school vicinity  in project catchment areas to empower women groups 
particularly on the activities of home garden. The selection of target school would give consideration 
to prevalence of malnourished and poor children and poor school attendance.  The HGSF will aim to 
contribute to school meals and raise awareness on nutritious foods to school children and their family. 
Also  the  HGSF  initiative  would  be  a  potential  market  access  to  the  youth  and  women 
groups/enterprises  for  income  generation.  This  activity  will  explore  synergies  with  other  relevant 
stakeholders (i.e WFP, FAO) and sectors (Education).  The support from LIFE intervention will be for 
the  first  three  years  of  project  implementation.  Details  on  the  collaboration  and  engagement 
modalities and exist strategy need to be developed with further information. The HGSF initiative is an 
opportunity  to  explore  the  UN  Rome  base  agencies  (WFP,  FAO,  IFAD)  collaboration  on  LIFE 
interventions in Niger Delta region for good nutrition.  
f)  Food  and  nutrition  study:  There  is  dearth  of  data  on  dietary  diversity  and  diet  quality  especially 
among the women and adolescents girls in the Niger Delta region. Contribution of LIFE interventions 
to  nutrition  outcomes  will  be  monitored  and  documented  through  periodic  food  survey;  at  baseline, 
midterm  and  at  completion.  Through  collaboration  with  relevant  institutions  (i.e.  research  centres, 
college  or  University  of  agriculture)  one  or  two  M.Sc.  students  (including  female  youth)  will  be 
supported  in  the  respective  project  states  in  carrying  out  these  food  survey  as  his/her  postgraduate 
programme.  The  baseline  food  survey  will  be  conducted  to  ascertain  information  on  prevailing 
nutrition  knowledge,  food  attitudes  and  practices  (KAP),  to  guide  nutrition  education,  nutrition-
sensitive  interventions  and  benchmark  data  for  tracking  progress  on  nutrition  outcomes  and  as  the 
benchmark data for an evidence based contribution of LIFE interventions to nutrition outcomes.  Also 
the  baseline  information  will  provide  the  space  to  reaching  out  to  the  vulnerable  groups  as  well  as 
appropriate 
Good  practices  and  lessons  learned  from  nutrition  mainstreaming  will  be  disseminated  through 
factsheets, technical reports, publications, meetings and workshops with stakeholders. The generated 
food and nutrition database from LIFE interventions will contribute to the efforts of National Strategic 
Plan  of Action for nutrition  and the Nutrition Information  System in the country.  The project nutrition 
expert/focal point at regional and state levels will be responsible for coordination and facilitation of the 
activity. 
education 
selection 
nutrition 
food 
and 
of 
commodities.                                                                                                                        
g)  Capacity  building  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture:  The  capacity  of  nutrition  officers,  extension 
workers, community frontline agents, project team and stakeholders would be supported to effectively 
facilitate  the  implementation  of  nutrition  activities.  The  support  would  involve  trainings,  sensitization 
workshops  and  refresher  courses  on  nutrition-sensitive  interventions.  The  interventions  on  capacity 
building  of  the  incubators  and  enterprises  are  channels  for  nutrition  education  to  the  project 
beneficiaries. LIFE will explore possible collaboration with the CS-SUNN on this activity and build on 
the CS-SUNN mission to  advocate,  generate evidence, build capacity and stimulate communities to 
scale up Nutrition in Nigeria 
10.  Nutrition indicators 
i.  Outcome  indicator:  Percentage  of  women  consuming  minimum  number  of  food  groups  (dietary 
diversity). The baseline=TBD/ Target=50percent increase. 
205 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
ii.  Output  indicator:  Number  of  beneficiaries  participating  in  nutrition  activities.  The  baseline=  0/ 
Target=30percent of project beneficiaries. 
iii.  Output indicator: Number of nutritious product  developed. The baseline= 0/ Target=4 products 
11.  Budget/costing  
206 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Nutrition Mainstreaming LIFE 
Nutrition Activities 
Unit 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
Total Unit 
Unit  Cost 
(USD) ‘000 
Total  Cost 
(USD) ‘000 
Value added product development 
Analysis of nutrition gaps along commodity supply chain 
(production to consumption)  
Development and promotion of value added products 
Support  on  Time  and  labour  saving  technologies  for 
processing nutritious food commodities 
studya 
Sessionb 
statec 
1 
18 
138 
18 
138 
18 
138 
18 
138 
18 
0 
18 
0 
Food and nutrition study 
Food consumption, food practice, knowledge and attitude 
conducted at baseline, midterm and at project completion 
Publications, learning and sharing events 
studyd 
evente 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
and 
education 
Behaviour 
Nutrition 
Communication 
Develop  behaviour  change  communication  materials, 
awareness campaign drama, mass media 
Module  development  on  nutrition-sensitive  commodity 
value 
extension 
in 
workers/incubators 
the  work  plan  of 
Change 
chain 
statef  
18 
18 
18 
18 
Lumpsumg 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Home garden  
Support  on  vegetable  gardens  and  rearing  of  small 
livestock at home 
Home Grown School Feeding (HGSF) initiative 
Support to the school feeding programme initiative  
stateh 
138 
138 
138 
138 
statei 
138 
138 
138 
0 
0 
1 
18 
0 
0 
0 
1 
108 
552 
3 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
18 
18 
126 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
552 
414 
100 
1 
0.5 
50 
10 
0.5 
50 
0.1 
0.2 
staffj 
18 
Capacity building on nutrition-sensitive agriculture  
TOTAL 
a. One time Nutrition analysis of the 4 priority commodities in each of the 6 states 
 b. Three sessions on two priority commodities per year in 6 states (3X6=18) 
  c. In each of the 6 states approximately 23 women groups will be supported on improved technologies (23X6=138)  
 d. Food survey in each of the 6 states at baseline, midterm and completion (1X3) 
e. Publication of study report and event to share the knowledge products  
 f. Three session of publicity, awareness campaign/events in each state per year (3X6=18) 
  g. Contract to develop module for all the priority commodities for each states 
h. In each of the 6 states approximately 23 women groups will be supported on home garden (23X6=138)  
  i. About 15 schools will be supported in each state on HGSF (23X 6=138) 
 j. Approximately 3 staff in each 6 states (i.e. nutrition officers, extension workers, project team) will be supported to participate in refresher course and workshops  
126 
0.5 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
207 
100 
108 
276 
484 
150 
60 
210 
63 
50 
113 
55.2 
82.8 
138 
63 
1008 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Nutrition Activities 
Unit 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6  Y7 
Total 
Unit 
Unit  Cost 
‘000 
(USD) 
Total  Cost 
(USD) 
‘000 
Value added product development 
Analysis of nutrition gaps along commodity supply chain (production to consumption)  
Development and promotion of value added products 
Support  on  Time  and  labour  saving  technologies  for  processing  nutritious  food 
commodities 
Food and nutrition study 
Food  consumption,  food  practice,  knowledge  and  attitude  conducted  at  baseline, 
midterm and at project completion 
Publications, learning and sharing events 
Nutrition education and Behaviour Change Communication 
Develop  behaviour  change  communication  materials,  awareness  campaign  drama, 
mass media 
Module development on nutrition-sensitive commodity value chain in the work plan of 
extension workers/incubators 
Home gardening training and advisory services 
Support on vegetable gardens and rearing of small livestock at home 
Home Grown School Feeding (HGSF) initiative 
Support to the school feeding programme initiative  
Capacity building on nutrition-sensitive agriculture  
study70 
Session71 
unit72 
 study73 
 Lumpsum 
 events74 
1 
18 
135 
1 
- 
18 
- 
18 
135 
- 
18 
135 
- 
18 
135 
- 
1 
- 
1 
1 
1 
- 
18 
- 
- 
1 
- 
18 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
 Lumpsum75 
1 
- 
- 
- 
session 
unit76 
staff77 
135 
135 
18 
135 
135 
135 
135 
18 
135 
18 
- 
18 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18 
18 
18 
1 
108 
540 
100 
1 
0.5 
3 
6 
50 
10 
126 
0.5 
1 
50 
540 
0.1 
405 
126 
0.2 
0.5 
100 
108 
270 
150 
60 
63 
50 
54 
81 
63 
979 
70 Nutrition analysis of the 4 priority commodities in each of the 6 states 
71 2 sessions on two priority commodities per year in 6 states 
72 In each of the 9 states approximately  15 women groups  will be supported on improved technologies  
73 Food survey in each of the 9 states at baseline, midterm and completion 
74 Two sessions/events in each state per year 
75 Contract to develop module for all the priority commodities for each states 
76 In each state about 15 schools will be supported (15X 9=135) 
77 Approximately  2 staff in each 9 states (i.e. nutrition officers, extension workers, project team) will be supported to participate in refresher course and workshops  
208 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
References : 
1)  National  Nutrition  and  Health  Survey  (NNHS,2015).  The  Nutrition  and  Health  Situation  in  Nigeria 
November 2015 
2)  Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) 2013. National Population Commission Nigeria and 
ICF International and Rockville, Maryland, USA: NPC and ICF International. 
3)  Ukpe, Offiong Uma (2016). Effects of access to microcredit on the food security  status of crop farm 
households  in  Niger  Delta,  Nigeria.  A  Ph.D.  Thesis  submitted  to  the  department  of  agricultural 
economics,  University  of  Nigeria,  Nsukka  in  fulfilment  of  the  requirement  for  the  award  of  doctor  of 
philosophy (Ph.D.) Degree in agricultural economics. 
 The Agriculture Promotion Policy (2016 – 2020). The Policy and Strategy Document, Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture & Rural Development. 
4) 
209 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
Appendix 18: Expectations of NDDC on the impact of LIFE on youth 
restiveness in the Niger Delta region 
IFAD brings N21bn support to help nddc fight unemployment 
MARCH 25TH, 2017 
 KAY UGWUEDE NEWS COMMENTS 
A United Nations agency, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), is coming down with 
$60 million (N21bn) to support the Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) in the fight against 
youth unemployment that leads to restiveness in the oil region. 
Nsima U. Ekere, managing director of the NDDC, disclosed this when IFAD officials paid a courtesy 
visit to management at the NDDC headquarters in Port Harcourt weekend. 
Ekere said the Commission would sustain and strengthen its partnership with the UN agency as part of 
efforts to create wealth and transform the region. 
Ekere, who was represented by an engineer, Samuel Adjogbe, NDDC Executive director projects, said 
the Commission carried out a baseline study to gather data that would help it produce a good design for 
the new IFAD programme. 
He said: “If there is something I would really want to support, it is the collaboration that IFAD is 
bringing. The NDDC is ready to partner with IFAD in the new programme because we need to diversify 
the mono-economy of the country. 
“We hope that what we have gathered as the base line survey will help us to produce a design that will 
give us something reliable when we get to the implementation stage. NDDC is committed to getting 
many people, particularly our youths, back to work because we need to get our people to be meaningfully 
engaged. And this will help strengthen the process of our engagement with them, which we have begun 
in earnest.” 
The NDDC executive director said that the Commission had always recognized agriculture as the way 
forward for Nigeria, adding that it would continue to support IFAD to integrate rural dwellers into 
agricultural entrepreneurship. “Oil and gas has given us a take-off platform. Now we must diversify.” 
Rich Pitrine, the representative of the IFAD (Rome) and Country Director in Nigeria, said that the new 
programme, which would run for six years, would revolve around enterprise development for youths and 
women. “We understand the lack of opportunities which is an unfortunate disease for your region. We 
211 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
understand very well that there are phenomenal things which can be done if proactive investments are 
done.” 
He explained that the IFAD programme would broaden the economic horizon of budding entrepreneurs 
and set the stage for the emergence of a sustainable system that would engage youths in enterprise-based 
jobs. 
“We have invested with NDDC in the past on Community-Based Natural Resource Management 
Programme (CBNRMP) that has helped to create wealth in the Niger Delta region. We have learnt some 
lessons from that and we have had some successes.” 
Saying the IFAD was an investor and not a project implementing team, he said; “We are not coming to 
Nigeria or to the Niger Delta to take over. We are coming here to help you to invest in your vision and 
invest jointly with you to realize an outcome which will create employment for you in this region 
particularly.” 
Marcel Eshiogu, NDDC director, agriculture and fisheries, praised the gains of the partnership with 
IFAD, noting that the Commission had been working with the UN agency since 2005. 
212 
Federal Government of Nigeria 
Livelihood Improvement Family Enterprises in the Niger Delta 
Project Design Report  
213 
