Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB
ADP
AWPB
BISP
Asian Development Bank
Annual Development Programme
Annual Work plan and budget
Benazir Income Support Programme
BISP-PSC
Benazir Income Support Programme – Poverty Score Card
BRI
CBN
Belt and Road Initiative
Cost of Basic Needs
CDWP
Central Development Working Party
C&W
CO
COSOP
CPEC
DFI
DFID
EAD
Communication and Works Department
Community Organization
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
Development Finance Institution
Department of International Development
Economic Affairs Division
ECNEC
Executive Committee of National Economic Council
ETIGB
FA
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Balistan
Financing Agreement
FATA
Federally Administered Tribal Area
FSC
FY
GCC
GII
GDP
GLLSP
GLOF
GNI
HHs
IFAD
IMF
JICA
KM
Km
Farm Service Centre
Fiscal Year
Gulf Cooperation Council Countries
Gender Inequality Index 
Gross Domestic Product
Gawdar-Lasbel Livelihood Programme
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
Gross National Income
Households
International Fund for Agriculture Development
International Monitory Fund
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Knowledge Management
Kilometre
KPRETP
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Transformation Project
LSO
M&E
MFB
Local Support Organization
Monitoring and Evaluation
Micro-finance Bank
MFI
MPI
Micro-finance Institution
Multidimensional Poverty Index
NAVTEC
National Vocational & Technical Education Commission
NMD
NGO
NER
NPGP
NPGI
P&D
PDR
PKR
PC-I
PCC
PHE
PCN
PFO
PMT
PMU
PPAF
Newly Merged Districts
Non-Government Organisations
National Economic Registry
National Poverty Graduation Programme
National Poverty Graduation Initiative
Planning and Development Department
Project Design Report
Pakistan Rupees
Planning Commission Proforma-I (government document for project design)
Project Coordination Committee
Public Health Engineering Department
Project Concept Note
Professional Farmer Organization
Proxy Mean Testing
Project Management Unit
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund
PSC
RETP
RSP
SDGs
Project Steering Committee
Rural Economic Transformation Project
Rural Support Programme
Sustainable Development Goals
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment in Projects
SMP
SSN
Social Mobilization Partner
Social Safety Net
SSN-TUP
Social Safety Net – Targeting the Ultra Poor (an IFAD pilot)
TA
TEVTA
UCT
UNDP
USD
VO
WB
Technical Assistance
Technical Education & Vocational Training Authority
Unconditional Cash Transfer
United Nations Development Programme
United States Dollars
Village Organization
World Bank
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/30
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$13,548,000
$0
$13,548,000
Background: Pakistan is the sixth most populous (217 million) country in the world with overwhelmingly young population (64%
youth). Among the 5 provinces, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province is the third largest (101,741 km2) inhabited by 35 million people (29%
youth). The multidimensional level of poverty in the province is 49% (58% rural) against a national average of 39%. Agriculture
employs 32 percent of the labour force and is largely small holder dominated (95% having subsistence orientation with mixed farming
systems). The youth unemployment owes to predominance of informal economy, low level of education and skills and exceptionally
low participation by females. The province is administratively divided into 7 divisions and 35 districts including 7 newly merged
districts (NMD).
KP-RETP's purpose is to addresses the main drivers of rural poverty and food insecurity. The underlying causes include low
productivity, wastages and low return from agriculture and unorganized smallholder farmers, poor marketing, youth and women
unemployment as well as  limited access to financial resources, causing in turn income losses, food insecurity and malnutrition.
Project Area and Target group: KP-RETP will be implemented in all 35 districts of KP province and will benefit around 785,000
households (4.35 million corresponding persons). RETP will target: (i) smallholder farmers actively engaged in agriculture; (ii)
households falling in 0-34 PSC; (iii) households experiencing food insecurity and malnourishment; and (iv) rural women and youth.
Strategy and Approach. The project interventions are aimed at transforming the rural economy through organized farming and
agribusiness developed under the framework of Professional Farmers’ Organizations (PFOs) and Public-Private Producer
Partnerships (4Ps) and improved service delivery. Rural women and youth will be assisted in skills development and start-up capital
activities thereby accelerating a youth-mainstreamed and gender-sensitive economy. Similarly, employment promotion will
complement agribusiness development in terms of new rural services development. It will also encompass  special support for job
market integration of the graduates (through the public – private job placement programme), as well as the specific partnership with
TEVTA and relevant institutions for professional and technical/vocational education.
KP-RATP is in line with Pakistan’s Vision 2025, 12th Five Year Plan, Poverty Reduction Strategy 2019, National Food Security Policy,
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Policy, Women Empowerment Policy 2017, Youth Policy 2016, and IFAD’s comparative advantage.
Nutrition and Youth. With regards to nutrition, the project will build upon the lessons learned from IFAD financed projects and
through active engagement with ongoing initiatives of WFP and FAO (RBA collaboration). Special attention will be made to the food
security policy (currently being developed) and adopting guidelines related to selection of nutrition sensitive value chains, creating
nutrition related awareness, and promoting nutrition sensitive labelling and packing thus impacting both producers and consumers.
The project will ensure women’s inclusion in value chains and advance equitable opportunities in skills development. All efforts will be
made in this very conservative region in order for gender to be mainstreamed by ensuring a minimum of 25% quota for female
participation in all project activities and by the development of women centred value chains, and 4Ps. Youth will be also
mainstreamed in all project interventions (50% of all support will go to youth). 
Project Management. An independent PM U under the Planning and Development Department with a strategic oversight provided
by the Project Steering Committee (PSC), which will be headed by the Additional Chief Secretary (Planning and Development).
Project costs and Financing. The project cost is estimated at USD185.82 million (PKR. 29 billion) with IFAD loan financing of
USD84.19 million (33%), a financing gap of USD15.91 million (20.5%), USD40.44 million (22%) leveraged by Government of KP and
USD45.27 million (24%) contributed by private sector/beneficiaries. The project investment is organized in three project components,
i.e. (i) agribusiness development (USD104.5 million); (ii) capacity building for employment/jobs (USD66.2 million) and (iii) project
management and policy support (USD15.1 million). Financing for youth represents USD92.9 million (50% of total project cost) while
investment in women is estimated at USD46.5 million (25%). 
GoKP incremental contribution is estimated at USD9.1 million on account of taxes and project management related expenditures
while USD31.4 million will be leveraged mainly through ongoing ADP support to TEVTA and agriculture department (under farmer
service centres support).  The project beneficiaries’ contribution include (i) an estimated USD37.7 million, which would finance about
36% of Component 1; and, (ii) an estimated USD7.6 million, which would finance about 11% of component 2 (mainly on account of
job placement contribution). Beneficiaries will be contributing mainly in cash with various ratios depending on the type of activity.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
National and Provincial Context
2/30
Pakistan is a lower-middle income country with a per capita income of US$ 1,641[1] and an estimated GDP of USD 314 billion.
The services sector (61%) is the largest contributor to the economy, followed by industry (20%) and agriculture (19%). The latter
absorbs 42% of labour force, generates an important source of foreign exchange earnings, and stimulates growth in other
sectors. In order to sustainably increase the income of rural households, and particularly of youth and women of these areas, the
Government of Pakistan (GoP) is focusing on supporting small and marginalized farmers to increase their productivity and
promote diversification to high value niche crops and livestock, foster agribusiness development, improve skills and
professionalization, as well as facilitate access to financial services and improve climate resilience.
Pakistan’s economy has been severely hit by the COVID 19 pandemic and the country’s GDP is estimated to experience a
negative 0.38% growth in FY20 compared to a pre-COVID19 growth of more than 5.8% in 2018 and 5.6% in 2017. This is the
second contraction in decades and reflects the effects of the COVID-19 containment measures that followed the monetary and
fiscal tightening prior to the outbreak. Economic growth is projected to remain low, averaging 1.3 percent for FY21-22.
Pakistan is the sixth most populous country in the world with a population of 207 million and expected to reach 280 million by
2030, of which  63% is below the age of 30. Notably, Pakistan has the 9th largest labour force in the world with almost 4 million
youth attaining working age every year. This large proportion of youth in the population, combined with economic slowdown, will
exacerbate the problem of underemployment and unemployment especially in the rural areas. Indeed, Pakistan’s youth
unemployment is relatively higher than other South Asian countries.
Poverty reduction remains a persistent challenge for Pakistan. The country’s multidimensional poverty index (MPI) is 0.198 with
38.3% of the population ranked as poor while 21.5% of population is in severe multidimensional poverty[2]. A 2008 nationwide
poverty survey, being updated since 2017, established a national well-being registry, ranking HHs on a scale from 0 to 100
(Poverty Score Card). Appendix 1 describes the typology of poverty bands and related score card ratings. Using the GoP’s
definition, the corresponding IFAD target groups in Pakistan falls within the poverty score card of 0 to 40. According to MPI
corresponding poverty head count is 81.352 million. The Ehsaas[3] programme is the biggest national poverty graduation
programme in the world, providing unconditional cash transfers to the most vulnerable 5 million people. Pakistan continues to
face significant human development challenges with an HDI rank of 152nd out of 189 countries.
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Province is the third largest province of Pakistan with a land mass of 101,741 km2 and population
of 35.35 million (4.4 million HHs) of which 81% is rural. The province is administratively divided into 7 divisions and 35 districts
including 7 newly merged districts (NMDs). The KP provincial economy is dominated by services (67% of provincial GDP)
followed by manufacture (17%) and agriculture (14%)[4].  Remittances coming mostly from unskilled workers in the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, constitute an important source of livelihood for about 3 million HHs (75% of the total HHs).
The province is the second highest producer of oil and natural gas in the country and annual oil and gas royalty receipts
amounted to about USD 140 million (PKR 22.3 billion) in 2018-19. According to the Petroleum Policy 2012, 10% of the oil and
gas annual royalty receipts are to be earmarked and utilized for development but only in the oil and gas production districts
(mainly Kohat, Karak, and Hangu districts).
Despite this natural resource endowment, the KP province is comparatively more challenged compared to other provinces, with a
multidimensional poverty rate of 49% against the national average of 39% (2015). Within KP, poverty is particularly acute in rural
areas and NMDs, where  poverty rates stood at nearly 58% and 74%, respectively. The number of HHs categorised as extremely
and chronically poor (Poverty Score Card 0-16.7) in the KP province, is estimated at 1.6 million[5]. Similarly, the unemployment
rate in the province is higher (9.2%) compared to the national average (5.7%).
Nutritionally vulnerable groups include children of both sexes, adolescents, women of reproductive age, and especially pregnant
and lactating women. While malnutrition not only translates into underweight, the other side of it are overweight and obesity
which are increasing in Pakistan. Stunting (chronic malnutrition) is a major problem in Pakistan, and the percentage of stunted
children under the age of five is the highest in the NMD of KP with 48 %, while it is 40% for the rest of KP.  With regards to
wasting (acute malnutrition), the percentage in NMD is 23% and for the rest of KP 15%. Micronutrient deficiencies in children
under the age of five are causing anaemia (53% of children all over Pakistan), iron deficiency, vitamin A and D deficiency.
The nutritional status of adolescents (10 to 19 years) in KP provides the following picture: 15% of adolescent girls are
underweight in KP and 18% in KP-NMD, while for boys it is 14% in KP and 12 in KP-NMD.  One of the biggest nutritional
problems all over the rural areas in Pakistan is anaemia, which affects about 41% of women of reproductive age (UNICEF
National Nutrition Survey 2018).
Due to small landholdings and subsistence-level crop production, the personal production of cereals for household consumption
is merely sufficient for four months on average. This makes households more dependent on markets for their food needs.
Although food is generally available in the markets, the purchasing power of HHs is considerably low and the distance to food
markets is far, thus having adverse impacts on people’s access to food
Agriculture and Rural Development:  In the KP province, agriculture employs 32% of labour force. While 95% of the small
farmers follow a traditional mixed farming system, with a subsistence approach, most farmers sell surpluses mainly just after
harvest and through the classical intermediary channels that often ensure them with access to credit and inputs. The number of
farmers in the province are estimated to be over 4 million with an average size of farm between 2 to 3 acres.  The total cultivated
area of the province is 1.8 million ha of which half is rain-fed. Because of its unique agro-climatic conditions, the province has
12.
13.
14.
15.
enormous growth potential in the development of high value crops such as orchards, vegetables and floriculture, as well as the
development of livestock/dairy sector (see Annex 1 - zone wise value chain development potential in KP validated during design
mission, and Annex 2 - Data Livestock 2019). 
3/30
Despite the existence of provincial and national market opportunity and niches, farmers’ profitability and employment generation
potential remain untapped. Major issues hindering exploitation of the potential in the province include: high transaction cost/lack
of economies of scale (high cost of aggregation) due to fragmented production base; low productivity owing to low adoption of
technology and techniques; limited access to finance limiting potential of investment; high risk associated with investment in
agriculture and livestock; poor linkage of small-holders with markets and non-integration in major supply chains; high post-
harvest losses due to absence of essential infrastructure; weak compliance capacities and complex quality standards regimes.
As a consequence of the foregoing constraints, profitability of farmers is low and deter investment in improved technologies,
irrigation systems, and adoption of improved practices to better respond to the market demand. Additionally, smallholders do not
have the critical mass to attract the interest of market stakeholders other than the classical intermediaries, and are not eligible for
formal financial services (microfinance or banks). The private sector is underdeveloped and largely concentrated around trading,
mining, and transportation services. The farm services centres (described under subcomponent 1.3) are among the very few
existing services for FOs. Limited exports destined to Afghanistan and Middle Eastern countries actually originate within the
province.
The province historically has been a food deficit area depending heavily on other provinces and seasonal supplies imported
mainly from Afghanistan. Wheat and sugarcane are the main crops while maize, rice and various fruits are some of the minor
crops grown. Vegetables are grown throughout the year and make important contributions to income generation and food
security. Commercial production of fruits and vegetables has expanded rapidly in the last two decades but still remains lower than
the overall demand and potential. KP province is one of the two gateways to Afghanistan, a net importer of almost all agriculture
commodities.
Diversification to horticulture and the livestock/dairy sub-sectors offers the highest potential. While horticulture is an emerging
sub-sector, livestock has traditionally been an integral part of smallholder’s HH economy and a key element in the mixed farming
system with more than 70% of HHs having ruminant livestock. Livestock alone contributes to 30% of the total agricultural income
in the province and complements income of farming and landless HHs. The production and distribution system of livestock and
livestock products are traditional and poorly developed, warranting attention.
16.
The security situation has improved significantly since 2014 and is generally stable in most parts of the province. Security in 7
(newly merged tribal areas) out of the total 35 districts remain precarious and access and operation requires authorization from
Government especially for foreigners and personnel of non-governmental organisations.
17.
Relevant National Strategies and Policies
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
Rural and agricultural sector: Following the 18th Constitutional Amendment in 2010, the provinces were made autonomous
with regards to legislative, regulatory and policy making and could choose and prioritise development pathways and budget
allocations through federal divisible pools, provincial receipts and donor assistance. Loans from IFIs represent a provincial liability
with the federal government serving as guarantor. Since the devolution of the agriculture and rural sectors to the provincial level,
the provinces, including KP, have developed policies for agriculture, livestock and key thematic areas related to rural
development.
In its overarching coordinating role, the National Food Security Policy in place aims to achieve the reduction in poverty,
malnutrition, and food insecurity by reaching an average growth of 4% for the agriculture sector. To enhance the agriculture and
livestock sectors, the federal government launched a five-year PKR. 309 billion (USD 1.93 billion) National Agriculture
Emergency Programme in 2020. The programme, focused on emergency support (mainly subsidies on inputs) and is being
executed with the coordination of the provinces to enhance productivity of major crops and improvement of water efficiency. This
is in addition to a number of provincial projects in the area of agriculture, livestock and rural development. The Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Policy and the Ten-Year Perspective 2015-2025 aim to enhance productivity and competitiveness,
address food security, enhance the role of women and improve natural resource management, adaptation to climate change and
disaster risk management.
Poverty Reduction: the Pakistan Vision 2025, the 12th Five Year Plan 2018-23 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy 2019 guide
Pakistan’s poverty reduction efforts. The vision 2025 aims to half poverty by 2025 and attain upper middle-income status for the
country. The Federal Government’s 12th Five Year Plan 2018-23, set the target of reducing Cost of Basic Needs based poverty
from 24.3% to 19.0% by 2023 and reducing the multidimensional poverty headcount from 38.8% to 30.0% during the plan period.
Pakistan was one of the first countries to endorse the SDGs in 2015. The Parliament in place at the time approved the SDGs as
the national development agenda.
A major national social safety net programme called Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP) was initiated in 2008 and is
currently providing unconditional cash transfers to over 5.8 million beneficiaries. A national registry Poverty Score Card[6] based
on Proxy Mean Testing identified 7.7 million poor HHs eligible for unconditional cash transfers.  To update the national registry, a
survey is currently at an advanced stage of implementation and the registry is likely to be updated by end 2021.
Realizing the need for an integrated poverty graduation approach by combining BISP safety nets with livelihoods, human capital
development and financial services, the government introduced a comprehensive multidimensional poverty reduction strategy
called Ehsaas in 2019. A national poverty graduation initiative under “Ehsaas” was launched in 2019, which aims to graduate the
poorest 16 million HHs out of poverty.  The government, in addition to providing funds for the initiative, collaborated with IFAD
and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) through its on-going National Poverty Graduation Programme (NPGP). Through the
Ehsaas programme, the GoP invested USD 8 billion in 2020 to support the most vulnerable HHs as well as the economy to
overcome the COVID 19 situation, including to expand the ambit of unconditional cash grants to include an additional 4 million
households who were affected by the pandemic. The poverty alleviation strategy is further reinforced through expansion of space
for private sector and investment in youth (Kamyab Jawan Programme[7]).
4/30
23.
Key National and Provincial Institutions
24.
25.
26.
27.
Government: The main interlocutor for IFAD in Pakistan has been the Economic Affairs Division (EAD) of the GoP as all
assistance to the Government is coordinated by this Division at the Federal level. The Planning and Development (P&D)
Department headed by the Additional Chief Secretary and Government line departments in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa are generally
well placed in terms of human resources, technical and delivery capacity concerning economic transformation, agriculture, rural
development, and poverty reduction. The most relevant line departments for the Rural Economic Transformation Project (RETP)
include the P&D (as lead), Agriculture and Livestock, Irrigation, Communication and Works and Local Government, Elections and
Rural Development.
Civil Society, NGOs and Rural Support Programmes (RSPs): The province is among the pioneers in community led
development approaches where a number of NGOs/RSPs are operational in almost all the districts of the province. IFAD through
the Mansehra Village Support Project (MVSP) and South FATA Development Project (SFDP) were among the pioneers in
introducing community-led development approach and gender empowerment. As a result of mobilization efforts, there exist a
network of more than 50,000 community organisations in the province. The province has several credible RSPs/NGO such as
Sarhad Rural Support Programme, SABAWON and Lasoona[8], with experience of working on government and donors funded
programmes and projects.
Micro-Finance Institutions: The micro-finance sector has experienced exponential growth since 2006 when IFAD collaborated
with the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund through the Microfinance Innovation and Outreach Programme (MIOP, 2006-11) and
the Programme for Increasing Sustainable Microfinance (PRISM, 2008-2013). Currently, Micro-finance Banks/Micro-finance
Institutions (MFBs/MFIs) have 177 fixed offices and 17 mobile units in the province. The current active borrowers of the
commercial banks in the province total 137,000 with a gross loan portfolio of PKP 5.046 billion. Additionally, a provincial bank,
the Bank of Khyber has been facilitating increased access to financial services through various products under Agri Finance,
microfinance, interest free and low-cost loans.
Development Finance Institutions and Partners: ADB and World Bank (WB) are the two largest development finance
institutions in Pakistan in terms of portfolio size and have several projects in the province related to water resources
development, provincial road improvement, irrigated agriculture development and governance and policy programme.
Additionally, DFID, JICA, IDB, SDF and UNDP are actively involved in the province. IFAD has in the past financed/co-financed a
number of projects in Pakistan including in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (DIR Area support project / Barani area development project /
South FATA and Mansehra village support programme). Co-financing options are being explored with EU
28.
[1] Economic Indicators 2019/2020, Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan
29.
[2] Multidimensional Poverty Index: developing countries -2020
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2020_mpi_statistical_data_table_1_and_2_en.pdf
30.
[3] National Poverty Graduation Initiative (NPGI) locally named Ehsaas (meaning sentiment/empathy in Urdu language).
31.
[4] World Bank, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project, 2018
32.
[5] BISP PSC data. https://bisp.gov.pk/ProjectDetail/ZDZjYzY3ZDAtZTQ2OS00NGRhLTliNmItMzJmMzdiYTY3ZDE0
33.
[6]  NSER is a database of information about the socioeconomic status of over 27 million households across the country. The
registry was set up as a result of a Poverty Scorecard Survey. The survey covered 87% of the country’s population. The registry
enables BISP to identify eligible households through a Proxy Means Test (PMT) which calculates the poverty levels and
determines the welfare status of a household on a scale between zero and 100.
34.
[7] https://kamyabjawan.gov.pk 
35.
[8] SABAWOON and Lasoona are also involved as implementation partners in IFAD financed NPGP.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
36.
37.
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Transformation . In line with the priorities of the provincial government and IFAD, the
transformation potential of agriculture for enhanced incomes and employment will be pursued by addressing the critical issues in
the farm, off-farm and non-farm sectors.
Women:  Women in Pakistan and particularly in KP are considered the most socially excluded group and are deprived in terms
of access to basic social services and livelihood opportunities. The 2020 Global Gender Gap Index report
of 2020 ranked Pakistan 151 out of the total 153 countries. This translates into a low labour force participation rate for women
which stands at 13% compared to 76% for men at national level. Similarly, the employment to population ratio for females aged
15-24 years is a paltry 9.3%. The share of agriculture in total employment is 73% for women and 25% for men but very often
women are not compensated properly for this work which is done in family farms. The project, which envisages at least 25%
participation of women in project activities, is well-entrenched with priorities of the Government of KP and IFAD.
38.
39.
40.
Youth: Pakistan is a young country with more than 60% of Pakistanis aged between 15 and 33 years[1]. KP’s youth population
represents 14% of the country’s total youth population.  Lack of appropriate skills, relevant to job market needs, and low access
to resources are the main reasons for high unemployment and under-employment among youth. The project will provide an
opportunity for realizing the dividends of the “youth bulge” by addressing critical challenges related to human capital
development, jobs market readiness (skills and self-employment), integration of young graduates to job market and access to
finance. The Government of Pakistan has launched a special initiative for youth - the kamyab jawan programme (successful
youth programme) with an initial push strategy to increase access to finance for youth. The project interventions will foster an
integrated approach to employment and jobs promotion by improving skills, facilitating self-employment and job market
placement for training graduates.
5/30
Climate Change: Pakistan is one of the 10 most affected countries in terms of climate change and variability, ranking 5th in the
Long-Term Climate Index[2]. The KP Province is assessed to be one of the most vulnerable provinces of Pakistan to the negative
impacts of climate change. By 2050, the temperature in the province is expected to increase throughout the year by 1-1.5 0C.
The rainfall projection indicates that the summer monsoon will bring much more rain in 2050 than in 1960-1995 and the winter
monsoon slightly less. The other months will be drier, implying the possibility of droughts. In terms of water resources, an
increase in their availability will be observed in the near future but a decrease is expected in the medium term and after 2050,
which could jeopardize the current farming systems. To reduce the risks and impacts associated with changing weather and
climate conditions, the project will strengthen the capacity of farmers to assess climate risks, plan and identify climate adaptation
measures under Component 1. The identified climate adaptation measures, once implemented, will significantly improve
resilience to climate change.
Food Security and Nutrition: Over the years, Pakistan has become a food surplus country. However, 37% of the population
faces food insecurity[3] primarily due to limited economic access by the poorest to an adequate and diverse diet[4].  While
Pakistan is 'on course' to meet the targets for maternal, infant, and young child nutrition (MIYCN), some progress has been made
towards achieving the target for stunting, but 37.6% of children under 5 years of age are still affected, or approximately 10 million
children, which is higher than the average for the Asia region (21.8%).  According to UNICEF, wasting (0-5years) is extremely
high in Pakistan, with some areas at emergency levels. There is still high prevalence of anaemia among women of reproductive
age (52.1%)[5].  Food insecurity in KP is around 35% and as high as 45% in NMDs. A decrease in malnutrition among children,
thanks to improved food security, is a well-documented outcome of successful poverty graduation approaches. However, there
are still gains to be made in improved nutrition for children and women of reproductive age. Based on the evidence of earlier
projects and other initiatives in the region, it has been seen that increased income at household levels have had positive impact
on food security and dietary diversity. Based on this, the project will supplement investments in livelihood enhancement, with
nutrition information services to women and men, to ensure that decisions at household level are well informed. Considering the
conservative social context in the project area, the 25% of targeted women will be provided with this information through separate
trainings, especially on maternal and early childhood nutrition, while men will be trained separately on good nutritional behaviours
and dietary diversity. It is also expected that enhancing smallholder production and productivity will have a positive impact on the
nutrition status of targeted households.
41.
[1] Pakistan Human Development Report 2017, UNDP
42.
[2] Global Climate Risk Index 2020, www.germanwatch.org/en/cri
43.
[3] National Nutrition Survey 2018, Ministry of Health Services, Government of Pakistan
44.
[4] National Nutrition Survey 2019.
45.
[5] SOFI 2020
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
46.
47.
The multidimensional poverty rate in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Province is 49% for a population of 35.35 million (4.4 million
HHs) of which 81% lives in rural areas. Because of the poverty level and despite a real potential in economic development in
agriculture, livestock, fishery, vegetable, plantation, flowers or agro-tourism, the level of income of the rural households is
extremely low, affecting in particular the youth. The traditional way of doing business and marketing rural products in these
remote rural areas are under the full control of money lenders. Without external support allowing the poorest farmers to be
organized, to access profitable markets, to access formal finance or banking products, and to have key technical and
management skills, the rural population will continue to struggle in order to survive, as it is not capable to initiate any innovations
and to take any risks to change their economic status in the future, for themselves or their children.  
Because of the rural poverty and the extremely low household’s income, in almost all KP rural families, at least one young male
must emigrate. Today, the remittances for the province of KP are coming mostly from unskilled workers in the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) countries, and constitute an important source of livelihood for about 3 million HHs (75% of the total HHs). These
young males leaving their village or their country, never had the opportunity to be trained, to acquire the necessary skills to have
access to decent jobs or to create their own business in their own village or areas. They leave their family, sometimes their wife
and children against their will, often for years, to sacrifice their personal life for ensuring the maximum support they can to the
family with often, miserable salaries. 
48.
KP is a very important province of Pakistan, with a very high level of diversity, complexity, and a long period of security issues
but today the overall economic and political environment is changing fast, and the rural sector could grasp many opportunities if
properly supported. That is why, the GoP and the GoKP requested IFAD to support them to design and implement a provincial
programme, covering all the districts, which could generate a real and sustainable rural economic transformation, with the
valorization and the development of the provincial economic agri-business potential but also with the necessary support to ensure
the sustainable employability or self-employability of the poorest section of this rural population.
6/30
IFAD is a 40 years partner of Pakistan and has successfully demonstrated during these years its capacity to address this type of
challenge, to target and to support the poorest households (NPGP), to integrate women and youth in the local economy
(SPPAP), to develop in a sustainable and market oriented approach professional and profitable farmer organizations (ETI-GB), to
develop large provincial programme with visible impact in terms of poverty reduction, nutrition, gender empowerment (Pakistan
received the 2020 IFAD APR gender award) and to positively contribute to the overall 2030 SDG objectives. The current IFAD
funded programme, in particular the SPPAP (34 000 employment or self-employment created) and ETI-GB (160 professional
cooperatives created as well as 4Ps developed) are models that can be easily adapted and replicated in the KP province. The
GoKP has demonstrated its interest and already visited some of the IFAD Funded projects, in particular SPPAP.
The proposed intervention is fully aligned with the COSOP 2016-2021 strategic Objectives, in particular with the strategic
objective 1 (Promoting rural poor households' economic transformation by pursuing expansion and scaling-up of successful
poverty graduation approaches already successfully tested in Pakistan ). The proposed project offers, therefore, an opportunity to
leverage the experience and lessons learned from prior engagement in KP (MVSP and SFDP) and at the national level. In
particular the farmer organisation model under the Economic Transformation Initiative in Gilgit Baltistan (ETI-GB) and
employment generation under SPPAP feed the design of KP-RETP.
The project outcomes will also contribute to balanced regional development, as outlined in the Vision 2025, 12th Five Year Plan,
Poverty Reduction Strategy 2019, National Food Security Policy, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Policy, Women Empowerment
Policy 2017, and Youth Policy 2016.  Given its mandate, successful experiences, and comparative advantage as well as
replicating and scaling up evidence-based solutions, the Government of KP and the GoP requested formally IFAD to support
them in the economic transformation of their provincial area for the benefit of the poorest
49.
50.
51.
B. Lessons learned
52.
Some key lessons, relevant to KP-RETP, can be summarized as follows:
1.  Professional Farmer Organizations (PFOs) have to be promoted through a business model based on market studies,
integrated into a business plan, with a clear break-even point, commercial profit objective, professional management team
(i.e., not necessarily managed by the shareholder farmers) and with a critical minimum mass (300 to 500 farmers). The
professionalization of the farmer organizations gives them credibility at both client level and farmer / production levels where
clear and immediate benefits become evident and significant. By addressing the key issues faced by farmers, this approach,
tested in different APR countries through the Asian Pacific Farmer Programme funded by an IFAD grant, has already
demonstrated its relevance and impact in terms of access to market and net additional income at farmer level. The new multi-
purpose cooperative approach developed under NPGP (180 cooperatives) has also confirmed the relevance of this approach
in the Pakistan context and the high interest of the farmers and Government for this business-oriented and sustainable
approach where farmers are in the driver seat of their own development.
2.  Employment generation for the ultra-poor and poor is possible, with the right combination and sequencing of technical and
managerial skills, enterprise development as well as start-up capital. Some specific lessons of IFAD interventions in this area
(in particular, under SPPAP which has already allowed the creation of 34,000 new jobs during the last 4 years) have shown
that (i) vocational training is key and must be sanctioned by an official diploma recognized on the labour market and (ii) start-
up capital (of around USD 300) is essential for the poorest who do not have access to the formal financial system. This allows
them to effectively develop their business and to observe within 12 – 18 months a significant jump in terms of poverty
graduation / income / livelihoods. The vocational training for youth and women also serves (i) to guarantee Farmer
Organizations and service providers working for them along the value chain that they will find the necessary skills locally and
(ii) to promote rural off-farm employment.
3.  Food Security and nutrition. Evidence from the IFAD financed SSN-TUP[1] and the on-going Southern Punjab Poverty
Alleviation Project (SPPAP)[2], suggests economic pathways to improvement in food security of HHs and reduction of skipped
meals by children.
4.  Gender integration.  Lessons from earlier engagement by IFAD and other development partners inform that an integrated
household and inclusive approach in a culturally acceptable manner provides an entry point for gender mainstreaming. The
MVSP and SFDP applied culturally sensitive approaches which provide a workable model.
5.  Results based (RB) contracts and ad-hoc but high-level Technical Assistance (TA) are essential to ensure that the final
objective will be reached. In the case of SPPAP, the RB contract with the Institute of Rural Management (IRM) has resulted in
70% of the trained women and youth being employed within 6 months after the vocational training. Similarly in the case of the
4Ps in Sri Lanka, where one of the conditions in the call for interest with the private sector was that the net incremental
incomes for the farmers amount to USD 100 per month or above. Market studies and professional business plans need
guidance and in-depth review by a high-level TA to ensure that the investment will be relevant, suitable, and efficient. This was
the case of the IFAD regional grant for the Asian Pacific Farmers’ Programme (APFP) where in Laos, Cambodia or Mongolia,
the TA has allowed to establish business plans with very short breakeven periods and generate confidence as well as
credibility to the Farmer Organizations supported.
6.  Implementation arrangements based on partnerships with organisations that have previous significant experience in the
requested domain and with presence in the target areas helps in general to intervene in a much more efficient way. An
Independent Project Management Unit staffed through a competitive selection process is key to ensure smooth
implementation of projects, with the sufficient flexibility to adapt to the contextual changes that can happen at country context
(such as COVID 19) or provincial / district levels. The success of the Pakistan portfolio has been due to (i) the relevant
guidance provided by the Government through the steering committee; and, (ii) dedicated PMUs managing the day-to-day
implementation of the programme under specific procedures adapted to the goals and objectives of the investments.
7.  A Provincial approach for IFAD funded programmes,  as was adopted for the ETIGB, has allowed the Fund to be much
more efficient in terms of policy dialogue, since the Provincial Governments in Pakistan now have full authority in terms of
policy and regulations on many subjects such as agriculture, climate change or farmer organization development
7/30
8.  Security issues. As security challenges persist, RETP will take a flexible and phased approach: project phasing based on the
fact that the insecurity situation is not permanent but moves in waves; different and mixed implementation modalities (e.g.,
service providers coupled with direct implementation); national consultants backed up with international consultants
(debriefing, join remote mission, technical support); ICO involvement (nationals including the CPO are allowed to go in all parts
of the country, which is helpful whenever international personnel may not receive GoP authorisation); and digital technologies
(virtual meetings and with internet coverage being relatively good, all key partners can be supported even when travel may not
be possible). 
53.
[1] Study results, published in Science, show increases across income and consumption, assets, food security, and health
54.
[2] An impact survey of SPPAP revealed that “Overall, only 13% of survey households have reported that they have faced at least
one period of food insecurity in the past 2 years”. This is much below the provincial average of 32.4% food insecurity.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
55.
56.
57.
58.
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to poverty reduction, food and nutrition security and strengthened resilience of rural
households. The development objective is Incomes of rural households sustainably improved through climate-resilient, high-
value agriculture and off-farm/non-farm employment opportunities'.
Target area:  The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will be managed through a provincial project management
unit (base at Peshawar) and five regional offices (to allow for coverage of all agro-ecological zones). To mitigate the security
concerns, implementation will follow a phased approach (initially starting implementation in 10 districts and adding 3 districts per
region per year) with the objective to have the entire province covered by the Mid Term Review (End of Year 3). The sub
provincial offices will be established in the first six months and where possible in premises of districts administration or joining in
within FAO/WFP offices.  Under the lead of the GoKP, KP-RETP will also ensure complementarity and synergies with the IFAD
financed National Poverty Graduation Programme (NPGP) in 10 districts of the province[1], Kohat Division Development Project
(KDDP) in 3 districts[2], other donor funded projects such as the WB Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigated-Agriculture Improvement
Project and ADB’s ongoing and pipeline investments. In addition synergies will be ensured with the ongoing operations of
TEVTA. Coordination among complementary projects and programmes will be facilitated by the Project Steering Committee and
relevant sections of the planning and development department at the provincial level. Coordination for complementarities and
synergies will be the responsibility of Project Management Unit. IFAD country office and EAD will facilitate experience sharing
among the different projects funded by IFAD and other relevant development partners. A coordination mechanism has been
discussed with WFP and FAO regarding policy support to Government especially with regards to nutrition, food security and
climate smart agribusiness development.
Target Groups: The KP-RETP target groups will fall under the category of smallholders (as per the definition of the Government
<12.5 acres or 5 ha) and landless households (HH). Among these, the KP-RETP targeting will prioritise HH with PSC 0 – 34
range. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific interventions aiming at economic empowerment. The target
groups (small farmers, youth and women target groups) will be pre-identified through the implementing partners. Youth and
nutrition will be mainstreamed with a focus on women as secondary targeting criteria. Local organizations and in particular the
village councils / community organizations, combined with the decentralized PMU team will check and validate / confirm Poverty
Scorecard data (0-34) of the eligible households. For the youth and the women identification and engagement in the project (and
based on the successful experience of the NADP Diamer project in gender empowerment in a similar context), the religious and
community leaders and village elders/jirga will be sensitized. This will facilitate the integration of groups who usually don’t have
access to non-traditional activities.
Youth and Nutrition strategy. Youth and nutrition will be mainstreamed into all aspects of programme implementation and
appropriate strategies will be adopted for areas with more pronounced youth and nutrition challenges. GoKP, NGOs, FAO and
WFP have initiated,  over the years,  a number of programmes focused on youth and nutrition as well as on gender. KP-RETP will
have a 50% quota objective for youth and 25% for women beneficiaries in all the project activities who will benefit from self- and
wage employment opportunities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child nutrition information. And the nutrition
trainings will be organized in parallel to the other trainings, carried out by the implementing partners.  KP-RETP will build on the
current initiatives through a flexible approach to youth and gender, keeping in view the regional propensities and imperatives in
each district. Each target group will be engaged with its implementing partners, receive knowledge on nutrition aspects, trainings
and will benefit from coordinated actions with other KP development partners and in particular WFP and FAO.  The youth and the
women headed households and landless and part of the PSC 0-11 (ultra-poor) will be exempted from payment of FSC or PFOs
share fees and all able-bodied priority groups will be given priority access to wage earning opportunities under the employment
generation programme (component 2).
59.
KP-RETP will also recognize the importance of supporting value chains with the highest impact on nutrition and dietary
diversification.  On the implementation aspects, the partnership with FAO and WFP is on the basis of no-cost to KP-RETP. The
GoKP wishes IFAD, FAO and WFP to coordinate their field activities at all levels in terms of food security and nutrition. At the
start-up phase, the districts will be formally mapped and consequently, based on FAO and WFP existing programme on these
subjects and in these districts. IFAD through KP-RETP will adjust and complement these activities in order to reach the objective
described in the log-frame. This exercise will be repeated annually and assessed at MTR and before completion date
Furthermore, in collaboration with WFP and FAO, KP-RETP will engage in KP policy analysis and reform to improve the situation
of both nutrition and youth conditions in the province.  Finally, the M&E system would monitor youth, gender and nutrition
dimensions in a disaggregated manner. 
8/30
Project Beneficiaries: Around 785’000 households (4.35 million persons) will benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP
interventions through market oriented professional farmer organizations (around 550 PFOs), public-private-producer partnerships
(around 20 4Ps) and Farm Service Centres (35 FSCs). These KP-RETP supported organizations will be established based on
market studies, business plans, professional management teams, matching grant investments, partnerships, promoting
processing and value addition, as well as clear break-even points and realistic exit strategies. The necessary technical
assistance as well as the coaching, mentoring, capacity building necessary to develop the business plan proposals, to register or
to organize these institutions will be provided by KP-RETP to ensure sustainability within 4 to 5 years of  existing or new
institutions.
Additionally, the target groups in the same districts will benefit from a specific and dedicated skills development programme,
start-up capital and first professional exposure (public – private internship programme) in order to (i) ensure that the skills and
services necessary for the success of the KP-RETP agri-business component 1 will be available, (ii) respond to the local,
provincial and national labour market and employer needs particularly in the sectors like agro-industry, agro-tourism or tourism,
mining, industry or civil works by valorizing the KP local employable forces and in particular the youth and women, and (iii) boost
the employability of the newly graduated students (Master’s holders in particular) by ensuring them quick professional integration
through a one year public – private internship programme.
60.
61.
62.
The target groups will benefit from technical / vocational / managerial training with official and recognized certificates or diplomas
but will also have access to transversal capacity building, particularly in financial literacy, climate risk and resilience, nutrition for
enhancing the effectiveness of their enterprise and business development as well as personal lives. Investment in PFOs and 4Ps
will create additional jobs from which women and youth will specifically benefit, especially those trained under component 2.
63.
The project design is based on:
1.  An IFAD-GoKP joint and in-depth assessment of the KP Province in terms of rural development, agri-business and
rural employment status and potential, with a special focus on rural smallholders and a particular interest in economic /
social development of the youth and women within their own locality (including migration – seasonal and permanent as well as
national and international). The local, provincial, national, and international demand have also been duly explored, especially
in terms of agriculture, livestock, fishery as well as for other rural high value economic potential. The diagnosis has
demonstrated that (i) the KP province has indeed an impressive and diversified rural production potential, which is currently
highly under-valorised, (ii) the demand for these rural products exists with profitable and very accessible conditions, (iii)
smallholder farmers are not organized and operate in a full dependent/ controlled conditions of intermediaries, (iv) most of the
current interventions in rural areas are technical and do not address the full business constraints to ensure profit and
sustainability of these interventions.
2.  A project proposal based on the existing interventions to fill the gaps and create models that will later be upscaled and
financed by the regular budget of the GoKP. To this extent, the proposed project will consolidate the investment made by the
GoKP through the establishment of the Farm Service Centres to make them complementary to the agribusiness development
component and fully autonomous and sustainable post-project. In the same vein, RETP-KP will integrate Technical Education
and Vocational Training Authority (TEVTA) in the Employment Promotion component in order to review some of the
educational curricula, better respond to the provincial skills demand of the employers and as well propose formal skills
certification programmes fully compatible with the rural target groups, in particular for youth and women.
3.  The upscaling approach of two successful on going IFAD-funded projects in Pakistan, (i) the USD 120 million Economic
Transformation Gilgit Baltistan project (ETI-GB) that has successfully adapted the Sri Lanka National Agribusiness
Development Programme model (NADEP) in the mountain areas through market oriented PFOs (vegetable, dried fruits, etc.)
and 4Ps (dairy transformation in particular) and (ii) the USD 125 million South Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (SPPAP) that
has successfully generated 34,000 new sustainable and profitable jobs in rural areas during the last 4 – 5 years and from
which the approach, methodology, tools and lessons learnt will be extracted. The ongoing SPPAP and ETI-GB implementing
partners will also be invited to contribute / participate in the KP-RETP design and potentially in the implementation.
4.  An approach to jobs creation for youth through the promotion of self-employment, enterprise and skills development, all
based on a labour demand assessment from key value chain actors (promotors – large scale agribusiness companies,
MSMEs SMEs, FIs, public and private service providers, PFO and FSCs). Wage employment will be promoted through a mix
of skills development alongside building strong linkages with identified promotors. The aim is to support start-ups along the
value chains and wage jobs in the production, post-harvest-processing and services segments of value chains. This is an
integrated investment approach with a focus on agribusiness development, enhancing entrepreneurship skills, apprenticeship
for on-the-job mentoring/coaching; and job placements to increase employability.
64.
[1] Batagram, D.I. Khan, Kohistan Kolai Palas, Kohistan Upper, Kohistan Lower, North Waziristan, South Waziristan, Shangla,
Tank and  Tor Garh.
65.
[2] Kohat, Karak and Hangu districts covered to varying extent
D. Components/outcomes and activities
66.
The proposed project will have three components:
1.  Agribusiness Development (Professional Farmers Organizations, 4P Development, Farm Service Centres, Support to
MOA),
2.  Skills Development and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship
9/30
programme, support to TEVTA),
3.  Project Management and Policy Support. 
67.
Component 1 will create the necessary potential and conducive institutional set up within the repositioned agribusinesses
approach (PFOs, 4Ps and FSCs) to absorb a significant part of the target groups supported by component 2 (vocational training,
start-up capital, public-private internship programme) by developing relevant and new skills or services necessary to the business
development of the PFOs, FSCs or 4Ps. The other category of the component 2 target groups will allow the project to better
respond to the large local and national labour demand as well as to fight better against current migration of the unskilled. This will
also help strengthen the impact delivered through component 1 seeking to deliver stronger institutions and players for the
agribusiness sector to thrive. Experienced implementing partner (IPs) (competitive selection process by sub provincial office (so 1
IP for 5 districts) will implement component 1 and component 2. Each IP will have to implement the Nutrition and Youth
mainstreaming themes in all its activities. Component 3 will provide support, monitoring for the smooth implementation of the KP-
RETP programme and ensure synergies between components 1 and 2, as well as (ii) advocate and support the GoKP in its
agenda for policy reform to improve the rural poor’s livelihoods and to facilitate and ensure the sustainability of KP-RETP
activities initiated through the Agro-business development and Employment creation components. This will allow the project to
deliver results beyond the expected outcomes from this investment.  
68.
Component 1: Agribusiness Development - (USD 104.5 million)
69.
This Component shall consist of four mutually reinforcing sub-components as follows: (i) Professional Farmer Organizations
(PFOs) Development, (ii) Agro Value Chain 4Ps Development, (iii) Farm Services Centres, and (iv) Institutional Support.
70.
71.
72.
73.
Sub-Component 1.1: Professional Farmer Organizations Development: (USD 53.3 million). Based on (i) the successful
experience developed in Pakistan (ETI-GB), Sri-Lanka (NADEP/SAP) and Asian Pacific Farmers’ Programme (APFP Laos,
Cambodia and Mongolia in particular), (ii) the growing demand in local and national markets (220 million people with growing
middle income class) for both fresh and  processed products, (iii) the significant number of farmers (almost 4 million small farm
households) in KP and (iv) the comparative advantage of the KP province in terms of rural production (cash and staple crops,
livestock, cold-water fishery), the project will develop / adapt the models for the establishment of 550 PFOs during the  first 5
years of KP-RETP interventions. These PFOs will be composed each, of 300 to 500 small farmers, on average, and will develop
multi-purpose / multi-seasonal agri-business activities aligned with the current local farming system. In general, one village or
cluster of village (between 1,000 to 2,000 families) will have one PFO.  Twenty-five percent of the membership will be women.
Before establishing a PFO, a call for interest describing in detail the objectives, approach, roles, responsibilities, and contribution
requested will be disseminated by the PMU, MOA and/or Service Providers at district level. Based on the demand and the
theoretical potential, a first visit and a preliminary selection report will be done by the Implementing Partner (IP) at district level.
The IP will meet with the existing or potential new PFO, discuss and assess their current status and report to the PMU on the
situation, along with its recommendations. Once the request is accepted, the IP with its pool of staff (market, business, finance,
legal and / or technical officers) will conduct the market studies based on the local farming system and main production capacity,
and prepare the full 5-year business plan (BP) with a clear breakeven point (expected at 3 years maximum), skill identification
and cost estimate of the professional management team (farmers will be shareholders of the PFOs but management will be
handled by professionals not originated from the village, and recruited on the basis of test / past experience). The final PFO BP
proposal will be reviewed by the PMU before a contract is signed with the same IP that prepared the BP, and the Farmers.
The IPs will be responsible for mobilization of members (farmers), legal incorporation/registration, development of business plan
and will facilitate recruitment of professional staff and implementation of the BP. As shareholders of the PFOs, the farmers will
attend the general assembly twice a year, will vote the budget and approve the POW as well as the new investments / markets.
The PFO Manager and his/her team will be in charge of the management of the PFOs. The IPs will provide coaching, declining
support in all the business and technical FO aspects, ensure good governance practices and audit each PFO monthly for the first
2 years. Formal joint staff assessment will be also carried out every semester. 
The overall expected investment per PFO will range between USD 70,000 and USD 100 000, with a contribution of around 30%
by producers/shareholders in cash or in kind, immediate or progressive. All business plan will include investment for climate
adaptation and mitigation practices. The project will finance the PFOs (investment and working capital) which will in turn provide
‘in kind’ loans to the members (given the lack of access to formal banking or micro-finance loans) for the necessary inputs /
services supply, so as to enable members to produce the expected quality and quantity of commodities. The PFO will be
responsible for aggregating the products, grading, processing, packaging and ensuring the sale as per the business plan and
contract established. Certification will be developed where needed to guarantee the best added value for the farmers. The PFOs’
net profit will be limited to the operational cost recovery and some provision in order to transfer most of the profit at farmer level.
The average estimated net incremental income generated per farmer is expected in the range of USD 1000 – 2,000 per year.
Leveraging the access to finance programme of provincial government, by channelling project assistance through banking sector
credit history will be built for both the PFOs and their members in order to integrate them gradually in the formal financial sector
and enable them to manage all their financial operations through the formal banking system.
74.
While the climate risk is high, the project does not include activities of size or scale that would have significant negative social
and environmental impacts rather; there will be positive impacts on the livelihoods and economic wellbeing of the community.
Nevertheless, any identified investments by PFOs and 4Ps will be subject to environment and climate screening. Business plans
for PFOs will include costed adaptation and mitigation measures as provided in ESMP to avoid or minimize any social and
environmental impacts (see PIM).
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
All value chains that support dietary diversity, nutrition and incomes will be eligible (e.g. livestock, crops, vegetables, fruits, etc.),
with a prioritization of those with high nutrition impact, subject to the condition that the business plan demonstrates market
demand, the profitability at individual and organizational levels, and sustainability. Based on demand, line departments may
provide technical support to the PFOs. In line with the diagnosis undertaken by GoK PKP, typical elements to be promoted may
include climate smart technologies, digital channels for transactions, high efficiency irrigation technologies, planning and
harvesting, value addition etc., as well as transversal trainings related, financial literacy, climate change or gender. These
groups will also be entry points for nutrition education. In partnership with WFP and through other contracted service providers,
nutrition education will be delivered through two fronts: (i) to the women membership, especially on maternal and child nutrition
and (ii) to the male membership on good nutritional habits and dietary diversification. While curriculum will be overlapping, the
two groups will be trained separately considering the requirements of the social context.
10/30
This sub-component will directly reach and provide decent revenue and employment for 200 000 HHs and allow around 1.6
million people to benefit from the additional significant net-income generated. More specifically, the sub-component shall
integrate grading, processing, storage, and consolidation thus creating additional job opportunities especially for youth. Details
are provided in the PIM.
Sub-Component 1.2: Agro Value Chain 4Ps Development (USD 9.7 million).  Also based on the experience developed in
Pakistan (ETI-GB) and Sri-Lanka (NADEP), the project will develop 20 “4Ps”, with a minimum of 1,000 producers per 4P (same
ratio as for Sri Lanka). The project will make a call for proposals open to local, national, and multinational private
firms/companies already in the business and with financial capacity as well as demonstrated market share.
The call for proposals will clearly request to demonstrate that the proposed partnership will generate a net incremental income at
farmer level of minimum USD 150 equivalent per month. The project will allocate a maximum amount of USD 500 000 to each 4P
business plan, which will be dedicated only for the investment related to smallholder or small farmers, to enable them to better
respond to the demand (mainly production in quantity / quality / regularity) of the private sector. A five year contract will be
established between the private sector, the project and the farmers, which will describe the terms and conditions of the
partnership.
The private company will generally have to ensure the extension and technical support, the collection of the product as well as
the transformation / marketing. Producers will be capacitated to meet the demand characteristics and requirements of the private
company for which project investments will be identified and provided. The 4Ps model could / will also be developed as a link to
the PFOs under contract farming modality. All payments will be gradually digitalized through formal banking sector institutions.
The process of evaluation and approval of proposals will be done by an evaluation committee established by the PMU and
consisting of at least 3 experts from private sector i.e. technical, financial and marketing based on an approved criteria. The
criteria against which the proposals will be reviewed shall include assurance of the market potential, benefits and income to the
target group, nutrition/dietary diversity, gender considerations, sustainability of the proposed activities, climate resilience and
impact, etc. To reduce the risks and impacts associated with climate change, the project will create capacity among farmers to
assess climate risks, plan and identify climate adaptation measures (including insurance) and adopt technologies that mitigate
the same. The identified climate adaptation measures, once implemented, will help farmers to cope with extreme climatic events,
notably drought and water shortages. This subcomponent should reach around 20 000 additional households.
Sub-Component 1.3: Farm Service Centres (USD 33.7 million).  The objective of this sub component is for the farmers (FPO,
4Ps, others) to have an easy access to qualitative and affordable input supply and key services in each district of the province
and not to depend on middle men for that.   Building on the 2014 GoKP investments in the development of the Farm Service
Centres (FSCs), the KP-RETP will contribute to making these institutions more responsive to the needs of the farmers in terms of
input supply (fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, etc.) and services (mechanized labour, technical advice, support, marketing) in order
to complement and fully operationalize subcomponents 1 (PFOs) and 2 (4Ps). The KP-RETP objective will be to establish one
fully functional, autonomous and sustainable New Farm Service Centre (NFSC) per district, with PFOs and individual farmers as
shareholders. This NFSC will be managed as a private company offering services to the PFO mainly supply of good quality seed,
agrochemicals, improved technology, packaging material and may also assist in matchmaking with end-buyers/suppliers. 
The Farm Services Centres in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province were established under the KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA Farm
Services Centres Act 2014. Today, 99 FSCs have been established overall in the KP province with a total of 2.16 million
members. The total endowment fund by the GoKP has amounted to PKR 159 million, the overall registration and share fees are
about of PKR 130 million and the overall net official income is of PKR 128 million for the province. Despite these encouraging
figures, today, only 5% of the farmers on average benefit from the FSC.
The main issues observed are: (i) the management of the FSC by the District office of the Ministry of Agriculture, with staff
already very busy with the MOA own mandate (time allocation to FSC is limited to the minimum), (ii) no inputs provided on “in
kind” basis campaign loans (farmers have to pay all inputs in cash), (iii) extremely limited working capital by FSC compared to
the needs (today 5 000 to 30 000 members per district for one FSC), (iv) limited or no adapted equipment (materials, machines,
infrastructures) in relation to the specificities of the district and (v) limited marketing capacity / experience / exposure of FSC staff.
The PK-RETP project will build on the existing FSC and create a revised / new model (NFSC) in order to address the current
observed structural issues (Detail of implementation described in the PIM).
Sub-Component 1.4: Institutional Support (Agriculture Extension / research (Department of Agriculture): (USD 4.7
million).   The main objective of the sub-component is to provide demand driven institutional services to PFOs/4Ps/FSCs, to
meet the market demand and buyers’ requirements. The PMU will enter into multiple results-based MoUs with the relevant
public/Government departments (academic, research and extension services) for different activities with clear responsibilities and
deliverables. The scope of work will emerge from the aggregated needs of PFOs/4Ps/FSCs and will be translated into work plans,
timelines and cost estimates. The engagement plan will be developed by the PMU and approved by PSC as and when the need
arises on a rolling out basis. Performance assessments will be done on an annual basis and presented for review to PSC. Below
is a not exhaustive list of potential institutional services but reflect typical needs assessed during project design;
1.  Directorate of Agriculture Extension:(DAE): Based on the need assessed, the PMU will engage for provision of support
11/30
regarding training and advisory services (using existing App);
2.  Directorate of Agriculture Research (DAR):  additional collaboration will be in the areas of reforms related to seed/planting
material import and multiplication and other related policy domains.  
3.  Additional/Other Partnerships: Several other MoUs may be executed as per need with different institutions. The terms of
partnership will include the investment in capacities of the institutions, delivery of the services and overheads.
84.
A Business Mobilization Partner(s) will be selected through a competitive process to support the implementation of the
component in conjunction with several institutions engaged through performance-based MoUs. Synergies will be built with IFAD’s
regional grant implemented by Precision Development (e-advisory), the Asian Pacific Farmer Organisation Programme and the
South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC).
85.
Component 2: Skills development and Employment Promotion (USD 66.2 million)
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
This Component shall consist of two mutually reinforcing sub-components as follows: (i) Skills Development and (ii) Employment
Promotion. The first subcomponent 2.1 will ensure that all the skills necessary for a smooth implementation of Component 1 on
the agribusinesses development approach (PFOs, 4Ps, NFSC (both staff and members)) are available locally, and adapted to the
needs and success of these new institutions or private initiatives. The second subcomponent 2.2 will complement Component 1
in terms of new rural services development and rural employment promotion by offering the possibility for skilled youth or women
to develop their own private business and services. This will allow them to better serve but also benefit from the opportunities
created under Component 1 and/or to respond to the existing market or business gaps observed in their respective rural areas. 
The special support for economic insertion of the recent student graduates (through the public – private internship programme),
as well as the specific partnership with TEVTA, will be inserted in subcomponent 2.2. 
Sub-Component 2.1: Skills Development (USD 18.1 million).  This subcomponent will focus on the technical, financial,
managerial, or business skills needed to ensure the management, development, success, profitability, and sustainability. A total
of 60,000 trainees will benefit from the reorganised approach of TEVTA. In addition, linked to component 1, i.e.: (i) the 550
Professional Farmers Organizations supported and their members, (ii) the 20 Public-private-producer partnerships and (iii) the 35
New Farm Service Centres, a dedicated training activity will be organised.
The overall objective will be to improve or to develop the skills of individuals (approx. 5,000 per year – 145 per districts per year),
staff or members, based on the active and effective roles of the individuals in the institutions supported and the personal needs
expressed / assessed (backed by the business plan and capacity building plan of the institutions supported). Special focus will be
given to the youth and women with a minimum quota of 30% each. The training needs will emerge from the business plans of
PFOs/4Ps/FSCs and the capacity building investment will be incorporated in the same.
The overall implementation of Component 1 and consequently subcomponent 2.1 will be progressive (phasing approach). Each
implementing partner in charge of Component 1 (agri-business development) will also be responsible for the implementation of
subcomponent 2.1 (skill development for agribusiness entities). The implementing partner will either directly train the
beneficiaries or (for very specific areas) will engage service providers at provincial or national level. The implementing partner
will be responsible for the quality and efficiency of the training and will consequently manage the contractual relationship with the
‘skill development’ service providers subject to No Objection from the PMU.
The IPs will census the individual skills needed based on (i) the requests of the institutions (when already operational), (ii) the IPs’
own needs assessment for PFOs, 4Ps or NFSCs to reach optimum performance and (iii) the guidance of the approved BP. 
Based on am approximate target of 25 000 trainees, the maximum (all-inclusive) cost of training per individual will be USD 160 for
the duration of the project.  The IP(s) will be responsible for ensuring progress reporting of component 1 and sub-component
related to agribusiness skills development under component 2. Monitoring and evaluation will be the responsibility of M&E staff
as well as complemented through periodic external evaluations.  
Sub-Component 2.2: Employment promotion (USD 12.7 million).  The overall objective of this subcomponent 2.2 will be (i) to
create jobs (including self-employment)for the ultra-poor and poor households having limited access to land, with a specific focus
on youth (50%) and women (25%), and (ii) to facilitate the employability and the active integration in the economy of newly
graduated students. Pakistan produces around 450 000 new graduates each year – 70 000 annually in KP province. The project
will provide start up grants to enable graduates to initiate self-employment and entrepreneurship. Service provider(s) will be
selected to implement this subcomponent. Details of the implementation is provided in the section below and in the PIM.
Technical Support Services – (USD 5 million). The implementation will be delegated to several training/service providers in
charge of the selection of the candidates, organization of pre-training, training as well as post-training support, including
coaching, mentoring, and guidance to the beneficiaries to ensure that the income and employment objective is reached.
The SPs will be recruited on a competitive basis . Each SP will have a 3-year framework contract renewable based on
performance and will be assessed / confirmed every year. The SPs will handle aspects related to both employment / self-
employment and post-graduate economic integration. In areas where the service providers will not be able to obtain the NOC to
intervene, the PMU through its regional office will directly intervene using its own field consultants and GoKP line departments, as
GoKP public services are authorized to intervene in these areas.
94.
This subcomponent 2.2 will be developed based on the SPPAP effective and successful model / methodology of rural
employment and self-employment. The SPs will develop the skills of the target group to become employable or to create their
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
own employment / business and consequently improve their livelihoods in a significant and sustainable manner (the objective
being a minimum monthly net income of 15 000 PKR). Based on the SPPAP experience, around 70% of the beneficiaries of this
subcomponent would develop their own self-employment / business.
12/30
The beneficiaries will be pre-identified through the updated BISP Poverty Score Card (data available) after the necessary initial
screening/consultation organized through the village/Tehsil councils or functional existing community organisations. The
applications of beneficiaries will be validated by the PMU after due diligence related to the poverty score card and endorsement
by the village/tehsil council. Based on the SPs’ assessment of the employment market and the demand expressed locally by the
potential beneficiaries, the SPs will organize various consultations in order to match the market offer and the beneficiaries’
demand.
The type of skills to be acquired will vary and could cover different sectors depending on the gender, the location of the district
and its business / labour comparative advantage / demand. Gender and youth will be identified as per SPPAP methodology.
Vocational and Entrepreneurial trainings will aim at developing sustainable and profitable businesses (mechanics, tailoring, shoe
or handicraft production, beauty shop, mobile or solar panel repair, brewery, masonry, hostelry, cloth design, heavy machinery
operation, electricity, steel fixing, plumbing, etc.) – see list of the 49 activities proposed in PIM.
The duration and location of the training will be adapted based on the target group (particularly for women) and the topic.
Generally, the duration envisaged is 2 / 3 months per training, sanctioned by an official and recognized diploma or certificate. The
overall cost (training + stipend + support for CV and search of employment) would be around USD 300 per trainee and would
allow her or him to exceed to average earnings of USD 125 per month (which corresponds to the estimated amount needed in
rural areas to sustain a family).
The service providers in charge of this subcomponent will be responsible for the quality of the training provided and the results
obtained (in terms of sustainable employment ratio and level of income). A special partnership will be developed with TEVTA to
handle most of the technical training. TEVTA will be supported to assess and adapt their trainings (if necessary) to the most
recent market requirements and / or to add some training modules to their existing curricula. TEVTA will also be supported to
develop partnerships with a network of entrepreneurs willing to offer internships or to participate in vocational cooperative
education programmes (with trainees alternating between theory and practice).  
The trainees will be progressively identified and supported based on the phasing approach of KP-RETP. Around 30% of the
trainees will respond to the local, provincial, national, or even international employment market (e.g. GCC countries). The other
70% who have demonstrated interest, willingness and capacity will be supported to become self-entrepreneurs with an additional
package (start-up capital and management coaching/mentoring) averaging USD 300 per person, expected to yield an average
income of USD 180 to 200 per month. The start-up capital may be provided in kind (necessary equipment / tools) and/or in cash
(working capital). Each beneficiary will be requested to open a bank account using either of the commercial/MFI or branchless
banking option. KP-RETP will link with the provincial banks to facilitate / negotiate the financial inclusion of these poor households
(with PSC scores of 0 – 34) who are not normally eligible for loans, through (i) brokering attractive loan conditions with support
from GoKP and (ii) valorising the KP-RETP support as collateral.
100.
Job placement of graduated students (USD 30.2 million):  Each student will have the possibility to do 2 internships of 6
months each. The recruiting enterprise will be allowed to keep the same student for a second period of 6 months only if it
provides a formal offer of employment to the student. In case of non-compliance, the enterprise will no longer be eligible to
participate in the programme. Each enterprise will have a maximum of 2 students at the same time. Around 145 interns per
district and per year will be eligible to this programme. Priority will be given to those coming from the poorest families. 50% of this
economic integration programme will be dedicated to women. Annual assessments of this activity will be conducted and the
approach will be adjusted if needed.  The total investment amount of this sub component includes the contribution of the private
sector to benefit from the placement programme (detail below).
101.
Twice a year, the SPs (component 2.2) will have to generate calls for proposal in their operating districts so as to tally the private
and public sector enterprises interested in integrating post graduate students as professional interns for a period of 6 months.  At
the same time, the SPs will regularly take a census of the district youth, male and female, interested in participating in this post-
graduate economic integration programme. A web site will be created under the KP-RETP to match the demand and the offer (on
line permanent enrolment, negotiation, and contract). Every quarter and in each operational district, one-to-two-day workshops
will be organized by the PMU / SPs to (i) facilitate an in-situ selection process through meetings between the post-graduate
candidates and the public or private enterprises and (ii) promote exchanges on the various experiences and needs of both
students and public or private entities (thematic / debates).
102.
As much as possible, experience in both the private and the public sector will be encouraged to allow students to better
understand the organization and constraints of both sides. After due diligence done by the SP, an internship contract will be
signed between all the parties. The remuneration of the intern will be set at 15 000 PKR per month, of which 12 000 PKR will be
granted by the programme and 3 000 PKR by the recruiting enterprise. On the 25th of each month, the enterprise will transfer the
3000 PKR to KP-RETP (this will also serve as proof of attendance by the intern) and on the 30th of each month, KP-RETP will
transfer the total salary of 15 000 PKR to the intern. The SPs will be responsible for the monitoring and reporting to the PMU. It is
expected that 30% of the interns will remain employed in the enterprises after completing their internship period, 50% will find a
job after their second internship (in a different enterprise) based on the experience acquired and 20% will set up their own
business or still be looking for a job after 6 months.  
103.
Institutional strengthening support (USD 5.1 million).  The project support will be extended to Department of Industries,
Commerce and Technical Education and Department Zakar-Usher, Social Welfare, Special Education and Women
Empowerment and TEVTA through several service providers, training institutions, universities and individual as technical
assistance for improving curricula, training delivery, training facilities, testing and certification aspects. The support will also
strengthen the facilities for emerging sectors and putting in place state of the art skills development facilities around key
economic zones. The policy support will particularly focus, during the initial project years, on developing an extended competency
based testing framework covering agribusiness and women empowerment; developing framework for skills development fund to
cover start up capital for self-employment, and developing capacity for job market assessments and development of job market
outlook on a continual basis. The project will also provide technical assistance to facilitate curricula, testing and certification of
skills training by TEVTA under the overall umbrella of the National Vocational and Technical Education Commission (NAVTEC).
13/30
104.
Component 3: Project Management, Policy and Institutional Support (USD 15.1 million)
105.
The project will be placed under the Planning and Development Department. An autonomous Project Management Unit will be
established at Peshawar and 4 additional regional offices will be set up to better manage the distance / geographic coverage /
diversity of the project area. The PMU will report at least once a year to the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The cost
allocation includes the running cost and equipment of the PMU, as well as a USD 1.5 million provision for the policy support,
equipment, and MOUs with the relevant line departments.
106.
Nutrition and Food Security Policy and Action Plan: Building on existing studies carried out on the current nutrition and food
security situation in the province, KP-RETP  will engage 6 person-months of national technical assistance in collaboration with
WFP and FAO to assist the GoKP in the development of a comprehensive nutrition and food security policy and action plan. This
will foster sound policy formulation and changes beyond the project immediate results.
107.
KP-RETP will assist in integrating ICT4D specifically on digital business plan development for PFOs (AgriPlan developed by
IFAD or similar other options - to formulate, edit, evaluate, approve, and monitor business plans for producers’ organisations), e-
commerce, digital money and e-advisory, etc.  Digital systems may also be used to develop credit history and scoring of farmers
under the PFOs. Institutional support will be provided in these respects on a cost-recovery basis and in a sustainable manner.
108.
A Project Steering Committee, headed by the Additional Chief Secretary Planning and Development Department, will provide
policy level guidance, oversight, and coordination. The PSC will consist of representatives from the relevant line departments,
representative of PFOs, 4Ps, private sector, and civil society. The Committee will coordinate, build synergies, grant approval of
Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), conduct regular progress reviews, and take corrective actions where warranted. 
E. Theory of Change
109.
The theory of change is organised as follows: (i) Challenges to smallholders, challenges of women and young people, (ii)
Fundamental premise/pathways, (iii) Activities for each of the target groups and (iv) Outcomes envisaged. 
110.
The theory of change is based on three mutually reinforcing pathways:
1.  Agribusiness development pathway- First, the project is based on a fundamental premise that a market-driven approach is
needed to help smallholder farmers sustainably increase their income and improve their livelihood and nutrition. This is
operationalized by facilitating (i) the emergence of professional profitable and sustainable farmers organizations responding to
the market and (ii) the brokering of mutually beneficial (win-win) 4Ps between smallholder farmers and private companies in
response to clear market opportunities and by strategically combining public and private sector funds and advice to address
smallholders’ needs in terms of access to market, technology, organization and scale, good agricultural practices, and
affordable credit, as well as creating a favourable policy and regulatory environment for the agribusiness and financial sectors
to expand outreach towards rural clients and become overall more competitive. Farmer Organizations with an average of 400
HHs will facilitate also the joint discussion and analysis of the nutrition issue, define agreed objectives and include as part of
the capacity building plan of the PFO and its members educational and activities directly linked to nutrition for the benefit of the
entire HHs and in particular for the children and youth.
2.  Skills for employment and entrepreneurship pathway– Second, poorer households (PSC 0-34), and especially women and
youth who do not have access to land, can easily be economically and sustainably integrated in their environments through an
already tested and successful combination of technical / managerial training and start-up capital. This combination allows them
either (i) to access a decent and remunerative employment or (ii) to develop, alone or in association, their own business or (iii)
to become economically active participants of the agribusiness chains. The youth / women trained will be able to get jobs and
income generating opportunities created through Component 1 and consequently, to sustain their family in a decent way. They
will also be in a position to provide additional and often missing services to the community as well as to complement / reinforce
the local service offers needed by the professional farmer organizations or developed 4Ps.
3.  Nutrition and food security pathway. Lack of nutritional security impacts resilience of poor rural households. Anaemia
especially among women of reproductive age is a major health problem in Pakistan, especially in the rural areas. Anaemia,
and other micronutrient deficiencies, can result in maternal mortality, weakness, diminished physical and mental capacity, and
increased morbidity having a bearing on productivity. The relationship between anaemia and reduced productivity has also
been well documented. The project's investments will be nutrition-sensitive. The project will promote commodities/crops and
its related products that have high nutritional value. Furthermore, recognizing that improved productivity and incomes do not
automatically lead to better nutrition outcomes, the project will pursue behaviour change, awareness/education campaigns
primarily through farmer’s organisations. Improved nutritional status of households, will not only increase productivity, but also
their resilience.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
111.
The proposed project is well aligned with IFAD's Strategic Framework and COSOP for Pakistan and is highly relevant to the IFAD
11 business model and corporate priorities notably gender, youth, climate change, and nutrition. IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-25 calls for enabling inclusive and sustainable rural transformation through ‘investing in rural people’ to enable them to
overcome poverty and achieve food security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. The COSOP strategic
objectives include promoting rural poor households’ economic transformation; policy and institutional strengthening for
community-led development; and building resilience for sustainable nutrition and food security.
14/30
112.
Both the Federal and Provincial Governments grant a high priority to socio-economic development of the province particularly
NMDs.  The newly merged districts (former FATA) are among the most underdeveloped regions of Pakistan and thus may
require greater attention and priority under the KP-RETP.
113.
KP-RETP is being designed to contribute to the attainment of (i) the SDGs (SDG 1- No Poverty, SDG 2- Zero Hunger, SDG 5-
Gender Equality, SDG 6 - Decent Work, and SDG 13 – Climate Action); (ii) Vision 2025 and 12th Five-year Plan targets in terms
of poverty reduction, food security, and nutrition; and (iii) Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Policy in terms of agriculture
development and rural transformation. Furthermore, the project will address the attainment of the balanced regional development
objective of the 12th Five-year Plan and will also contribute to priorities for water sector development and climate resilient rural
development.  Finally, the project is closely aligned to the Government’s high priority poverty reduction policy as enunciated in
the Ehsaas initiative.
114.
Partnership: The project will seek synergies and promote complementarities with the Ehsaas programme of the Federal
government (particularly with IFAD-funded National Poverty Graduation Programme already present in 10 of the 35 KP districts),
as well as with all other donor- or GoKP-funded programmes in the province. Special partnerships will be established with the
FAO and WFP to reinforce respective interventions, especially on climate resilience aspects, advance technologies, nutrition
(sensitization, training, direct support, coordination of the intervention and joint intervention in particular on nutrition district
diagnostic and policy at provincial level), and gender. The coordination of the interventions will be facilitated by the component 3
under the lead of the Planning and Development department. New partnerships and co-financing are currently under exploration
(in particularly with the European Union and other bilateral) to co-finance and strengthen this action in line with the approach
describe above.  
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
115.
Project Cost. The estimated investment requirement for the project is USD185.8 million over 7 years, which will impact directly
785,000 HHs. The investment cost is approximately USD172.2 (93%) while USD13.6 million (7%) is the estimated recurrent cost.
Investment cost includes Vehicles, Equipment and Material; Technical Assistance, Training and Studies; and Grants to
Beneficiaries. Recurring expenditure is composed of salaries and operating expenses. The project investment is organized into
three components; i.e. (i) Agribusiness Development (USD104.5 million); (ii) Skills Development and Employment Promotion 
(USD66.2 million); and, (iii) Project Management, Policy and Institutional Support (USD15.1 million).
116.
Of the total government contribution of USD40.4 million, about USD9.1 million is estimated on account of taxes and incremental
project management cost. The remaining amount shall be leveraged through existing/new projects under provincial Annual
Development Plan (ADP). Co-financing options are under discussion with the EU.  
15/30
16/30
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
117.
Project costs and Financing.   Total project costs are estimated at USD185.82 million. The IFAD financing will consist of a
USD84.19 million loan from IFAD 11, and a financing gap of USD15.91 million to be funded under subsequent allocations and
applicable terms. Government’s contribution amount to USD40.4 million while Beneficiaries’ contribution amounts to USD45.3
million. 
118.
Financing for youth represent USD92.9 million (50% of total project cost) while the investment on gender mainstreaming is
estimated at USD46.5 million (25%). 
119.
GoKP incremental contribution is estimated at USD9.1 million on account of taxes and project management related expenditures
while USD31.4 million will be leveraged mainly through ongoing ADP support to TEVTA and agriculture department (under
farmer service centres support).  The project beneficiaries’ contribution include; (i) an estimated USD37.7 million, which would
finance about 36% of Component 1; and, (ii) an estimated USD7.6 million, which would finance about 11% of component 2
(mainly on account of job placement contribution). Beneficiaries will be contributing mainly in cash with various ratios depending
on the type of activity. 
120.
The investment is over 7 years of project life. It is planned that around 60% investment will be already made by mid-term. The
financial phasing is given in the following figure.
c. Disbursement
121.
The project will have segregated, but integrated, systems of funds flow, budgeting and accounting to ensure a clear, verifiable
audit trail for all project transactions. Total project cost is estimated at USD 185.8 million which includes the IFAD Loan (USD
100.1 million), Government’s contribution (USD 40.4 million and Beneficiaries’ contribution (USD 45.3 million).
17/30
122.
PMU shall establish a Designated/Revolving Fund Account in the National Bank of Pakistan (NBP), Peshawar to receive and use
IFAD’s Loan. As per Federal Government’s instructions, the NBP is the designated bank for handling all transactions of revolving
fund accounts. The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP)—which maintains the accounts of foreign aid for Pakistan, shall receive funds
from IFAD in USD, convert it at the prevalent exchange rate into local currency, debit the national account for loan, and credit the
project’s Designated Account accordingly. The project account shall show debits, credits and balance in PKR along with USD
equivalent. The funds shall go through the SBP to the NBP-Peshawar following the same procedure through the SBP.
123.
Report-based disbursement will be the mechanism used for withdrawing funds from IFAD financings. Interim Financial Reports
(IFRs) package will be used as a basis of submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD. The IFRs package will be included in
the Letter to Borrower and the PIM. Project will be using the Revolving Fund modality under the report-based disbursements
during the implementation period. The first advance should be equal to or less than the forecast amount of IFAD financed
expenditures approved in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for the period of six months. Further advances to the
Designated Account will be made for the next reporting period based on the AWPB or expenditures forecast provided that at least
70% of the immediately preceding advance and 100% of all prior advances have been fully justified.
124.
Each quarter the PMU should submit the IFRs package (using the templates included in the LTB and the PIM) to report on the
financial performance and to justify the specified percentages of the withdrawn advances as indicated in the LTB. By justifying
the required percentage of the withdrawn advances, the PMU will be eligible to withdraw further advances based on next period
cash forecast. 
IFRs package will mainly form the templates of the Withdrawal Application (WA) which will be submitted in ICP. The package
should be sent to IFAD Finance Officer for clearance. Once the package is cleared by IFAD Finance Officer and the WA is
submitted in ICP, the Financial Controller’s Division (FCD) will proceed with finalizing the WA in IFAD system. IFAD Finance
Officer could select a sample of the expenditures included in the IFRs and request the supporting documents for further check.
125.
The government’s share in financing comprises counterpart funding for payment of applicable taxes and project management
costs (USD 9.1 million) and ongoing development projects (worth USD 31.3 million) that will be leveraged by the project. PMU
shall open an Assignment Account to receive and use government counterpart funds (cash) for taxes and project management.
The annual requirement of counterpart funds shall be reflected in the project’s AWPB and provincial budget. The accounting
system shall record government financing separately.
126.
The flowchart depicts the flow of funds (excluding beneficiaries’ contribution):  
127.
Beneficiaries shall contribute USD 45.3 million (the ratio of share between IFAD and beneficiaries: 30% under PFOs, 50% under
the 4Ps arrangement, and 50% for FSC). Access conditions (bank account/separate ledger, hiring of professional staff—including
FM official, other requirements as appropriate) shall be included in contracts/MOUs with these IPs which must be met by the
beneficiaries to draw on IFAD’s share in the financing of related activities. PFO/FSCs/Private Partners shall maintain record of
beneficiaries’ contribution and keep the PMU updated. PMU shall ensure that the project accounting system reflects updated
information on the beneficiaries’ contribution at all times.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
128.
The KP-RETP provides the necessary incentive to all stakeholders as evident from its financial and economic rate of returns. The
net cash flows resulting from the project provides incentive for beneficiaries (producers and participating private sector) in the
shape of improved income and profitability. For the Government of Khyber Phakhtunkhwa province, there are significant
economic gains in terms of socio-economic development of rural households. The intervention will leverage private sector
investment and will catalyse horizontal and vertical expansion of economic activities in the rural areas.
18/30
129.
The benefits: The project benefits are anticipated in the two project components including; i) agribusiness development; and (ii)
employment and jobs promotion while the third component i.e. project management, institutional and policy support will facilitate
the two.
130.
Benefits of agribusiness development. The project interventions related to aggregation of the production based on three
simultaneous pathways. These include (i) mobilizing small farmers into professional farmer organisations; (ii) integrating small
farmers into public-private-producers partnership; and, (iii) strengthening the delivery of inputs and services to the PFOs and
farmers participating under 4Ps. The project logic is to reduce transaction cost (production, handling and marketing), accessibility
to quality inputs, reduce cost of capital and eventually improving quality compliance. The net effect is in the form of increased
income stream resulting from increased production and higher prices realised.  The farm services centers having shares of PFOs
(its members) will generate additional income and will provide inputs and services to both members and non-members.
131.
Benefits of employment and jobs promotion: The project component will position rural youth to avail jobs and self-
employment for remunerative engagement. Investment in skills (vocational and entrepreneurship) for job market will increase
wage/salary rates while self-employment (combining training and start up) will create economic activities in the rural areas. In
addition, job placement facilitation will provide the entry point for youth training graduates.
132.
The estimated incremental increase in income resulting from agribusiness development is US$400 per household ranging
between USD200 and USD1 000 per household. The project support will enable to enhance monthly income to an average of
US$130 per month. The estimated incremental increase is on average USD300 – 400 per year.
133.
Financial analysis. The KP-RETP investment is viable as evident from its overall Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of
22.3%. The Net Present Value (NPV) of the proposed project over 20 years’ period is noted to be USD119.2 million. The
discounted benefit cost (B:C) ratio is noted to be 1.56.
134.
Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated at 26.7%. The economic net
present value (NPV) of the project net benefit stream, discounted at 9.76%, was calculated to be USD118.0 million while benefit-
cost ratio is noted to be 1.34.
135.
The PDR identifies two major risks i.e. (i) security; and, (ii) financial management capacity. In addition climate-risks may also
have impact. These risks may cause underperformance with regards to achievement of full scale benefits, delay in realization of
benefits and reduced effectiveness.  Under various risk scenarios, the analysis reveals acceptable values of both NPV and EIRR,
and thus the proposed investment is feasible under these adverse scenarios with the project viability more sensitive to extended
time lag.
136.
The results of the financial and economic analysis suggest that the proposed project including the additional financing is
financially and economically viable, will result in the increased income and represent significant inceptive for the participating
beneficiaries thus recommended for investment. 
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
137.
The theory of change is based on the premise that a market-driven approach will best help smallholders to sustainably increase
their income and improve their livelihoods. Further, when this approach is mainstreamed into the delivery of technical and
vocational trainings, it generates employable workforce which readily meets unmet labour demand. The project creates and
exploits the symbiotic relations between the demand and supply forces and focuses on institutional/capacity development to
ensure safe exit and the sustainability of project outcomes as briefly described below:
19/30
The smallholders—organized into Professional Farms Organization (PFOs) as legal entities will generate demand for
inputs/services (including microfinancing)—based on clearly thought-out business plans, whereas the existing Farm Services
Centres—transformed into commercial entities, will become the suppliers these inputs/services. Registered PFOs will have
more bargaining power and a greater capacity for market penetration. Public-Private-Producer Partnerships (4Ps)—created
for agribusiness value chains development, will be linked with these PFOs and the FSCs, shall work collaboratively to enable
smallholders/PFOs to optimize yield and quality of their produce per acceptable standards. This will—in turn, give
smallholders a fair price for their effort.
Institutional capacity at KP TEVTA to conduct labour market assessment and design market-responsive courses shall be
enhanced. The project would train about 25,000 people for new jobs at new entities i.e. PFOs, 4Ps, and FSCs that would
continue requiring these people beyond the project’s life. All technical and vocational trainings shall be based on labour supply
gaps and where viable—complemented with start-up capital to enable trainees to have sustainable self-employment. Further,
trainees shall be linked with government’s low-cost microcredit programs i.e. Kamyab Jawan Program to facilitate further
business development/expansion as appropriate. Fresh graduates shall be facilitated to get internships with potential
employers under contracts which would require the latter to offer regular jobs upon the completion of the internships. Most
fresh graduates don’t get jobs because their degrees don’t prepare them for the job market. The internship opportunity would
address this gap. The government is committed to replicating this internships-led-sustainable-job-creation model once it shows
impact.   
All MOUs/contracts with partner organizations shall establish requirements of  market study, proper business planning—with
clear breakeven point and profitability of the institutions supported, rigorous oversight and reporting. In case of
technical/vocational trainings, the requirement of facilitating trainees in finding jobs shall be included in contractual
arrangements with the service providers. Most project interventions—by design are co-financed by beneficiaries (FPOs, 4Ps,
NFSs, internships for job placement etc.). As a result, all partner organizations will contribute to the sustainability of project
outcomes. 
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
138.
Inherent Risks: KP-RETP faces certain inherent risks that can be categorized as “Moderate”:
139.
Macro-Economic Stability:   Pakistan is going through a difficult macro-economic situation over the last year or so due to
adverse balance of trade and current account deficit leading to a bail-out package of US$ 7.2 billion from IMF. Existing
projections point to continuing economic challenges in the medium term. The Government has initiated various steps to control
government expenditure and widen the tax net for improved revenues. Relevant to the project are also the weak coordination
between federal and provincial institutions especially in the area of policy coherences and integrated development of regulatory
framework – notably related to Farmer Organizations policy. The collaboration of other donors and agencies, as well IFAD
Regional Grant Asian Pacific Farmer Organization will contribute to address this through its ongoing assistance to the federal
government for developing a revisited Professional Farmer Organization regulatory framework.
140.
Country Fiduciary Risk:  The country’s inherent fiduciary risk rating continues to be Substantial. Pakistan is the 124 least
corrupt nation out of 180 countries, according to the 2020 Corruption Perceptions Index reported by Transparency International.
Pakistan’s score against the World Bank’s Transparency, Accountability, and Corruption Index for the public sector has been 3
out of 6 since 2015. The World Bank’s Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) funded Project is currently being
implemented to help provinces address these challenges and in particular the performance gaps observed in the PFM system
141.
Security Situation in KP Province : KP has experienced security related challenges over the last few years that result in
restricted movement of international staff for supervision and implementation support. Nevertheless, the situation has
significantly improved thes last years and 28 out of the total of 35 districts in the KP province are not anymore concerned by
these travel restrictions. This risk on the remaining 7 districts are not permanent and the GoKP is now handling this situation
within shorter period. This remaining risk can however be addressed as there is sufficient qualified national expertise available to
supervise the project in any such eventuality.
142.
Operational Risks: The following table lists the operational risks and mitigation measures that can be adopted to address them:
20/30
143.
Fiduciary risk assessment. The country’s risk rating continues to be “Substantial” though with its CPI score of 31, Pakistan is
at the edge of slipping to “High” risk countries. Pakistan’s Corruption Perception Index (CPI) ranking is 124 out of 180 countries in
2020—dropping four spots compared to last year. This reflects that corruption has become more pervasive in all branches of the
government namely the executive, legislature, and judiciary.
144.
Pakistan’s Open Budget Index (OBI)—which gauges transparency in public sector governance, has also gone down substantially
from 44 in 2018 to 28 in 2019 on a scale of 0-100—reflecting very limited public access to information. Pakistan’s public
participation score at 4 out of 100 shows that citizens are not provided any meaningful opportunities to influence how the
government is mobilizing and using public money. Pakistan's parliamentary oversight of budget remains weak (score of 36 out of
100) though audit oversight by the Auditor General Office (score of 61 out of 100) is rated adequate.
145.
PEFA for KP (2017) highlighted issues such as weak linkages between policy and budgeting, inefficient use of development
funds, data integrity issues, unpredictability in availability of funds from the federal government, manual and IT based accounting
system running in parallel, weak internal audit, and delayed in submission of audit reports to the legislature. The World Bank is
trying to address these PFM bottlenecks at federal and provincial levels under a PFM Accountability for Service Delivery Program
(closing in November 2021). The program has made significant impact in terms of delegation of financial powers to Principal
Accounting Officer (PAOs), establishment of Chief Finance and Accounts officers (CFAOs) and Chief Internal Auditors (CIAs) at
federal ministries, introduction of Audit Management Information System (AMIS) at the office of the Auditor General of Pakistan,
E-Procurement at Pakistan Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA). In provinces also, the World Bank is offering
incentive grants for adoption of similar initiatives but the pace of uptake is rather slow. On the whole, the provincial PFM
environment has not changed to any significant degree since the last PEFA reporting of 2017.
146.
Lessons learnt from previous projects in the country include (1) ensuring adequate & timely recruitment for staff; (2) complete
draft of PIM draft, before the project start disbursing, that includes clear guidelines that adapt with the project design and
activities; (3) procure an accounting software that meets the project needs at start-up phase; (4) hire an internal auditor given the
geographical spread and decentralization of the projects in Pakistan; (5) early coordination with the Auditor General of Pakistan
for timely delivery of the audit reports and timely settlement of audit findings.  
147.
For KPRET, main project categories will include civil works, vehicles, equipment and material, technical assistance, training and
studies, grants to beneficiaries, salaries and allowances and operating cost for which they will be grouped into five categories in
the financing agreement. It is estimated that the investment costs will form 93% from total project cost whereas the recurrent cost
will form 7% from total project cost. Project will be using the reports based disbursement mechanism to withdraw funds through
submitting Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) using the revolving modality. Project to request an advance based on the projected
expenditures for the first six months of the first AWPB. Following advances to be withdrawn based on forecast of the following six
months or based on the next period in the AWPB after justifying 70% of previous advance and 100% of all prior advances.
Separate bank accounts will be open for each financing source under the project.
148.
The following table shows a summary of the Financial Management issues, risks and proposed mitigation actions:
Control Risks
Summery of Issues
21/30
FM
Inherent
Risk
Mitigation Actions
FM Residual
Risk
1.    Organization and
Staffing
-Hiring process is subject to
political interference. In
competent & delays in
recruitment.
-Market for private
enterprises that may want to
become part of 4P
arrangements is thin and
there is risk of qualified
partners not being
available/selected.
1-Core staff of the PMU—Project Director,
Finance Manager/FM Specialist, FM
Specialist, M&E Specialist should be
engaged within eight (8) weeks of the date
of signing of the Financing Agreement.
IFAD’s representative should take part in
the process of recruitment as an
observer.
Moderate
2-Well structured finance unit within the
PMU that includes competent and
qualified staff who are capable of carrying
out project financial management as per
the fund requirements.
Low
2.    Budgeting
i.  Funds flow and
Disbursement
Arrangements
Component 2 (Economic
Graduation and Employment)
is the largest component of
the project. It is envisaged to
be funded by the government
through ongoing projects.
TEVTA is the major partner
but it has very limited
development budget which
can be a constraint. Second,
it is not clear at this stage how
the ongoing schemes shall be
identified and leveraged to
achieve project outcomes.
Substantial
Delays in the opening of
account, ambiguities around
the counterpart funding can
result in implementation
difficulties for the project.
PFOs—which are
implementing partners under
component 1, need significant
handholding to be able to
manage FM function
properly.
Moderate
3-Competent management—especially
FM official should be hired in each PFO
as one of the access condition for IFAD
funds.
1-PMU should get the approval of AWPB
& Procurement Plan through the PSC (by
30 April each year).
2-AWPB/Procurement Plans should be
prepared in consultation with
implementing partners and and these IPs
should be supported by PMU/RPMUs to
ensure proper estimation of funding
requirements in the AWPB
3-Roles and responsibilities of line
departments with reference to such
contribution should be clearly stated in the
notification/MOUs.
1-Designated Accounts for the project will
be opened within eight (8) weeks of the
date of signing of the Financing
Agreement;
2- Access conditions for release of funds
to FOs/IPs shall be clearly established in
MOUs/contractual agreements’. These
conditions should be identified in the PIM
as well.
3-Counterpart Fund requirements shall be
clearly established. A formal
MOU/Notification needs to be made by
the provincial government
4-Checklists and timelines shall be
established for release of payments
against different types of claims and shall
be strictly adhered to.
Moderate
Low
ii. Internal Controls
iii.    Accounting and
Financial Reporting
22/30
Instances of non-compliance
with applicable internal
controls have been reported
by the Auditor General of
Pakistan in recent audit
reports and therefore specific
controls—established under
Accounting Policies and
Procedures Manual need to
be emphasized for
compliance.
In several cases, IFAD
projects not using appropriate
accounting software ran into
financial reporting difficulties.
The FM system also does not
act as an effective decision
support system for the
project. Project must procure
an accounting software the
fully comply with IFAD’s
accounting and financial
reporting requirements.
High
1-Financial management procedures as
part of the PIM need to be approved by
the PSC and shared with IFAD within
eight (8) weeks of the date of the signing
of Financing Agreement;
Substantial
2-No funds should be released to any
PFO unless it meets all access
conditions.
Moderate
3-Post-qualification due-diligence should
be carried out of all private partners.
1-An appropriate Accounting Software i.e.
TOMPRO needs to be procured, installed
and the finance team trained in its use.
Financial reports should be auto-
generated from the procured accounting
software.
2-PMU shall submit to IFAD; Quarterly
Interim Financial Reports within 45-day of
period end, annual unaudited financial
statements within 4-month of year end
and annual audited Financial Statements
within 6-month of year end.
1-PMU needs to engage with Director
General Audit (KP), through P&DD for
timely completion of audit.
Moderate
iv.    External Audit
Delays in submission of audit
reports, weak-follow up with
audit office resulting in
backlog of audit findings, non-
resolution of audit findings
causing the amounts involved
in those audit findings to
convert into ineligible
expenditure
Substantial
2-Audit observations should be settled
within six (6) months after the Audit
Report has been shared with the P&DD to
avoid backlog of unresolved audit
findings.
Moderate
3-Follow up meetings with the Auditors
should be requested to settle any
unsettled audit findings from previous
years.
Overall Rating
Substantial
Moderate
149.
Project FM inherent risk is rated Substantial due to (a) estimated delays in the opening of Designated Account; (b) delays in the
hiring of competent staff for PMU caused mostly by political interference in the process; (c) delays in the approval of AWP/B; (d)
lack of clarity about leveraging  provincial government’s ongoing development projects (77% of government financing) under the
KP RET Project; (e) risks associated with the use of a sub-optimal accounting software; (f) endemic internal control weakness
across the provincial government in general and donor funded projects in particular as highlighted in the Auditor General’s audit
reports; (g) weak M&E processes within P&D and absence of internal audit arrangements in P&DD; (h) implementation through
partner organizations especially PFOs/FSCs/Private Partners under 4Ps arrangements etc. is fraught with risk as they would
require significant handholding and continuous guidance and oversight to manage their responsibilities effectively; (i) delays in
submission of audit reports to IFAD and non-resolution of audit findings promptly leading to the risk of audit findings. Mitigation
actions proposed would lower the overall risk to an acceptable level.
I. Environment and Social category
150.
Adherence to IFAD policies and SECAP. The KP-RETP project is fully aligned with IFAD's Strategic Framework 2016-2025, in
pursuit of the mutually reinforcing strategic objectives, especially by way of promoting investment in productive capacities and
encouraging better and deeper market participation (and benefits) through the vehicle of 4Ps. The principles of engagement
(targeting; empowerment; gender equality; innovation, learning and scaling up; and partnerships) are, furthermore, fully
embedded in the project through the 4Ps and institutional strengthening approaches, as well as the operating modalities.   
151.
The project design also adheres to IFAD policies and strategies for mainstreaming youth and nutrition while keeping focus on
promoting gender equity and inclusiveness, improved natural resource management, enhancing capacities of smallholder
farmers and off-farm entrepreneurs for enhanced capacities for compliance to climate change and social safeguards, as well as
scaling up (see Appendices 5 SECAP and 11 Eligibility Criteria check list for mainstreaming themes).
152.
23/30
The potential negative environmental and social effects of the project are limited and site-specific, and therefore the
environmental and social category is classified as B.  The design of the project  focuses on the establishment  of
Professional Farmers Organisations (PFO); Public Private-Producer Partnerships (4P); strengthening of farm services centres
(FSC); and  capacity building and trainings in employable trades including agriculture for employment generation of youth women
and men. The project does not include activities of size or scale that would have significant negative social and environmental
impacts, rather most of the project investments aim to enhance the climate resilience of farmers and production and improve the
environment through sustainable use,  management and preservation of natural resources.  The project does not involve any
infrastructure and no economic and physical displacement of people is anticipated.  To reduce any risks and impacts associated
with changing climate conditions, the project will ensure that beneficiaries are made fully aware of potential environmental effects
and will strengthen the capacity of farmers to assess climate risks, plan and identify climate adaptation measures.  Any identified
investments as part a business plan of Professional Farmers Organisations, 4Ps and FSC under agribusiness development
component will be subject to environment and climate screening. These Business plans will also include costed adaptation and
mitigation measures to avoid or minimize any social and environmental impacts.
153.
The SECAP review note and Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) contain detailed information on risks
and mitigation measures in line with SECAP, which will apply to all activities in the project.
154.
The ESMF provides a guide for the integration of environmental and social considerations into the planning and implementation
of the project activities. It further provides a basis for environmental assessments of all sub-projects to be carried out under this
proposed financing. The ESMF will be used by the project  to ensure that all environmental and social safeguards are adequately
addressed and that where required, relevant capacity building and training needs are established for effective implementation of
the project.
155.
The ESMP  focuses on the nature and extent of environmental impacts that may result from the project activities. It will also serve
as a framework for screening environmental issues for the concerned project activities and will establish a unified process for
addressing environmental and social safeguards issues on sub-projects from preparation, through review and approval, to
implementation.
J. Climate Risk classification
156.
Pakistan potentially faces significant climate change challenges. The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province is assessed to be one of
Pakistan’s vulnerable provinces to the negative impacts of climate change. Climate change concerns include increased variability
of monsoons, impact of receding glaciers on the river systems, decreased capacity of existing water reservoirs, and extreme
events including floods and droughts. Potential climate change induced impacts include severe water stress; food insecurity due
to decreasing agricultural and livestock production; degradation of ecosystems and biodiversity loss. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be High.  
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
157.
The Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan, will be the overall coordinating agency at the federal level for IFAD
financing.
158.
A Project Steering Committee headed by the Additional Chief Secretary of P&D Department, will provide the policy level
guidance, oversight, and coordination. The PSC will grant approval of AWPB, conduct regular progress reviews, and take
corrective actions where warranted.
159.
The RETP-KP being a multi-sectoral project, the Planning and Development Department will be the execution agency. A
Project Management Unit and Divisional Implementation Units under the P&D Department will be established in Peshawar
and in the Divisional HQ of the project area, respectively. The PMU will report to the Project Steering Committee.
160.
The key implementing partners will be the Vocational and Management training institutes, Agro-business firms, Agro-business
organizations, and line departments (particularly Agriculture, Livestock and Cooperatives, Environment, Social Welfare, Election
and Local Government and Industries). In addition, the project will closely engage with the Farm Services Centres, Farmer
Organisations, and cooperatives. 
161.
The PMU, headed by a Project Director, will be responsible for planning, coordination, financial management, procurement, and
M&E of the project activities. Professional technical staff will be hired for the respective components of the project.
162.
A Finance Manager will be responsible for the management of project budgets and finances. Separate bank accounts will be
maintained for IFAD and Government funds as per the applicable regulations and guidelines. Annual audits of project accounts
will be carried out by the Auditor General of Pakistan within three months of the end of each financial year, and the audit report
will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the close of each financial year.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
24/30
163.
The FM inherent risk for existing project is rated “Substantial” based on the current financial management arrangements
executed by each PMU. This is also explained by (i) delays in staffing’ (ii) delays in AWPB submission to IFAD; (iii) weak internal
controls over use of funds; (iv) FM capacity gaps within partner organizations (PFOs, FSC, Service Providers, Private Partners
under 4Ps); (v) use of inefficient accounting software; and (vi) Delays in submission of audit reports to IFAD and weak follow up
with the audit office to minimize backlog of unresolved audit findings. The KP RET Project shall have robust financial
management arrangements to effectively manage project funds. Key aspects of project financial management arrangements are
briefly described below.
164.
Organizing and Staffing. PMU shall have adequately structured FM section headed by a qualified and experienced FM
Manager. The FM Manager shall have necessary support staff to manage workflow optimally both at PMU and RCOs levels.
Centralized FM arrangements are being proposed at PMU in line with applicable government instructions for donor-funded
projects  though a position of B&F Coordinator is provided for each RCO to facilitate the IPs in compliance with applicable
requirements to make payment process more efficient. The position of FM Manager shall be recruited subject to No Objection
from IFAD.  It shall be filled through a competitive process on terms and conditions acceptable to IFAD.  The TORs of FM
positions are provided in the PIM. An internal audit firm/Internal Audit Manager shall also be engaged to strengthen FM
arrangements as explained later. Detailed organizational chart is included in the PIM. The chart shows proposed structure of FM
Section for the project.
165.
Work Plans and Budgets. PMU shall prepare Annual Work Plan & Budgets (AWPBs) in line with the PDR and the Financing
Agreement. PMU shall engage with relevant line departments, Implementing Partners, and target beneficiaries to make the
process transparent and responsive to ground realities. PMU shall obtain IFAD’s No Objection to its AWPB by the end of April or
the financial year starting in July. The AWPB shall be reflected in the provincial government’s Annual Development Plan (ADP)—
showing separate allocations for the IFAD Loan and government’s counterpart contribution. PMU shall actively engage with
P&DD to ensure that sufficient counterpart funding for the project.   FM team shall prepare budget vs actual expenditure
statements for PD—highlighting deviations and suggesting remedial actions where required. Where required, PMU can modify
the AWPB in the light of such analysis subject to IFAD’s No Objection.
166.
Flow of Funds. In order to ensure proper monitoring of the funds transferred to implementing partners IPs (PFOs, Private
Partners under 4Ps and FSCs), an MOU should be signed between the implementing partner and PMU that includes clear
provision for the maintenance of dedicated account, accounting, financial and technical reporting, and recovery of advances. This
is important to ensure transparency and accountability in the flow of funds down to end beneficiaries.
167.
IPs should send financial reports that include SOEs, transaction lists and bank statement and reconciliations on monthly basis. In
case of advances, PMU should not send further advances to the IP/s if 90% of the previous advance and 100% of all prior
advances are justified. Where possible and applicable, payments to IPs should be based on actual expenditures on monthly or
quarterly basis instead of advances. Interim field visits should be conducted by the finance staff of the PMU to ensure that the
financial management arrangement applied by IPs do not jeopardize the use of fund. During these visits, a sample check of the
project expenditures supporting documents and bank statements should be conducted. These field visits should be documented
and filed at PMU, the reports should include work done during the visit, sample check, findings and agreed actions.
168.
Financial accounting. Project accounting shall be done based on acceptable international accounting standards such as IPSAS
Cash Basis. The accounting system shall permit allocation of expenditures in accordance with the respective components,
disbursement categories, and sources of funds. PMU shall (a) maintain full set of accounts subject to IFAD’s requirements; (b)
conduct monthly reconciliation of accounts with provincial Accountant General; (c) maintain updated Fixed Asset Register on
prescribed format and conduct periodic physical inspection of assets; and (d) be alert to, and take appropriate mitigation against
fraud risk in its work subject to IFAD’s Anti-corruption policy. An invoice register shall also be maintained to track payments
against invoices. Contractual agreements with implementing partners shall establish responsibility for proper accounting,
documentation, financial reporting, and anti-corruption actions in line with IFAD policies. 
169.
Accounting Software. PMU shall procure a properly designed accounting software to record, process and organize its financial
data and produce financial statements for IFAD and other stakeholders. The accounting system should reflect all sources and
uses of funds separately. Since TOMPRO is the only accounting software that fully meets IFAD’s requirements, PMU should
invoke the provision of Para 23 (d) of the KP PPRA Rules (Single Source Selection/Direct Contracting) to procure it. The
procurement of accounting software should be one of the pre-condition for the release of initial advance to PMU.
25/30
170.
Financial Reporting. The project will submit (a) detailed unaudited financial statements for each financial year within four (4)
months of the end of each financial year (by the end of October); audited Financial Statement within six month of the close of a
financial year (by 31 December); and (c) Interim Unaudited Financial Report (IUFR) each quarter indicating progress against
components/categories and issues that may require IFAD’s action. The interim reports will also include bank reconciliation duly
signed by the project and the bank. The financial statements shall be prepared based on the followed accounting standards as
per the prevalent accounting system and as per IFAD financial reporting and auditing requirements.
171.
All IPs (PFOs/FSCs, Service Providers, and Private Partners under 4Ps) shall be required to submit Quarterly Progress Report
(QPR) to PMU. Each IP shall also include with its QPR bank statement duly signed by the bank and the authorized official of the
IP concerned.  The QPR shall also highlight specific actions that need to be taken to keep project implementation on track. PMU
shall use these reports as the basis for its random/periodic inspections to verify physical and financial progress in fields. In cases
where advances have been made under contracts/MOUs, the statement of use of advances and status of recoveries shall also
be included in the QPRs.
172.
Internal Controls. The Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual (APPM) and General Financial Rules (GFR) stipulate a
robust internal control framework for government entities. Audit reports of the past three years, however, have flagged significant
gaps in internal control environment in foreign aided projects managed through the Assignment Accounts and SOEs.
Accordingly, PMU shall be required to implement following actions in project implementation:  
1.  Monthly bank reconciliation must be performed and record thereof maintained;
2.  Budgetary controls must be ensured for each transaction at the PMU. Further on monthly basis, budget v/s actual report must
be prepared by the FMS and shared with the PD and Project Steering Committee for continuous project oversight;
3.  Fixed Asset Register shall be maintained. These assets shall be tagged and physically verified periodically by the admin
section of the PMUs. Accuracy and completeness of the fixed assets register shall be verified independently periodically;
4.  FM team shall maintain complete documentation for each category of expenditure and it shall also conduct periodic/random
inspection of partner organizations’ project record to ensure that project activities/expenditure are properly documented and
factually reported. Specific documentation requirements/guidance for different partner organizations are provided in the PIM.
5.  Internal Auditor shall review project transactions, processes, procedures, and performance at least semi-annually to provide
assurance regarding the fiduciary controls, risk management and monitoring mechanisms in place;
173.
Internal Audit. Considering the size and nature of the project and absence of any internal auditing arrangements in P&D, the
project shall require a robust internal audit system for project activities. PMU shall engage a Chartered Accountant firm/Internal
Auditor for this purpose subject to No Objection from IFAD to the TORs for the hiring of an auditing firm. The auditing firm will be
required to submit quarterly reports to PMU. The draft TORs of the internal audit firm are included in the PIM.  
174.
External Audit. As per the Constitution of Pakistan, the Auditor General of Pakistan (AGP)—which is the Supreme Audit
Institution (SAI) of Pakistan, shall conduct audit of the project accounts.  PMU shall prepare—and submit to the AGP the Annual
Financial Statements (AFS) within two (2) months of the close of a financial year for this purpose. Report of each Audit—along
with the Management Letter shall be submitted to IFAD within six months of the close of financial year (by 31 December) to which
the audit relates. PMU must maintain continuous liaison with the Director General Audit (DGA), KP to ensure that (a) the audit of
project is included in the annual audit plan of the audit office; (b) audit is executed on time; (c) audit quality is acceptable to IFAD;
and (d) audit report is shared with IFAD within the stipulated timeline i.e. by 31 December for the preceding financial years.
Follow-up with the DGA, KP is also critical to ensure timely resolution of audit observations at Departmental Audit Committee
(DAC)—to minimize the backlog of audit observations during the life of the project and mitigate the risk of audit observations
converting into ineligible expenditure which would require to be refunded to IFAD.
175.
 The contractual agreements with the IPs will include a provision for external audit of activities funded with IFAD funds. The
service providers/private partners shall propose names of three reputable chartered accountant firms for this purpose out of
which PMU shall select one against already notified criteria. The audit shall be conducted within three months of the close of
financial year and audit report furnished to PMU within six months of closure of annual accounts. The maximum duration of
contract with an auditing firm for this purpose shall be three year.
176.
Before project start-up
177.
The provincial government needs to procure accounting software that is acceptable to IFAD, finalize first AWPB, and notify the
government’s share in project financing—along with its break-up (counterpart funds, amounts for development initiatives). The
government should notify a mechanism for proper leveraging of financing by the KP RET project through Annual Development
Program (ADP) as more than 77% of government financing (USD 31.3 million out of total USD 40.4 million) comes through the
ADP. Once the PC-1 is approved, the provincial government shall initiate the process of opening the Designated Accounts for the
projects—one for the IFAD’s Loan and the other for Counterpart Funds. IFAD shall organize a start-up training for the project staff
which shall also provide detailed guidance on how the project staff shall comply with IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy.
178.
Use of country system
System Domains
Comments
Organization
Budget
Treasury
Accounting
Reporting
Internal Audit
External Audit
PMU is being established in provincial Planning and Development Department (P&DD) which
is the lead government agency for provincial development. The core staff shall be recruited
from the market and government officials could also compete for these positions
26/30
The Project shall follow the instructions/timelines contained in the Budget Call Circular (BCC)
of the provincial government in preparing AWPBs. The budget—irrespective of the sources of
finances (IFAD Loan or Government Counterpart Fund) shall be reflected in the provincial
Annual Development Plan (ADP).
The GoKP is part of the centralized FM system. The office of Controller General of Accounts
(CGA)—which is part of Ministry of Finance, federal government, has prescribed procedures
for the Designated/Revolving Fund Accounts for foreign aided projects irrespective of
whether these are provincial or federal projects. The project shall open designated account
for the IFAD Loan according to these procedures. The IFAD Loan shall flow through the State
Bank Pakistan to the Designated Account of the Project in the National Bank of Pakistan,
Peshawar as per the established procedures.  Ministry of Economic Affairs Division, a federal
entity responsible for coordination foreign aid, shall carry out monthly reconciliation of the
project account with the State Bank of Pakistan. Additionally, the project shall carry out
monthly reconciliation of the project accounts with the provincial Accountant General, which is
a field accounting office of the CGA responsible for provincial accounting in KP.
The CGA has prescribed a Chart of Accounts (CoA). All federal/provincial governments—
including foreign-aided projects are required to follow this COA for accounting and financial
reporting. When a project receives funds through the SBP into its Designated Account at
NBP, the information on the receipt of funds is recorded and reflected in the country’s
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS). When the project issues checks and these
checks are cleared by the banking system, the information on payments is also recorded in
the same system. Reconciliation is carried out between EAD and SBP, and between the
project and NBP as narrated above—to ensure there is no abnormality in recording of receipt
of funds or payments.
The project shall use an accounting software to record all transactions—receipts and use of
funds. The project shall prepare financial reports as required using its own software and
submit to IFAD as per established requirements. The financial reports must be reconciled
with the data available in the IFMIS. All deviations are explained in the financial statements. 
Under the PFM Act 2019, an office of Chief Internal Audit is required to be established for
each federal ministry. In KP, the provincial government has established Internal Audit Wing
(IAW) in the provincial Finance Department and 13 Internal Audit Cells (IACs) have also been
created in different government departments that report to the IAW. However, P&DD does
not have an IAC. Further, the internal audit mostly focus on checking financial compliance
rather than a department’s progress toward its overall objectives. Accordingly, an Internal
Audit function is being proposed for the project to strengthen FM arrangements for the
project.
The Auditor General of Pakistan—which is the Supreme Audit Institution of Pakistan, has the
constitutional mandate for external audit of all federal, provincial and district governments. 
The SAI develops annual audit plans—comprising compliance, financial attest, performance,
and project audits. Project audits are conducted as per the timelines established in the legal
covenants. Usually, EAD communicates the timelines for external audits to the Auditor
General of Pakistan—which forwards this information to the relevant field audit offices (FAOs)
across the county. Projects—however, are expected to maintain sustained engagement with
the FAO concerned to ensure timely completion of audit and resolution of audit findings
promptly since these FAOs are too pre-occupied in their normal workflows and project audit
does not figure  high in their priorities.
179.
Procurement: Project procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Public Procurement
Regulatory Authority (KP-PPRA) Rules, to the extent of their consistency with IFAD's Project Handbook & Procurement
Guidelines and the Financing Agreement. An assessment of procurement functions under the KP-RETP PMU will have a
dedicated highly qualified procurement team consists of a Procurement Specialist (PS) and a Contract Management Officer
(CMO) reporting to the Project Director. The procurement team will be responsible for undertaking all procurement activities
within the defined thresholds and shall prepare procurement document for the processes. All procurement activities shall have to
be consistent with the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) provisions. IFAD’s prior review and No Objection to procurement
plan is compulsory under the Financing Agreement directly supervised by IFAD and by observing the following specific
principles:
27/30
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement (FA), the Letter to the Borrower (LTB), the
Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Any subsequent changes reflected during the IFAD‘s supervision, mid-term and support
implementation missions.
Procurement shall be conducted within the project implementation period (from the date of effectiveness to the date of
completion). Procurement cannot be undertaken between the date of completion and the closing date;
The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds as per Financing Agreement;
Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget (AWP&B) including a procurement plan;
and
The procurement principle of value for money must be sought: Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest initial price
option, but rather represents the best return on investments, taking into consideration the unique and specific circumstances of
each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract in
meeting its original objectives.
180.
IFAD Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) will be used for all procurement for goods, works and services financed from IFAD
funds or administered by IFAD and all contracts to include:
a provision requiring suppliers, contractors and consultants ensure compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and
Corruption in its Activities and Operations available at ifad.org/anticorruption_policy. The project shall ensure that this policy is
clearly stated in all procurement documents (solicitation documents and contracts) and that all vendors comply with this policy
to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission and contract
performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors.
The project and its partners will strictly adhere to the provisions of IFAD’s Policy to Preventing and Responding to Sexual
Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse available at ifad.org/anticorruption_policy. The Project shall ensure that this policy
is clearly stated in all procurement documents (solicitation documents and contracts) and that all vendors comply with this
policy; and 
The project and its partners shall also ensure commitment to combating money laundering and terrorism financing consistent
with IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy available at
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41942012.
The details of applicable post and prior review requirements and other risk mitigation measures would be established under
Procurement Working Paper of the Project Design Report.
181.
Governance. At the provincial level, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Anti-Corruption Establishment (ACE) Rules of 1999 provide
the legal framework for fraud and corruption. Any citizen can complain against any official to the ACE. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa the
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 2011 were promulgated under the authority vested in section 26 of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Civil Servants Act 1973 (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act No. XVIII of 1973). These rules govern internal
accountability arrangements.
182.
The KP Right to Information Act 2013 gives the citizen right to access information from the government departments and in cases
where a department does not respond, a case can filed with the Independent Right to Information Commission for remedial
action. The provincial government has also enacted KP Prevention of Conflict of Interest Act 2016 and the Whistleblower
Protection and Vigilance Commission Act 2016. These laws provide a comprehensive framework to mitigate risk of conflict of
interest, abuse of authority etc. However, people—especially the most vulnerable ones, are reluctant to use these laws and the
provincial government has not invested sufficiently in promoting the rights based advocacy since it brings the government under
a tighter scrutiny.  
183.
IFAD has zero tolerance towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and
grants and the provincial government is bound to take steps to prevent, mitigate, and combat such action during project
implementation. In addition to promoting general awareness of IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy among all parties that are involved
in project implementation, PMU shall ensure that  all contracts for procurement of goods, works, and services, include a provision
requiring suppliers, contractors and consultants to (i) ensure compliance with IFAD’s anticorruption policy and (ii) allow IFAD to
inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission and contract performance, and to have them
audited, if deemed necessary. Lastly, the project will promote good governance through the involvement of communities and
beneficiaries in (i) the preparation of the annual work plans and budgets; (ii) the procurement process (at community level); and
(iii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities. PMU may encourage confidential reporting of improprieties to the PD or
senior management in P&DD under the existing provincial laws referred to above. 
184.
The contracts/MOUs with third parties shall also include explicit compliance requirement with IFAD’s Policy to Preventing and
Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (www.ifad.org/anticorruption_policy), and IFAD’s Anti-Money
Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy (https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41942012). 
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
185.
AWPBs, based on the PDR and PC-I indicative activities, costs and phasing, will be the key planning documents of the project.
The AWPB will follow the government annual planning cycle (July-June). The PMU will prepare the AWPB in close collaboration
with the implementing partners and submit it to the PSC well in advance to ensure approval by 30 April and to IFAD for no
objection before 31 May every year.
186.
28/30
Monitoring and evaluation.  Using the project AWPB and Log Frame as the basis, the main purpose of the M&E system will be
to provide project management, the Government and IFAD with reliable and timely information on project execution performance
and results, and to ensure efficient and effective project implementation.  The M&E system will aim at monitoring: (i) project
execution which essentially means the regular tracking of activities and output targets as identified in the AWPB and project
logframe, (ii) outreach i.e. the number of people directly benefitting from project interventions disaggregated in terms of gender
and age; (iii) project results ; and, (iv) benchmark risks and assumption against those identified in the Log frame. BISP PSC data
will be used as a targeting tool in addition to income and dietary diversity.
187.
Monitoring of implementation progress. The project monitoring system will focus on: (i) assessing the rates of physical
execution of yearly planned activities/sub-activities against planned annual and end targets; (ii) verifying compliance by all actors
(PMU/RPMU staff, Implementing Partners i.e PFOs, FSCs, 4Ps, line departments etc.) with agreed calendar and deadlines; (iii)
assessing the rate of financial execution against the provisional planned budget; and, (iv) providing input to the quarterly and
annual reporting
188.
Standardized templates shall be developed for data collection and reporting and included in the contracts/MOUs with
implementing partners. While field monitoring is largely led by IPs, in order to verify, randomly, the data submitted by the various
IPs and monitor the quality of delivered outputs, the M&E team will conduct random/monthly field visits, alone or jointly with other
PMU staff or Project Implementers. Such field visits shall also provide an opportunity to interact with beneficiaries, assess their
satisfaction with services received or document stories from the field.
189.
The PSC and IFAD’s supervision missions shall also periodically assess project implementation—including the effectiveness of
M&E system in tracking and resolving implementing bottlenecks at IPs, PMU, and RPMUs levels.
190.
Results measurement.
1.  Baseline.  A baseline survey, covering the mandatory indicators (as per log frame), will be conducted in year-1 through a third
party service provider to document the initial status of target beneficiaries prior to commencement of the project interventions. 
This information will, at mid-term and completion, become the reference against which to measure changes, and therefore
appreciate project outcomes and impact, or lack thereof.
2.  Mid Term Review (MTR). A MTR combined with mid-line assessment will be conducted by P&DD and IFAD during the fourth
year of implementation to assess progress against the targets. Comparison with baseline data will allow the measurement of
changes in core indicators, and thus to infer on the project’s direction of travel toward the project outcomes. The MTR shall
identify implementation bottlenecks and suggest remedial actions—which may also include modification in the project design
as appropriate.
3.  Annual Outcome Surveys. PMU shall also start conducting annual outcome surveys through a third party after the MTR to
validate the results reported in internal M&E assessments.
4.  Completion Survey. The project will undertake a terminal assessment towards the end of the last of year of implementation to
gauge the outcomes realised, as well as to document emerging impacts covering all the core indicators contained in the
project log frame. This may also feed in to the project completion report.
5.  COI surveys will be carried out at baseline, mid-term  and completion, the budget for which has been allocated in the cost
tables.
191.
Learning and knowledge management.  Knowledge management and learning will be an integral element of project
implementation, particularly in view of the scaling up agenda by Government and the project policy influence objectives. A
knowledge management strategy will be prepared during the start-up phase of the project to clearly identify knowledge products,
events, uses and forums to collect, collate and share the knowledge generated through project interventions. The KM strategy
has four pillars i.e. (i) use the project intervention as action research; (ii) systematic assessment and analysis using experimental
designs which are statistically valid and robust; (iii) deriving inferences/conclusions have strong evidence base; (iv) devise
knowledge products; and, (v) disseminating knowledge products using various channels/media. The KM function will particularly
focus on success factors pertaining to integration of small farmers to market chains and diversification into high value products
and through investment in skills and entrepreneurship foster women's and youth’s economic empowerment, while at the same
time mainstreaming nutrition. Formal consultative sessions will be a regular feature for relevant government functionaries, and
other stakeholders—including beneficiaries’ groups to review progress, share lessons learned, improve processes, and make
project visible..
192.
A dedicated M&E, KM, and Communication Section with suitably qualified and experienced staff is part of the organizational
arrangements at the PMU and district offices.
b. Innovation and scaling up
193.
The project shall test the commercial viability of converting the existing Farms Services Centres (FSCs) into vehicles for
providing farmers through the PFOs knowledge, technological support, and microfinance. The model permits the FSCs to  charge
a reasonable fee for the services that they will deliver to farmers through the PFOs. This shall ensure that the FSCs shall become
self-sustainable providing services even after the close of the project.  Further, farmers shall be getting inputs—financed by the
PFOs, from the FSCs and they would pay back to the PFOs after harvesting. As a result, both farmers and the PFOs shall
develop credit history/bankability for accessing formal credit. The project leverages inherent synergies between the PFOs and
the FSCs to respond to the microfinancing needs of small farmers and to support the sustainability of both PFOs and FSCs
beyond project life. The piloting of the FSCs as a private business entity—if successful, can be replicated across the province and
contribute to significant increase in farmers’ incomes.
194.
The project seeks to morph KP TEVTA into an institution that actively works for job creation in the province. Currently, KP
TEVTA’s trainings are not sensitive to trends in the labour market. A Vocational and Entrepreneur Training Organization
(VOETO) shall be hired to work as partner of KP TEVTA to  reach out to the poorest in remote areas—especially women, girls
and other marginalized groups,  that would not otherwise attend any training under TEVTA umbrella because of social, cultural,
geographical, or economic barriers. The VOETO shall carefully select beneficiaries, deliver appropriate trainings, and provide
seed money to those participants who want to start business.  For this purpose, the project shall also facilitate the VOETO in
signing MOUS with the banks that are providing financing to youth/unemployed as per government policies. Under the South
Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (SPPAP), this model has delivered sustainable employment/self-employment for up to 70% of
the beneficiaries who completed trainings. Initially, the project will pilot test the effectiveness of the concept. However, if it proves
effective, KP TEVTA shall implement it widely from its own funds.
29/30
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
195.
The project involves diverse stakeholders some of which may not be exposed to the implementation modalities used in the
project. There, a participative approach is being embedded in the project design to generate ownership and support of key
stakeholders.  This includes (a) participatory development of AWPD; (b) continuous handholding/mentoring in how to manage
processes—with due regard for gender, climate change, nutrition and other cross-cutting themes; (c) joint monitoring of progress;
(d) emphasis on gender balancing in staffing at IPs to ensure outreach to vulnerable women who would not otherwise be willing
to benefit from the project intervention; (f) random field inspection/survey of beneficiaries by PMU/RPMUs to assess that their
inputs/concerns are being properly considered in project interventions and the voice of beneficiaries is being properly transmitted
through reporting to PMU/RPMUs.
196.
The M&E team shall maintain a log of field visits and document all key issues highlighted by the beneficiaries during such
missions. The issues shall be taken up with the IPs and resolved promptly. IFAD supervision mission shall examine the log to be
sure that beneficiaries’ perspective is being mainstreamed in project implementation. Under Component 2 (economic graduation
and employment (Component-2), contractual arrangements with the service provider shall require—among other things,
validation of candidates’ eligibility status through Community Organizations (COs) to ensure fairness in the process and minimize
risk of target beneficiaries not being selected on merit. This will also provide the project opportunity to capture community’s
feedback on implementation issues.
b. Grievance redress.
197.
As stated earlier, GoKP has elaborate arrangements for anti-corruption against fraud and corruption. Any citizen can complain
against any official to the ACE. The GoKP can initiate investigation against the official subject to the GoKP Government Servants
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 2011.  The provincial government has enacted the KP Right to Information Act 2013, the KP
Prevention of Conflict of Interest Act 2016, and KP Whistleblower Protection and Vigilance Commission Act 2016. These laws
empower the citizens to come forward and file cases when they suspect any impropriety in the use of authority or public funds.
The provincial government has also established an e-Complaints/Grievance Redress System to address common man’s
grievances, and simultaneously monitoring and reviewing. This interface between the citizens and the government promotes e-
transparency and e-accountability[1]. This is a good initiative but it is not extended to all provincial government departments.
198.
The project shall take necessary actions to ensure that citizens/beneficiaries—aggrieved by any action of any project party, can
conveniently approach the PD/P&DD to redress their grievance. While the contracts/MOUs with the IPs contain references to
IFAD’s policies on(a) Anti-Corruption Policy, (b) Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, and (c)  Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing, this may not be a sufficient deterrence against the risk of
non-compliance. Accordingly, the project’s communication policy shall promote a general mass awareness among citizens about
how to report to PMU/P&DD/IFAD when they find any impropriety in the use of official authority or project funds or violation of any
of the IFAD’s policies applicable to the situation. The project shall provide an interface to the citizens to file their complaints when
they find non-compliance with applicable requirements. A log of complaints shall be maintained to check how frequently such
complaints are being received and efficiency in the redress of such complaints.
199.
[1]e-Complaint / Grievance Redressal System (kp.gov.pk)
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
200.
Supervision Missions. IFAD shall field two supervision missions in the first year of implementation to assess technical and
financial progress of the project, identify and fix implementation bottlenecks, and build the capacity of P&DD, PMU, and other
Implementing partners as appropriate.  The frequency of such missions for future shall be ascertained based on project
performance in first year. The supervision mission may recommend follow-up implementation support missions for capacity
building in specific areas.  The PMU is required to be fully prepared to facilitate the missions and follow up on the
recommendations that come out of these missions.
201.
Mid Term Review (MTR).  IFAD and PMU shall jointly carry out Mid Term Review (MTR) no later than the midpoint of the project
implementation period. The MTR shall evaluate the level of achievement of development objectives and the project’s expected
impact on beneficiaries, dating from project start-up; identify constraints and issues related to all aspects of project
implementation (technical, institutional, organizational, financial and administrative); and recommend remedial action or
reorientation of the project as necessary. MTR recommendations may result in amendments to the FA or cancellation of all or
part of the financing.
30/30
202.
Project Completion Review and Reporting.  The project shall be required to submit a report on the overall implementation of
the project in such form and substance as may be specified in the Financing Agreement. At a minimum, such report shall focus
on: (i) the costs and benefits of the Project; (ii) the achievement of its objectives; (iii) the performance by the government, IFAD,
and other implementing partners; and (iv) lessons learned during implementation.   
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Logical Framework
1/5
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
262500
588750
87500
196250
175000
392000
350000
785000
surveys, service providers'
records, MIS system, COI
survey
PMU
baseline, mid
term and
completion,
yearly
A baseline survey is
conducted; Project
approach and
timelines are
adhered to; An
efficient M&E
system is
developed and
implemented
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
87500
196250
Non-women-headed
households
Households
262500
588750
350000
785000
surveys, service providers'
records, MIS system, COI
survey
PMU
baseline, mid
term and
completion,
yearly
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Household members
1440000 4350000
surveys, service providers'
records, MIS system, COI
survey
Project Goal 
To contribute to poverty reduction, nutrition and food security
of rural households in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province
Beneficiary households reporting improved income from sales
through PFOs
survey
Households
262500
588750
baseline, mid
term and
completion,
yearly
baseline and
completion
PMU
PMU
Security situation
remains stable and
allows
implementation of
project
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
Income of rural households sustainably improved through
climate-resilient, high-value agriculture and off-farm/non-farm
employment opportunities
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
COI survey
Household members
1740000 3480000
Women-headed households
78500
157000
Households (%)
40
80
Households (number)
314000
628000
baseline and
completion
PMU
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making
of local authorities and project-supported service providers
COI survey
baseline and
completion
PMU
A baseline survey is
conducted; Project
approach and
timelines are
adhered to; an
efficient M&E
system is
developed and
implemented
Household members
1650000 3850000
Women-headed households
15000
30000
Households (%)
38
89
Households (number)
300000
700000
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
COI survey, assessements baseline, mid-
PMU
term and
completion
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
20
60
10000
220000
10
28
10000
220000
800000 1760000
Women-headed households
2500
55000
Non-women-headed
households
Outcome 
1. Enhanced capacity of smallholder farmers for increased
market access (Professional Farmer Organizations and Farm
Service Centres)
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in profit
Number of enterprises
200
550
outcome survey, MIS
system, service providers'
records, COI survey
baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PMU
Baseline
established, farmers
are willing to
participate in PFO
and FSC
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
1.1 Support provided to Professional Farmers Organizations,
Farm Service Centres and 4Ps and their members
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
Total size of POs
112000
220000
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Output 
1.2 Coaching of producers for increased capacity on business
planning, production practices and market advice
Rural POs supported
Males
Females
Young
280
550
84000
165000
28000
55000
56000
110000
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Total number of persons
trained by the project
Total number of attendances to
training sessions
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
110000
320000
82500
240000
27500
80000
Young people trained in crop
50000
160000
Total persons trained in crop
110000
320000
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
farmers are
interested to
participate, updated
BISP data on
poverty available
and targeting
guidelines
developed
Updated BISP data
on poverty available
and targeting
guidelines
developed, nothing
is hindering the
participation of any
of the categories of
persons
Total size of groups
Groups supported
Males
Females
Young
Output 
1.3 Producer-Public-Private-Partnerships (4Ps) established
Producers engaged in 4P collaborations
Males
Females
55000
160000
200
400
40000
120000
14000
40000
25000
80000
3500
14000
1500
6000
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Availability of
farmers willing and
interested in
entering into 4Ps
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
total producers
Young
partnerships
5000
20000
2500
20000
5
20
Output 
1.4 Households provided with nutrition education
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve
their nutrition
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Total persons participating
300000
700000
Males
Females
Households
85000
175000
215000
525000
300000
700000
Household members benefitted
1650000 3850000
Young
150000
300000
Outcome 
2. Improved capacity for obtaining jobs and engage in
entrepreneurship
Output 
2.1 Vocational, technical and entrepreneurial skills trainings
provided
2.2.1 New jobs created
Job owner - men
New jobs
Job owner - women
Job owner - young
30000
63000
40000
85000
10000
22000
20000
45000
outcome surveys, MIS
system, service providers'
records, COI survey
baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PMU
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business
management
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Males
Females
Young
6000
12000
9000
18000
15000
30000
Nothing (security /
customary laws) is
hindering the
participation of
anyone (especially
women) to attend
the trainings.
Trainings are
scheduled in a time
and location
suitable for all
beneficiaries.
Persons trained do
apply what
communicated in
the trainings. Value
chains are nutrition
sensitive
Updated BISP data
on poverty available
and targeting
guidelines available
all categories are
interested and
nothing is hindering
their participation in
the trainings
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
2.2 Provision of start-up capital for establishing business and
self-employment
Output 
2.3 Support to individuals entering the job market for the first
employment
5/5
Name
Persons trained in IGAs or BM
(total)
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
30000
60000
Start up provided for self employment
Males
Females
Young
total number of persons
persons receiving support
Males
Females
young
total persons
4000
8400
6000
12600
10000
21000
20000
42000
7000
17500
3000
7500
10000
25000
10000
25000
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
MIS system, service
providers' records
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Outcome 
3. Capacity for policy dialogue/reform strengthened (Farmer
Services Centre Act, cooperatives act, seed act amended)
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or
amendment
policy documents, COI
survey
baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PMU
Output 
3.1 Policy development and reform supported
Number
2
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
2
Policy 2 Functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported
Number
0
5
5
1
MIS system
MIS system
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
baseline, yearly
and completion
PMU
Careful assessment
of each households
potential and
endowments
Careful assessment
of each households
potential and
endowments
Willingness of policy
makers and other
key stakeholders to
provide enabling
environment
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
CHALLENGES 
ACTIVITIES 
OUTPUTS 
OUTCOMES 
IMPACTS 
Rural poor lack capacities 
to access market and job 
opportunities 
Smallholders are not 
organized to achieve 
efficiency and meeting 
buyers’ requirements 
Low production volumes, 
low productivity and low 
returns 
Weak access to 
technologies and inputs 
Lack of remunerative skills 
among youth and women 
Risks and uncertainties 
discourage investments 
Lack access to 
finance/capital for FOs and 
start ups 
Weak regulatory 
frameworks – FOs/ food 
safety and nutrtion 
Rural Poverty, Food 
Insecurity and Malnutrition 
n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
P
s
s
e
n
s
u
b
i
r
g
A
i
g
n
d
i
l
i
u
B
y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C
/
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
E
r
o
f
l
t
r
o
p
p
u
S
y
c
i
l
o
P
l
a
n
o
i
t
u
t
i
t
s
n
I
d
n
a
s
b
o
J
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
S
Organizing Professional 
Farmer Organizations 
(PFOs) and leveraging 
investments in Nutrition 
Sensitive value Chains  
Capacity building in 
climate smart technologies 
and practices 
Market access through 
4Ps (Producer-Private-
Public-Promoter) Model 
Vocational and 
entrepreneurship skills 
increased employability of 
women/youth  
Start-up capital (self-
employment) and job 
market integration 
Access to economic 
services and ICT4D 
Policy and KM products on 
FOs/networking for policy 
reforms 
Improved access to 
economic services for 
compliance and business 
development 
PFOs/ small holder 
farmers integrated into 
supply chains of 
nutritious food products 
and accessing end 
markets 
s
r
e
m
r
a
f
r
e
d
o
h
l
l
l
a
t
s
y
b
l
s
e
a
s
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I
Skilled women and youth 
resulting in increased 
employability and self-
employment 
Project supported HHs 
have received economic 
services & have 
enhanced awareness 
about dietary diversity  
Improved environment 
facilitates increased 
investments 
h
t
u
o
y
f
o
s
b
o
j
/
t
l
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I
Increased HH 
Incomes 
contribute to 
food security & 
dietary diversity 
Reduced poverty 
Increased Food 
Security 
Improved nutrition  
ASSUMPTIONS 
Security situation remains unchanged; 
PSC data available for robust targeting 
Market and other external shocks remain 
unchanged and manageable 
Conducive enabling environment for FOs 
and 4Ps are facilitated through reforms 
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Cost tables KP-REAP: 
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN  
KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA – RURAL EMPLOYMENT AND AGRIBUSINESS 
PROMOTION (REAP) 
PROJECT DESIGN REPORT 
ANNEX – 4:  FINANCIAL AND EOCNOMIC ANALYSIS 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................. I 
I. 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 1 
II.  THE PROJECT BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES ............................................................ 2 
A.  PROJECT BENEFICIARIES ...................................................................................................... 2 
B.  PROJECT BENEFITS .............................................................................................................. 4 
III.  FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ..................................................................................................... 4 
A.  THE FINANCIAL BENEFITS ..................................................................................................... 4 
B.  THE FINANCIAL COST ............................................................................................................ 5 
C.  KEY ASSUMPTIONS FOR FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ........................................................................ 5 
D.  FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................ 5 
IV.  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ..................................................................................................... 7 
A.  METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH ............................................................................................ 7 
B.  THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS ..................................................................................................... 7 
C.  THE ECONOMIC COST ............................................................................................................ 7 
D.  KEY ASSUMPTIONS FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ....................................................................... 7 
E.  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................ 7 
V.  SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS .................................................................................................... 9 
CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................... 9 
i 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
II. 
1. 
The  Khyber  Palkhtunkhwa  -  Rural  Employment  and  Agribusiness  Promotion  (KP-
REAP) will be executed in entire province over a period of seven years. The overall goal of 
the project is to contribute to poverty reduction, food and nutrition security and strengthened 
resilience of rural households. The development objective is improved rural income through 
agribusiness and employment promotion in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. 
2. 
The  intervention  logic  and  theory  of  change  is  based  on  two  mutually  reinforcing 
pathways. The agribusiness development pathway will reorient the traditional agriculture to a 
market-driven industry which integrates smallholder farmers into commercially viable supply 
chains. The project assistance will facilitated operationalization of; (i) professional, profitable 
and sustainable farmers organizations responding to the market  demand; (ii) 4Ps business 
model integrating small farmers into commercial supply chains; and, (iii) strengthening service 
delivery  that  improve  market  access  (mainly  inputs  and  technology).  The  aggregation  of 
farmers  will  initiate  policy  advocacy  for  creating  a  favourable policy  and  regulatory  environment. 
The  skills  for  employment  and  entrepreneurship  pathway  –  poorer  households  (PSC  0-34),  and 
especially  women and  youth  who  do  not  have  access  to  land,  will  be  economically  integrated  in job 
market  and  rural  economic  activities  through  skills,  start  up  capital  and  job  placement  support.  This 
combination allow them to; (i) access a decent and remunerative employment; (ii) to develop, alone or 
in association, own business; or, (iii) integrate into job market through an apprenticeship programme. 
The youth / women trained will be able to get jobs and income opportunities created through Component 
1.  Nutrition  and  food  security  pathway.  The  project's  investments  will  be  nutrition-sensitive. 
Commodities/crops  and  its  related  products  that  have  high  nutritional  value  will  be  prioritized. 
Smallholder  farmers,  skilled  persons  and  entrepreneurs  assisted  under  the  KP-REAP  will  facilitate 
recognizing the nutrition issue and will include awareness and activities directly linked to nutrition for 
the benefit of the entire HHs and in particular for the children and youth. 
3. 
The KP-REAP will sustainably increase income of small farmers, landless and women, 
which  in  turn  will  improve  their  livelihood  and  dietary  diversity/nutrition.  Recognizing  that 
improved productivity and incomes do not automatically lead to better nutrition outcomes, the 
project  will  pursue  behaviour  change,  awareness/education  campaigns  primarily  through 
farmer’s organisations and revision/extension in training curricula. 
4. 
KP-REAP  will  be  implemented  in  all  35  districts  of  KP  province  and  will  target:  (i) 
smallholder farmers actively engaged in agriculture; (ii) households falling in 0-34 PSC; (iii) 
households experiencing food insecurity and malnourishment; and (iv) rural women and youth.  
5. 
The Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) takes into account benefits from the two 
project components; (i) agribusiness development; and, (ii) employment and jobs promotion.  
The incremental financial returns for all the sub-components have been worked out keeping 
in view the initial situation vis-a-vis projected benefits resulting from the project interventions. 
The financial modelling covers a period of 20 years. The economic analysis takes into account 
investments  and  recurrent  costs  of  the  proposed  project  against  the  incremental  economic 
benefits over a period of 20 years. The economic values of cost and corresponding benefits 
of the project have been used in the economic analysis. 
6. 
The analysis takes into account increased households’ income resulting from project 
interventions. Increased income will in turn result in more disposable income thus contributing 
to  improved  food  security  and  dietary  diversity  among  targeted  households.  The  data 
regarding derivation of benefits for the analysis was mainly taken from the secondary sources 
1 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
updated  with  current  prices  and  productivity  levels.  Standard  conversion  factor  (SCF)1,  for 
outputs and inputs have been worked out using data between 2015 and 2019. 
7. 
The  target  group  of  KP-REAP  is  characterised  by  features  such  as  small  land 
holding/subsistence  or  semi-commercial  farming,  landless/unskilled  wage  workers  and 
unemployed youth. The project subcomponent will facilitate in the economic transformation of 
these households. 
III.  THE PROJECT BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
8. 
The  project  interventions  strategy targets  small farmers,  landless  youth and  women 
offering  an  integrated  package  of  intervention,  which  shall  catalyze  investment  and  job 
creation. The interventions will directly increase income potential of the small farmers and poor 
households creating multiple pathways out of poverty. The component 2 supports employment 
and will facilitate entrepreneurship through provision of skills and start up capital. 
A. 
Project Beneficiaries 
9. 
The KP-REAP target groups will fall under the category smallholders (as per the definition of 
the  Government  <12.5  acres  or  5  ha)  and  landless  households  (HH).  Among  these,  the  KP-REAP 
targeting will prioritise HH with PSC 0 – 34 range. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with 
specific interventions aiming at economic empowerment. The target groups (small farmers, youth and 
gender target groups) will be pre-identified through the implementing partners. Youth and nutrition will 
be  mainstreamed  with  a  focus  on  women  as  secondary  targeting  criteria.  The  target  groups  (small 
farmers,  youth,  and  women)  will  be  pre-identified.  Local  organizations  and  in  particular  the  village 
councils / community organizations, combined with the decentralized PMU team will check and  
10. 
Summary of the target beneficiaries of is given in Table 1. 
1 The calculation of the Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) and conversion factors for output and inputs are given 
in Annex I, II and III. 
2 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Table 1: Household Beneficiaries of the KP-REAP 
Components
Agribusiness Development
Professional Farmer Organisations
Adjusted (adoption rate)
4Ps
Adjusted (adoption rate)
Farm Services Centers
Adjusted (adoption rate)
Employment and Jobs Promotion
 Beneficiaries Per 
Intervention 
                        400 
                     2 000 
                   20 000 
100
70
4
3
7
5
1
Trainng for Job Market
Adjusted (adoption rate)
Self-Employment
Adjusted (adoption rate)
Job Placement
Adjusted (adoption rate)
Total Persons Benefited /b
Total Households Beneftited
/b An estimated 50%  of the beneficiary will be from common households.
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
1 000
800
1
1
Year-1
Year-2
Year-3
Year-4
Year-5
Year-6
Year-7
Total 
Targets
Total 
Beneficiaries
Affective 
Beeneficairies
Adoption 
Rate
150
105
4
3
7
5
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
6 000
4 800
100
70
4
3
7
5
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
6 000
4 800
100
70
4
3
7
5
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
6 000
4 800
100
70
4
3
7
5
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
6 000
4 800
-
-
3 000
1 800
7 000
4 900
550
20
35
18 000
42 000
25 000
220 000
-
40 000
700 000
18 000
-
42 000
-
25 000
1 045 000
522 500
154 000
70%
28 000
70%
455 000
65%
10 800
60%
29 400
70%
20 000
697 200
348 600
80%
69%
3 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
B. 
Project Benefits 
11. 
The income models have been worked out at the household and individual beneficiary 
level. In the case of the farming, cropping pattern (2 crops) model from a range of crops is the 
most  prevalent  farming  system  in  the  province.  Livestock  is  an  integral  part  of  the  farming 
system  –  with  90%  farm  household  owing  livestock.  The  project  benefits  are  summarised 
below; 
The agribusiness development component will increase income of  small farmers 
12. 
and shall create value through a model at the aggregate level and farmer level.  
13. 
Professional  Farmer  Organisations  (PFOs).  The  benefit  model  is  at  the  farming 
system  level  consolidated  at  the  farmer  organisation  level.  For  the  “subsistence  and 
vegetable”  farmers:  an  improvement  logic,  where  the  combined  profitability  of  an  existing 
production of wheat (as first crop) and vegetable (as second crop) is improved mainly through 
improved access to input and improved practices. The business development model will also 
include a replacement scheme, where, in addition to the improved profitability, the traditional 
cropping pattern is diversified to include high value crops (fruit, vegetables, floriculture etc.). 
In the model (which will vasry widely from region to region) the share of crops will change and 
consequently, the share of high value crops will increase.  
14. 
Public-Private-Producers  Partnership  (4Ps).  The  business  model  will  integrate 
small farmers in its supply chains. The project investment will be in the business model which 
increase capacity of small farmer to comply produce requirements. The participating farmers 
will realise increased production and increased price while transaction costs will be reduced. 
15. 
Small farmers participating in PFOs and 4Ps will have access to improved inputs and 
services  through  farm  services  centers  which  will  contribute  to  reduced  cost  of  inputs  and 
increased productivity. 
Employment  and 
16. 
fosters  skills 
development for job market readiness, facilitating first job entry/induction and start up capital 
for entrepreneurship. 
jobs  component.  This  project  component 
17. 
Vocational and entrepreneurship skills training. The skills will enable increase in 
remuneration and increased work opportunity while skills and start up capital will facilitate self-
employment. Generally the wage rates differ between skilled and semi-skilled workers is 30-
40% higher. The first job placement will enable youth to start a career. 
IV.  FINANCIAL ANALYSISIn view of the diversity and to estimate the benefit from all different 
interventions,  the  incremental  financial  benefits  of  each  component  were  worked  out 
separately and aggregated at the project level. The phasing of the benefits and distribution 
of  different  categories  of  the  beneficiaries  is  given  in  Table  1.  In  order  to  calculate  the 
incremental benefits, the “Without Project (WOP)” scenario (which is income stream during 
the  base  year)  is  compared  with  the  “With  Project  (WP)”  scenario  (the  income streams 
during the project year-1 and afterwards).  
A.  The Financial Benefits 
19. 
Current  market  prices  are  used  in  the  business  models  for  financial  analysis.  The 
income  after  the  project  intervention  of  small  farmers  is  estimated  to  be  Rs.  379  000 
(US$2500) on an annual basis, around 3-15% higher over the baseline. It has been estimated 
that  4Ps  will  enable  increase  to  Rs.  124,000  (US$818)  per  small  farmer  18-24%  up  from 
baseline. Additional income from farm services centers is estimated is Rs. 8 000 (US$50) per 
annum. Investment in vocational and entrepreneurship training help the beneficiaries enhance 
income and wage return. Annual increase is estimated at Rs. 237 000 (US$1 550) per year. 
4 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
B. 
The Financial Cost 
20. 
The project cost is estimated at USD185.82 million (PKR. 29 billion) with IFAD loan 
financing of USD100.1 million (54%, USD40.44 million (22%) leveraged by Government of KP 
and  USD45.27  million  (24%)  contributed  by  private  sector/beneficiaries.  The  project 
investment  is  organized  in  the  three  project  components,  i.e.  (i)  agribusiness  development 
(USD104.5  million);  (ii)  capacity  building  for  employment/jobs  (USD66.2  million)  and  (iii) 
project  management  and  policy  support  (USD15.1  million).  Financing  for  youth  represent 
USD92.9  million  (50%  of  total  project  cost)  while  investment  in  women  is  estimated  at 
USD46.5 million (25%).  
C. 
21. 
Key Assumptions for Financial Analysis 
Following are the key assumptions used in the financial analysis of the Project; 
22. 
Financial Income: The financial income are based on the average budgets prepared 
taking into account the market prices and the current productivity/revenue levels. The income 
for the trained human resources is worked out on the model of a self-employed skilled worker 
and an employed skilled person. In the context of the without project, situation the current daily 
wage for an unskilled person is taken as the average rate prevailing in the project area. 
  Effective Rates: The average effective rate vary among different activities as given below: 
Components 
PFOs 
4Ps 
FSC 
Skills-
Employment 
Self-
Employment 
Job 
Placement 
Success 
Rates 
70% 
70% 
65% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
  Opportunity Cost of Capital: The opportunity cost of capital used in the financial analysis 
is 11.17%2. 
D. 
Financial Analysis 
23.  The KP-KP-REAP investment is viable as evident from its overall Financial Internal Rate 
of  Return  (FIRR)  of  22.3%.  The  Net  Present  Value  (NPV)  of  the  proposed  project  over  20 
years’ period is noted to be USD119.2 million. The discounted benefit cost (B:C) ratio is noted 
to be 1.56. 
NPV  higher  than  zero  means  that  the  investment  is  viable.  The  FIRR  and  the  NPV 
24. 
based on financial prices of the project is given in Table 2.
2 Interest Rate in Pakistan averaged 11.55 percent from 2015 until 2019 (Source: www.tradingeconomies.com/ 
State Bank of Pakistan 
5 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Table 2: Financial Analysis of the KP-REAP 
Project Years
Agribusiness Development
Employment and Jobs Promotion
Total Project Benefit (in million USD)
Skills for Job
Skills for Self-Employment
Job Placement
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
PY1
PY2
PY3
PY4
PY5
PY6
PY7
PY8
PY9
PY10
PY11
PY12
PY13
PY14
PY15
PY16
PY17
PY18
PY19
PY20
PFOs
(11.06)
(14.35)
(7.27)
(5.02)
(0.28)
17.46
17.13
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
18.10
4Ps
(2.2)
(2.2)
(2.1)
(1.5)
(0.2)
4.2
4.0
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
FSC
(13.3)
(11.1)
(8.9)
4.6
6.4
8.3
7.8
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
8.3
(1.1)
(0.8)
(0.6)
(0.4)
(0.2)
(0.4)
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
(5.2)
(3.1)
(1.7)
(0.3)
1.2
0.8
8.4
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
9.1
 NPV (USD) 
 FIRR (@11.17% ) 
44.84
24.02%
11.07
26.08%
14.02
17.25%
1.67
17.13%
25.68
29.55%
(1.5)
(8.0)
(7.8)
(7.3)
(6.0)
4.3
5.6
6.7
8.2
9.8
11.4
13.1
14.4
15.2
15.7
15.7
15.7
15.7
15.7
15.7
21.89
20.08%
(34.30)
(39.57)
(28.30)
(9.95)
0.89
34.54
44.11
47.64
49.14
50.72
52.37
54.03
55.30
56.18
56.62
56.62
56.62
56.62
56.62
56.62
119.2
22.3%
6 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
A.  Methodology and Approach 
V.  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
25. 
The economic analysis of the proposed project was worked out taking into account the 
economic  cost  of  the  proposed  project  and  the  resultant  economic  benefits  to  the  target 
beneficiary households. The economic cost were worked out by converting the financial value 
using the standard conversion factor whereas economic value of benefits have been worked 
out using conversion factors of outputs and inputs. The standard conversion factor used in the 
economic analysis was derived to be 0.874 while the conversion factors for output and inputs 
were noted to be 1.10 and 0.95 respectively. 
26. 
The  economic  analyses  takes  into  account  the  total  economic  investment  and 
economic recurrent  cost of the project during the project period i.e. incurred between 2022 
and 2042. Price contingencies and taxes are excluded from the economic analysis. For the 
capital items, no residual values have been considered in the economic analysis. 
B.  The Economic Benefits 
27. 
The economic benefits are the same categories as that of the financial benefit but at 
an economic rates. The aggregation is carried out for all the project components taking into 
account the incremental economic benefits of the six major interventions. The recurring cost 
in the post project period is assumed to be 70% of the average of the economic cost of project 
management. The recurring  costs  are  assumed to  be  primarily  on  account  of  public  sector 
assistance, farmer organisations, households’ financial liabilities on account of operation and 
maintenance  under  self-employment  and  agribusiness  enterprises.  These  are  essential  for 
the continuation of the benefits. It is further assumed that the benefits stream will be at 75% 
of the potential benefits estimated owing mainly to reduced efficiency. 
C.  The Economic Cost 
28. 
The total economic cost of the project is estimated at USD149.63 million. 
D.  Key Assumptions for Economic Analysis 
29. 
Following are the key assumption used in the economic analysis. 
Economic  benefits:  The  economic  value  have  been  worked  out  by  converting  the 
30. 
financial value using a conversion factors for all the interventions. 
  Economic discount rate: The shadow discount rate used for the economic analysis is 
9.76%. 
E.  Economic Analysis 
31. 
The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated at 26.7%. 
The economic net present value (NPV) of the project net benefit stream, discounted at 9.76%, 
was calculated to be USD118.0 million while benefit-cost ratio is noted to be 1.34.
7 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Table 3: Economic Analysis of the KP-REAP 
Project 
Years
PY1
PY2
PY3
PY4
PY5
PY6
PY7
PY8
PY9
PY10
PY11
PY12
PY13
PY14
PY15
PY16
PY17
PY18
PY19
PY20
NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS
TOTAL 
PFOs
4Ps
FFS
Skills - 
Skills - Self-
Job 
Employ emnt
Emp
Placement
INCREMENTAL 
BENEFITS
Economic 
Investment Cost
NET INCREMENTAL COSTS
Economic recurrent 
Costs  (million 
USD)
Total 
Incremental 
Costs
Cash Flow 
(million USD)
-
-
1.41
-        
0.16
6.18
11.19
18.06
26.85
26.85
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
13.16
0.09
0.91
2.35
4.49
4.49
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20
-
1.65
3.22
4.94
6.84
8.92
8.92
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
4.37
-
0.19
0.39
0.58
0.78
0.97
1.16
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
-
1.73
3.46
5.18
6.91
8.64
10.37
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
5.08
-
0.03
0.27
1.02
2.07
3.44
5.00
3.11
3.81
4.55
5.28
5.85
6.23
6.43
6.43
6.43
6.43
6.43
6.43
6.43
-
4.84
13.60
23.81
37.00
53.31
56.79
28.49
29.19
29.92
30.66
31.22
31.61
31.81
31.81
31.81
31.81
31.81
31.81
31.81
24.82
33.93
29.03
20.10
20.09
4.29
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.459
1.459
1.434
1.434
1.429
0.997
0.403
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
26.279
35.388
30.464
21.532
21.523
5.289
0.403
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
0.862
26.3
30.5
16.9
2.3
15.5
48.0
56.4
27.6
28.3
29.1
29.8
30.4
30.7
30.9
30.9
30.9
30.9
30.9
30.9
30.9
NPV @9.76%
EIRR @9.76%
USD 118.0
26.7%
8 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
VI.  SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
32. 
The PDR identifies two major risks i.e. (i) security; and, (ii) financial management capacity. 
In addition climate-risks may also have impact. These risks may cause underperformance with 
regards  to  achievement  of  full  scale  benefits,  delay  in  realization  of  benefits  and  reduced 
effectiveness.  Under various risk scenarios, the analysis reveals acceptable values of both NPV 
and EIRR, and thus the proposed investment is feasible under these adverse scenarios with the 
project viability more sensitive to extended time lag. 
Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis of the KP-REAP 
Scenarios 
Normal Scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Time lag in benefits (Year) 
Time lag in benefits (Year) 
Success Rates 
Success Rates 
∆% 
Normal 
-10% 
-20% 
10% 
20% 
1 
2 
-10% 
-20% 
Link with the risk matrix 
No Adverse Risks 
Poor Security Situation affecting 
project benefits adversely 
Weak financial capacity result in cost 
overrun and delayed implementation 
Climate risk affecting success rate of 
the agriculture related activities 
IRR 
26.7% 
23.6% 
20.5% 
23.9% 
21.5% 
16.1% 
21.1% 
23.6% 
22.8% 
NPV (USD M) 
                118.0  
                  95.1  
                  72.1  
                106.9  
                  95.7  
                  49.9  
                  93.1  
                  95.1  
                  93.7  
33.  Switching values are given in the following table; 
Discount Rates 
10.00% 
14.00% 
18.00% 
20.00% 
22.00% 
26.67% 
Cost 
110.43  
99.35  
90.15  
86.11  
82.38  
74.71  
Benefits 
224.6  
164.6  
124.7  
109.7  
97.1  
74.70  
NPV 
114.2  
65.2  
34.5  
23.6  
14.7  
(0.0) 
CONCLUSION  
B/C R 
2.03 
1.66 
1.38 
1.27 
1.18 
1.00 
NPW 
1.03 
0.66 
0.38 
0.27 
0.18 
0.00 
34.  Summary of the financial and economic analysis is reproduced in the following table; 
Table 5: Financial Analysis of the KP-REAP 
Detail 
Financial 
Economic 
Internal Rate of Return 
(%) 
23.4% 
27.0% 
Net Present Value 
(Million USD) 
119 
118 
35. 
The  project  investment  is  feasible  on  account  of  financial  and  economic  benefits 
envisaged  and  remains  viable  under  different  risks  anticipated  (as  evident  from  the  sensitivity 
analysis). Based on the financial and economic analysis, the proposed project is recommended 
for consideration. 
9 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix I: Standard Conversion Factor 
Year
Total Imports (CIF) (I)
Total Exports (FOB) (E)
Taxes on Imports (Itax)
Sales tax on Imports(Ist)
Subsidies on Imports (Isub)
Taxes on Exports (Etax)
Subsidies on Exports (Esub)
SCF
2011/12
4 009 093
2 110 606
216 898
430 403
97 450
5 291
2012/13
4 489 112
2 484 099
239 459
429 831
97 450
3 966
0.918
0.925
2013/14
4 630 521
2 583 463
240 998
495 330
6 200
0.908
2014/15
4 644 152
2 397 513
306 220
553 028
5 754
0.892
2015/16
4 658 749
2 166 846
406 180
683 518
5 200
0.863
2016/17
5 539 720
2 138 186
496 772
637 068
5 132
0.872
2017/18
6 694 897
2 555 043
608 324
769 913
6 132
0.871
2018/19
7 885 941
3 229 420
724 977
906 883
7 751
0.873
(Rupees million)
Average
5 884 692
2 497 402
508 495
710 082
5 994
0.874
NOTES: 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 10.10 Imports excluded reimports 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 10.1 Exports excluded re-exports 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 8.1 Custom Revenue Receipts, Total import duty 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 2.4 Expenditure on gross national income 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 8.1: Iqra surcharges, Export duty and 0.25% Export Development Charges 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 6.1: Iqra surcharges, Refunds and Rebates 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, External Trade Statistics, Table 14.4 Exports by Economic category 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, External Trade Statistics, Table 14.5 Imports by Economic category 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 10: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2013-14, Table 10: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 8: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 12: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 11: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 3:  A Comparison of Collection 2015-16 Vis-a-Vis Target FY 2015-16 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2013-14, Table 10: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 13: Month-wise Collection of FED 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2012-13, Table 10: FED Collection of Major Revenue Spinners 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2014-15, Table 11: FED Collection from Major Commodities FY: 14-15 and FY: 13-14 
10 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix II: Standard Conversion Factor for Outputs 
Parity Price Basis  (1)
Wheat
(I)
Milk
(E)
Vegetables
(E)
Projected Price in Current Dollars $/mt (2)
Factor
Quality Adjustment Factor
World Market Equivalent $/mt
Transport and Insurance
cif, Karachi
Exchange Rate Rs/US$
cif, Karachi (Rs/t)
Clearance & Port charges
Storage and handling
Value at Karachi market
Transport to/from Project Area
Processed Value
Processing Ratio %
Processing/Packaging Cost
Wholesale Value
Local agents' commission/margins
Value at farmgate (Ton)
Economic Value at farmgate (Rs/1000 Litres/Kg)
Local farmgate price (Rs/1000Liters/Kg)
Financial Price per Kg/Litere
Economic Price per Kg
Ratio of border to local farmgate price
(1) Parity : [I] Import, [E] Export
(2) World Bank Commodoity Prices (for 2016)
247
1
1
247
20
267
105
28 053
1 200
3 000
32 253
9 000
41 253
1
1 031
43 126
4 000
47 126
47 126
40 000
40
47
1.2
417
1
1
417
45
462
105
48 502
1 200
2 000
45 302
12 000
57 302
0
1 000
56 302
1 000
55 302
331 812
60 000
60
55
0.9
429
1
1
429
10
439
105
46 050
1 500
1 500
43 050
12 000
55 050
1
3 000
51 500
3 000
48 500
48 500
40 000
40
48
1.21
1.10
11 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix III: Standard Conversion Factors 
Parity Price Basis  (1)
Projected Price in Current Dollars $/mt (2)
Factor
Quality Adjustment Factor
World Market Equivalent $/mt
Transport and Insurance
cif, Karachi
Exchange Rate Rs/US$
cif, Karachi (Rs/t)
Port charges
Storage and handling
Value at Karachi market
Transport to Project Area
Value at Project area
Wholesale Value
Local agents' commission/margins
Value at farmgate
Economic Value at farmgate (Rs/50kg Bag)
Local farmgate price (Rs/50kg Bag)
Ratio of border to local farmgate price
Financial Price per Kg
Economic Price per Kg
(1) Parity : [I] Import   [E] Export
(2) World Bank Commodoity Prices for 2016
Urea
(I)
DAP/Notrophos
(I)
SSP
(I)
212
1
1
212
43
214
105
22 477
1 000
1 500
24 977
8 000
32 977
32 977
660
33 637
1 682
1 700
0.99
34
34
368
1
1
368
58
370
105
38 803
1 000
1 500
41 303
8 000
49 303
49 303
986
50 289
2 514
2 000
1.26
40
50
309
1
1
309
55
311
105
32 675
1 000
1 500
35 175
8 000
43 175
43 175
864
44 039
2 202
3 600
0.61
72
44
SCF - Fertilizer
0.95
12 
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project  
(KP-RETP) 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)  
A.  Summary 
1.  The  KP  Rural  Economic  Transformation  Project  (KP-RETP)  is  a  category  “B”  project 
(see  screening  checklist  at  Appendix-1),  whereas  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) is provided at Appendix-3. The SECAP exercise of the project 
has  been  conducted  based  on  the  available  literature  review  and  field  visits.  The 
justification  for  the  preliminary  environmental/social  category  and  climate  risk 
classification  is  articulated  and  substantiated  with  appropriate  analysis.  The  review 
has been prepared using the latest IFAD guidelines and aims to highlight issues  on 
Natural Resources Management (NRM) and gender, potential social and environmental 
impacts and risks so as to improve and mitigate environmental concerns, monitoring 
aspects and justification of the project environmental and social as well as climate risk 
categories  assigned.  The  ESMF  will  be  used  by  KP-RETP  in  order  to  ensure  that  all 
environmental  and  social  safeguards  are  adequately  addressed  and  that  where 
required,  relevant  capacity  building  and  training  needs  are  established  for  effective 
implementation of the project. 
 B.  Background - Major landscape characteristics (social, health, 
environmental and climate change) 
2.  Pakistan is a lower-middle income country with a per capita income of US$ 1,6411 and 
an estimated GDP of USD 314 billion. The services sector (61 per cent) is the largest 
contributor to the economy, followed by industry (20 per cent) and agriculture (19 per 
cent). The latter absorbs 42 percent  of labour  force, generates important source of 
foreign exchange earnings and stimulates growth in other sectors. 
3.  Pakistan  is  the  sixth  most  populous  country  in  the  world  with  a  population  of  207 
million  (2017  census)  and  expected  to  reach  280  million  by  2030.  Currently,  64 
percent of the population is below the age of 30. Gender and rural-urban divide figures 
are  given  in    Table  1.  Males  make  about  51  percent  of  the  total  population  while 
females population is  around 49 percent. More than 63 percent people live in rural 
areas.   
Table 1. Population of Pakistan with details of male-female and rural-urban divide as per 2017 census.5 
Unit 
Total population (million) 
Total of Pakistan 
Male 
Female 
No. 
Percent of 
No. 
Percent of 
No. 
Percent of 
total 
Pakistan 
207.77 
Rural 
132.19 
63.62 
Urban 
75.58 
36.38 
106.45 
67.30 
39.15 
total 
51.23 
32.39 
18.84 
101.31 
64.89 
36.43 
total 
48.76 
31.23 
17.53 
4.  Literacy in Pakistan.  The overall literacy rate improved from 58 percent in 2015-
16 to 60 percent in 2018-19 where overall male and female literacy rate was 71 and 
49 percent, respectively. Urban literacy rate has reached 74 percent as compared to 
1 Economic Indicators 2019/2020, Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan 
1 
the rural areas rate of 51 percent. Rural male population was 65 percent literate while 
urban males were 80 percent in 2018-19. Rural women literacy rate was 38 percent 
which was much lower than 67 percent of men (Economic survey of Pakistan 2018-
19). 
5.  Poverty  in  Pakistan.    Pakistan  assesses  poverty  using  CBN  and  MPI  approaches. 
CBN poverty headcount was at 24.3% in 2015-16. While MPI based headcount was 
estimated at 38.8% during the same period. According to MPI corresponding poverty 
head count is 81.352 million. Since 2018, poverty is likely to have increased by about 
10 million persons due to economic challenges and more recently owing to COVID-19 
pandemic2 and desert locust swarm. A 2008 nationwide poverty survey, being updated 
since 2017, established a national well-being registry, ranking HHs on a scale from 0 
to 100 (Poverty Score Card). Using the GoP’s definition, the corresponding IFAD target 
groups in Pakistan falls within the poverty score card of 0 to 40.   
6.  Women:  Women  in  Pakistan  are  considered  a  socially  excluded  group  and  are 
deprived in terms of access to basic social services and livelihood opportunities. The 
2020  Global Gender Gap  Index  report  of 2020 ranked Pakistan 151  out  of  the  total 
153  countries. This  translates  into  a  low  labour  force  participation  rate  for  women 
which  stands  at  13%  compared  to  76%  for  men  at  national  level.  Similarly,  the 
employment to population ratio for females aged 15-24 years is a paltry 9.3%. The 
share of agriculture in total employment is 73% for women and 25% for men but very 
often women are not compensated properly for this work which is done in family farms. 
7.  Youth:    About  64  percent  of  Pakistan  population  is  below  the  age  of  30  while  29 
percent ages between 15 and 29 years which makes it one of the youngest country in 
the world and second in south Asia after Afghanistan. Regarding literacy, 29 percent 
young people are illiterate and only 6 percent have more than 12 years of education. 
While, 39 percent are employed (32 of them males and 7 females), 57 of 100 youth 
(16 males and 41 females) are neither working nor seeking jobs, and only 4 percent 
work  
for 
are 
(http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/unleashing-potential-young-pakistan#) . 
unemployed 
actively 
looking 
and 
C.  The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province 
8.  The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province is the third largest province of Pakistan with a land 
mass of 101,741 km2 and population of 35.35 million (4.4 million HHs) of which 81% 
is  rural.  The  province  is  administratively  divided  into  7  divisions  and  35  districts 
including 7 newly merged districts (NMDs).  
9.  Economy:  The KP  provincial economy  is  dominated  by  services  (67%  of  provincial 
GDP) followed by manufacture (17%) and agriculture (14%)[4]. Despite the declining 
share of agriculture GDP, the sector employs 32% of labour force and provide direct 
and indirect livelihood to 80% of the rural population. Small farmers which constitute 
95  percent  of  the  total,  mostly  undertaking  subsistence  farming  and  follow  mixed 
farming  system  consisting  of  agriculture  and  livestock  and  supplementary  income 
through off farm Labour.  The total cultivated area of the province is 1.8 million ha of 
which half is rain-fed. Because of its unique agro-climatic conditions, the province has 
enormous growth potential in the development of high value crops such as orchards, 
vegetables and floriculture, as well as the development of livestock/dairy sector.  
10.  With the exception of the central valley, both northern as well as southern regions of 
KP  have  fewer  resources  and  opportunities  for  its  people  to  live  on  and,  therefore, 
many people have to search for job elsewhere including overseas. Many people have 
been  looking  for  jobs  in  major  cities  of  Pakistan  like  Karachi,  Lahore,  Islamabad, 
Rawalpindi, Faisalabad, Multan, Hyderabad and many others while many opt for Saudi 
Arabia, UAE and other Middle Eastern countries.KP has the third highest population in 
the  country  but  produces  the  second  highest  number  of  Pakistani  migrants  (26 
2 Pakistan Economic Survey 2019-20, Ministry of Finance, Pakistan 
2 
percent) due to lack of local opportunities (Government of Pakistan, 2018). Over the 
past 20 years, natural disasters, especially floods, earthquakes and violent conflicts in 
KP  and  NMDs  led  to  the  internal  displacement  of  millions  of  individuals  in  Pakistan 
(IOM, 2017). Since 2009, 5.2 million people were displaced due to conflicts; in 2010 
floods affected 20 million individuals and the 2005 earthquake left 3.5 million people 
homeless 
2017) 
(https://migration.iom.int/sites/default/files/public/reports/Pakistan%20Migration%
20Snapshot%20Final.pdf. 
(Sayeed, 
Shah 
& 
11.  Population  of  KP.  Of  the  total  population  of  35.35  million,  about  50.67  percent 
people are male and 49.32 percent are female while a small fraction is transgender in 
KP. Merged areas had more male population than KP in 2017. Around 51.11 percent 
were  males  and  48.89  percent  were  females  in  merged  areas.  The  urban  division 
between male and female population in merged areas is more pronounced than KP. 
About 5 percent more males than women are living in cities of merged districts (Table 
2).  
Table 2. Population of KP, merged areas and combined based on 2017 census. 
Unit 
Total population (million) 
Percent population 
Male 
Female  Transgender  Total  Male 
Female 
Total 
Khyber 
15.468  15.055 
0.000913 
30.52
50.675 
49.322 
Pakhtunkhwa 
3 
Rural 
12.495  12.298 
0.000223 
24.79
50.397 
49.602 
81.229 
4 
Urban 
2.972 
2.757 
0.00069 
5.730 
51.877 
48.111 
18.771 
Merged areas  2.556 
2.445 
0.000027 
5.002 
51.109 
48.891 
Rural 
Urban 
2.482 
2.378 
0.000027 
4.860 
51.069 
48.930 
97.163 
0.074 
0.067 
0 
0.142 
52.469 
47.531 
2.837 
Grand 
total 
18.024  17.500 
0.001 
35.52
50.736 
49.261 
(KP  +  merged 
areas) 
Rural 
5 
14.977  14.676 
0.000 
29.65
50.507 
49.492 
83.472 
4 
Urban 
3.047 
2.824 
0.001 
5.872 
51.891 
48.097 
16.528 
12.  Education  and  literacy.  The  Pakistan  Social  and  Living  Standard  Measurement 
Survey (PSLM) 2019-20 shows that 56 percent children in KP excluding merged areas 
and 54 percent including merged areas attended school while literacy rate was 55 and 
53  percent  with  and  without  merged  areas,  respectively.  According  to  the  survey, 
overall youth,  aging between 15 and 24 years, literacy rate  was 67 percent,  out of 
which 81 percent was in urban areas and 65 percent in rural. Male and female literacy 
rate was 85 and 49 percent, respectively. 
13. Enrolment and dropouts  and  out of school children. About 64 percent children 
are enrolled in KP (excluding NMDs), out of which 35 percent dropout at primary level 
3 
comprising of 25 percent boys and 46 percent girls. The enrolment rate is almost the 
same, i.e., 64.4 percent in NMDs but, the dropout rate is quite high (69 percent) with 
boys being at 67 percent and girls at 72 percent. About 25 million children are out of 
school in Pakistan; girls constitute 53 percent and boys 47 percent of the total. There 
are vast regional disparities in providing equal opportunities of schooling for girls, with 
greatest  disparity  in  NMDs  and  KP.  About  52  percent  girls  in  KP  are  out  of  school 
compared  to  21  percent  boys,  showing  gender  disparity  against  girls  in  enrolment 
(Source: Pakistan District Education Rankings 2016). 
14.  Poverty in KP. Multidimensional poverty (health, education and standard of living) 
in the province is 49% against the national average of 39%3. Rural poverty is nearly 
58%. The number of HH categorised as extremely and chronically poor (BISP PSC4 0-
16.7), in the province, is estimated at 1.6 million5. The multidimensional poverty in 
NMDs is close to 74%. Because of the federally administered semiautonomous nature 
and the proxy system of governance till 2018, NMDs were not entitled to a formula-
based  federal  fiscal  allocation  and  generally  remined  outside  the  scope  of  political, 
economic and social development of the country. Rural poverty in the province is found 
to be strongly correlated with lack of productive asset, access to markets and services 
is limited, insufficient private sector participation and services, lack of off and non-
farm  income  opportunities  and  unemployment  particularly  among  the  youth;  and; 
increased vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Like the rest 
of the  country, poverty had also been declining in KP since 2010 but the trend has 
been reversed recently. The Household Integrated Economic Survey (HIES) of 2018-
19 showed that poverty had increased in KP where 36 percent population was poor in 
2018-19 as compared to 27 percent in 2015-16. The incidence is higher in urban than 
rural  areas.  Poverty  has  increase  by  about  11  points  in  cities  as  compared  to  8.5 
points in villages and small towns (Table 3).  Similarly, overall vulnerability to poverty 
has also increased from 54 percent in 2015-16 to 59 percent in 2018-19 in KP. Again, 
vulnerability to poverty is also higher in urban areas than urban. 
Table 3. Comparison of Incidence of and vulnerability to poverty in KP in 2015-16 and 
2018-19. 
Incidence of poverty 
2018-19 
2015-16 
Change 
Percentage  Change 
KP 
Urban 
Rural 
KPK 
Urban 
Rural 
36.1 
40.1 
35.3 
59.1 
54.7 
60.0 
27.2 
29 
26.8 
8.9 
11.1 
8.5 
Vulnerability to poverty 
53.7  
48.7  
54.8  
5.4 
6 
5.2 
32.7 
38.2 
31.7 
10.1 
12.3 
9.5 
15.  Gender.  Women  in  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  are  the  most  socially  excluded  and  are 
deprived in terms of access to basic social services and livelihood opportunities. The 
3 Multidimensional Poverty in Pakistan , UNDP 
4 A Poverty survey/census based on Proxy Mean Testing which calculates the poverty levels and determines the welfare status of a 
household on a scale between zero and 100, was carried out across Pakistan in 2010, for the selection of eligible HH for BISP unconditional 
cash transfer.   
5 BISP PSC data. https://bisp.gov.pk/ProjectDetail/ZDZjYzY3ZDAtZTQ2OS00NGRhLTliNmItMzJmMzdiYTY3ZDE0 
4 
literacy  rate  in  the  province  is  38%  for  women  compared  to  73  percent  for  men. 
Women labour force participation rate is 13.2% compared to 75.5% for men. Women 
are  heavily  involved  in  agriculture  particularly  livestock  and  share  of  agriculture  in 
total employment is 73% for women and 25 % for men. KP’s 80 percent population 
is rural where women are largely confined to domestic labour, animal husbandry and 
agriculture work, though their degree of involvement in formal and informal labour 
markets vary from district to district. In 2014, only 44,124 women (17 percent) out 
of 256,486 men were in government service in KP. The proportion of women working 
in the informal economy has increased significantly from 66 percent in 2003–2004 to 
73 percent in 2013-14. Despite lower earning potential women in the informal sector 
tend 
(https://www.theigc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/Kamal-Woodbury-2016-Working-paper.pdf  ).  According  to 
a study published in 2018, women only represent 0.21 per cent or 6,444 people of 
the total migration from Pakistan, (ILO, 2018) 
home 
work 
from 
to 
16.  Pakistan  has  a  high  rate  of  gender-based  violence,  which  has  been  blamed  on  a 
number  of  factors,  including  lack  of  education,  lack  of  awareness,  poverty,  and 
rampant  misogyny  in  the  country.  While  the  Government  of  Pakistan  has  passed 
various laws to prevent violence and support those affected by it, the conviction rate 
for  violence  against  women  sits  at  only  1-2.5  per  cent  (UNFPA).  Resources  and 
services for women survivors of gender-based violence (GBV) remain scarce. Health 
services  personnel  are  inadequately  equipped,  referral  systems  are  limited,  and 
insufficient training on GBV combined with low investment in human capital enhances 
the vulnerability of women.  These gaps  exist  on the backdrop  of a structurally and 
culturally  patriarchal  society,  where  social  norms  promote  gender-based  abuses, 
disclosure to violence is discouraged and women are often blamed for their abuse.  
17. Household heads in  KP.  In a male dominated  society, 90 and percent households 
are headed by males and only 10 percent are headed by females. About 83 percent of 
households are in rural areas, while the rest are in urban. More than half of households 
(54  percent)  have  5  to  8  members,  while  less  than  one  percent  have  one  member. 
Forty seven percent of the household heads have no education or only have pre-school 
followed  by  those  with  secondary  education  (17  percent)  and  higher  education  (15 
percent). 
education 
(https://www.pc.gov.pk/uploads/report/MICSKP-2016-17-Final_report.pdf).  
household 
primary 
percent 
heads 
have 
Ten 
18.  Youth and employment.  According to the National Youth Policy (2009) and the KP 
Youth Policy (2016), persons between the  age  group of 15 to 29 are considered as 
youth.    According  to  2014  estimates  for  KP  Youth  Policy  (2016),  active  youth 
population (15-29 years age group) was 27.23 percent of the provincial population. 
By  the  same  analogy,  KP  youth  population  should  be  around  8.3  million  (including 
merged area) based on 2017 census. Generally, the labour participation rate of the 
province  is  lower  than  other  provinces  mainly  due  to  low  participation  of  female 
workers in the economy. Male youth unemployment rate was about 30 percent and 
that of women  of 10  years  and  above  was 16,50  percent  in 2012-13 (Labour  force 
survey 2012-13). KP is endowed with huge natural resources but lack of development 
and skills force much of the youth to remain engaged with rudimentary agriculture or 
migrate  to  other  countries.  During  2019,  a  total  of  625,203  workers  emigrated 
overseas of which more than 50% were unskilled and less than 1% women. 
19.  Skills  demand  and  gap.  The  skilled  force  produced  by  the  technical  education 
institutes each year does not meet the emerging market requirements of the day in 
manufacturing, hospitality, construction, mining and services sectors. There are 650 
vocational institutions in KP accounting for 95 percent of TVET and meagre 5 percent 
(36) for technical institutions. The skilled workforce provided by technical institutions 
is  14,560  individuals  while  that  supplied  by  vocational  institutions  is  about  45,690 
individuals.  The  most  deficient  in  skilled  workforce  is  the  manufacturing  sector 
exhibiting the supply gap of 80,172 while the least demand is reported in energy and 
power  sector  accounting  for  a  total  2,440.  Skilled  workforce  gaps  in  services, 
5 
construction and hospitality sectors stand at 59,462, 46,619 and 44,619, respectively 
(Skills  gap  analysis  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa,  2019,  National  Vocational  &  Technical 
Training Commission, Government of Pakistan). 
20.  Nutrition and Health:  Nutritionally vulnerable groups include children of both sexes, 
adolescents,  women  of  reproductive  age,  and  especially  pregnant  and  lactating 
women. While malnutrition not only translates into underweight, the other side of it 
are  overweight  and  obesity  which  are  increasing  in  Pakistan.  Stunting  (chronic 
malnutrition) is a major problem in Pakistan, and the percentage of stunted children 
under the age of five is the highest in the NMD of KP with 48 %, while it is 40% for 
the rest of KP.  With regards to wasting (acute malnutrition), the percentage in NMD 
is 23% and for the  rest of KP 15%.  Micronutrient deficiencies in children under the 
age of five are causing anaemia (53% of children all over Pakistan), iron deficiency, 
vitamin A and D deficiency. The nutritional status of adolescents (10 to 19 years) in 
KP provides the following picture: 15% of adolescent girls are underweight in KP and 
18% in KP-NMD, while for boys it is 14% in KP and 12 in KP-NMD.  One of the biggest 
nutritional problems all over the rural areas in Pakistan is anaemia, which affects about 
41% of women of reproductive age (UNICEF National Nutrition Survey 2018).Weight 
and height at birth are a good indicator not only of a mother's health and nutritional 
status but also the new-born. Almost one in five children under age five are moderately 
or severely underweight (21%) and 8 percent are classified as severely underweight. 
Forty-one percent of children are moderately or severely stunted or too short for their 
age and 8 percent of children are moderately or severely wasted or too thin for their 
height, whereas less than 7 percent are overweight or too heavy for their height (KP 
MICS 2016-17, Final Report June 2018). 
21.  The same survey shows that boys are a bit more likely to be underweight, stunted, 
and wasted than girls. Children in rural areas are more likely to be underweight and 
stunted (22 percent and 43 percent respectively) than in urban areas (15 percent and 
34 percent respectively). 
22.  Agriculture  in  KP.    The  total  cultivated  area  of  the  province  is  1.6  million  ha  (7 
percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of  the  country’s  total  wheat,  2  percent  of  rice,  17  percent  of  maize,  8  percent  of 
sugarcane,  16  percent  of  barley,  4  percent  of  gram,  3  percent  of  rapeseed  and 
mustard,  and  75  percent  of  tobacco.  Its  share  in  the  country’s  total  livestock 
population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 
8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit and depends on imports from 
other  provinces,  especially  from  Punjab,  for  important  commodities  like  wheat  (64 
percent),  rice  (74  percent),  milk,  meat,  sugar  (80  percent),  and  vegetables  (90 
percent)  to  complement  its  production.  (World  Bank,  KP  Irrigated  Agriculture 
Improvement Project, 2019). 
(https://ewsdata.rightsindevelopment.org/files/documents/74/WB-P163474.pdf ). 
23.  Private Sector  Engagement:  The institutional landscape  in  rural  areas  of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa has changed in the last decade. The private sector has started  playing 
a role as a supplier of agriculture inputs and services, a buyer of output and a link to 
both  national  and  international  markets.  This  has  been  a  result  of  increasing 
commercialization, particularly in the horticultural sector, as well as in the livestock 
sector  where  flows  of  live  animals  and  meat  to  and  from  other  provinces  and 
Afghanistan  have  increased.  However,  the  private  sector  is  still  underdeveloped 
compared to potential and comparative advantage of the province agriculture sector 
particularly  in  high  value  crops.  The  sector  is  largely  concentrated  around  trading, 
mining, and transportation services. Key reason for the  shortfall includes appropriate 
policy and regulatory framework and institutional impediments. The major challenge 
with  regard  to  creating  an  appropriate  institutional  set  up  relate  to  regulating  and 
guiding  the  private  sector  not  only  to  provide    knowledge,  services  and  market 
linkages but also that best practices and quality control particularly in input supplies, 
6 
are  adhered  to.  The  present  government  as  part  of  its  focus  on  agriculture  sector, 
aims  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  private  sector,  invest  in  human  capital  and  create 
more  jobs  along  agricultural  value  chains.  The  National  Youth  Development 
Programme  (Kamyab  Jawan)  promotes  public-private  partnership  for  human 
resources development and support for employment and economic empowerment of 
youth. 
24.  Child labour. Though reliable data is not available on the issue, incidences of  child 
labour is prevalent in the country and the province particularly to a  greater extent in 
the  informal  sector  and  in  the  agriculture  sector  (The  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Child 
Labour  Policy  2018).  The  largest  number  of  child  workers  was  in  Punjab  province, 
followed  by  Sindh,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and  Baluchistan.  Child  labour  is  mostly 
engaged  in  agriculture,  domestic  work,  coal  mining,  production  of  bricks,  carpets, 
glass bangles, leather and surgical instruments.  Child trafficking is also prevalent in 
Pakistan which, can result in commercial sexual exploitation and forced begging. Child 
Domestic Labour as the Worst Forms of Child Labour (WFCL) which is behind closed 
doors  and  girls  are  in majority  (90%).  Their  invisibility  increases  their  vulnerability 
and potential violence Bonded labour in brick kilns exists in areas where they exist 
(https://www.ilo.org/islamabad/whatwedo/projects/WCMS_764614/lang--
en/index.htm 
25.  Climate  Topography  and  Geography:  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  province  is  uniquely 
situated  with  a  range  of  climatic  and  physical  conditions.  It  consists  of  mountain 
ranges and plains that also defines the climate of different regions. The three mountain 
ranges  in  the  north—Himalaya,  Karakuram  and  Hindukush  with  high  snow  covered 
peaks, Kaghan valley, Hazara, Dir, Chitral, the central Pakhtunkhwa and the southern 
region have varying climates due to variations in elevations.  Heavy snowfall occurs in 
Chitral,  Swat  and  Kaghan  valleys  while  Dir  and  Hazara  are  the  wettest  areas.  The 
plains  of  Peshawar,  Mardan  and  Dera  Ismail  Khan  depict  a  different  picture  as  one 
moves from upper parts in the north west to Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan in the south. 
The mountainous areas experience cold winters and cool summers while central and 
southern parts experience extreme cold and hot weather. The average annual rainfall 
varies from 500 to 1,600 mm with southern region being the most arid one. 
26.  Water resources. Glacial melt in the upper mountainous ranges during summer and 
rains are  usually feeding  the  rivers  and  streams  of  the  almost throughout  the  year 
with varying discharges depending upon temperature and precipitation. Indus, Kabul, 
Swat, Kunhar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Tochi, Dor, Haro, Gomal and Zhob rivers 
are the main sources of water for agriculture in the Province. The total groundwater 
resource of the KP has been assessed at 3.11 MAF which is used for drinking as well 
as agriculture. 
27.  Agro-ecological  Zones  of  KP.    The  Environmental  Protection  Agency  of  KP  has 
divided the province into five agro-ecological zones on the basis  of  climatic conditions 
covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and topography (Figure 2).  These zones are: 
Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower 
Dir, Swat and Chitral. 
Zone  B  –  Sub  Humid  Mountain  covering  districts  of  Haripur,  Batagram,  Mansehra, 
Abbottabad, Kohistan and Torghar.  
Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Charshada, Nowshera, 
Mardan, Swabi, Kohat and Hangu.  
Zone  D  –  Piedmont  Plains  (including  Suleiman  range)  covering  districts  of  Bannu, 
Karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan. 
Zone E – comprising of the western dry mountains of the newly merged districts of 
Mohmand, Bajaur, Khyber, Orakzai, Kurram, North and South Waziristan. 
7 
28.  The central valley plains (zone C) and piedmont plains (Zone D), are mostly used 
for agriculture and livestock grazing. 
Figure 1. Agro-ecological Zones of KP. 
29.  Forests. The forest cover of KPK, mostly in Zone A and B, is 26.6 percent of the total 
land including the  6.3  percent  additional  area  as a  result  of implementation of one 
Billion Tree Afforestation Project (from 2014 to 2019). The high northern mountains 
of  Chitral,  Hazara  and  Swat  above  4000  m  have  low  vegetative  cover.  Alpine  zone 
forests are found between 3350-3360 m. Dry temperate coniferous are present in the 
dry  ranges  of  Himalayas;  Himalayan  moist  temperate  forests  are  found  in  Hazara 
district (Kohistan, southern parts of Palas Valley, Lower Kaghan Valley) at an elevation 
of 1525-3660m. There is a narrow zone of subtropical forests between 900-2000m in 
the Southern parts of the Himalayan Mountains of Hazara and Swat Valley (KP Climate 
Change Policy 2016 and Ahmad H & Khan, n.d.). 
30.  Biodiversity. Geographically, KP has a diverse  ecosystem where all the five Zones 
have their own peculiar characteristics and are home to a variety of flora and fauna. 
The Himalayan forests are the habitats to many mammal and bird species. Out of 188 
species of mammals that occur in Pakistan, 98 mammal species are found in KP. Some 
of the endangered species found in KP include Snow Leopard, Brown Bear, Ibex and 
Lion-eared bat. 456 species of birds, 48 species of reptiles and approximately 4,500 
species of plants are found in KP (Ahmad, 2012). The protected areas notified in KP 
include 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community 
game  reserves,  16  private  game  reserves,  2  wildlife  refuges  and  8  wildlife  parks 
(Attachment-A). The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. The project 
activities will be implemented in all five agro-ecological zones of the province. 
31.  Climate Change: KP is endowed with diverse natural resources, which include some 
of  the  most  fertile  soils,  forest  and  water  resources,  which  accommodate  diverse 
species  of  flora,  fauna  and  fish  resources.  However,  these  resources  are  currently 
8 
challenged by complex interaction of several factors including rapid population growth, 
infrastructure  development,  climate  change  and  man  induced  interventions.  The 
unsustainable land use, depletion of forest resources and loss of biodiversity, heavy 
soil erosion and water pollution impose a challenge to these resources. 
32.  Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is one of the most vulnerable provinces of Pakistan to climate 
change.  Erratic  weather  patterns and  climate  change  have  emerged as the  biggest 
environmental  challenges  that  are  affecting  almost  all  the  sectors  of  economy 
particularly water resources, energy, health and biodiversity with a major impact on 
agricultural  productivity.  Since  2010  extreme  events  such  as  cloudburst  over  the 
catchment  areas  of  Indus  and  its  tributaries,  have  frequently  occurred  during  the 
annual  monsoon  season.  This  often  leads  to  flash  floods  and  landslides,  causing 
damages  across  several  sectors,  including  agriculture,  livelihoods,  infrastructure, 
transport and communications, and housing. The province is also facing an increased 
number  of  glacial  lake  outburst  floods  (GLOF)  due  to  increased  temperatures  and 
intense  precipitation.  Being  an  upper  riparian  province  in  Pakistan,  the  province 
receives  the  shortest  lead  times  for  early  warnings  on  climate  induced  hydro-
meteorological  disasters.  As  a  result  of  the  2010  floods,  the  province    suffered  an 
estimated USD 1.1 billion in damages, which included damages and losses of USD 96 
million6 to the agriculture sector in the province. The south of the province is on the 
contrary  is  prone  to  recurring  drought,  water  scarcity  and  extreme  weather  which 
impact livelihoods of the otherwise poor communities depending on depleting natural 
resources. 
33.  Economic  opportunities.  The  province  because  of  its  unique  agro-climatic 
conditions,  has  enormous  growth  potential  in  the  development  of  high  value  crops 
such  as  horticulture  crops  and  floriculture,  as  well  as  the  development  of  livestock 
sector. KP is also endowed with abundant natural resources including forests, minerals, 
enormous potential for tourism energy and power development. Other opportunities 
exist in large scale manufacturing concerns like cement, sugar and tobacco/cigarette 
units.  Dairy, meat, wool and fruit processing has great potential in the area.  
34.  The  province  is  passing  through  a  demographic  transition  that  is  creating  a  “youth 
bulge”,  which  provides  a  one-time  window  for  stimulating  growth.  Realizing  the 
dividends  of  the  demographic  transition  will  require  addressing  critical  challenges 
related  to  human  capital  development,  jobs  and  the  labour  market.  Since  a  large 
proportion  of  the  young  have  poor  educational attainment, skill development  is  the 
most  important  pathway  for  human  capital  accumulation.  In  the  case  of  KP  this 
pathway will be fundamental in restoring livelihoods and generating employment in 
the province particularly the merged districts which has a significant development lag 
compared to other districts of the province and country.  
D.  The  Project:  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  -  Rural  Economic  Transformation 
Project  
35.  Goal  and  objective:  The  overall  goal  of  the  project  is  to  contribute  to  poverty 
reduction, food and nutrition security and strengthened resilience of rural households. 
The  development  objective  is  Incomes  of  rural  households  sustainably  improved 
through climate-resilient, high-value agriculture and off-farm/non-farm employment 
opportunities'. 
36.  Target  area:   The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province.  A  phased 
expansion approach will be adopted whereby the project initially be implemented in 
10 districts and will add 3 districts per region per year with the objective to have the 
entire province covered by the Mid Term Review (End of Year 3).  
6 Pakistan Floods 2010 Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment (2010) report, p. 154 
9 
37.  Target  Groups:  The  RETP-KP  target  groups  will  fall  under  the  category  of 
smallholders  (as  per  the  definition  of  the  Government  <12.5  acres  or  5  ha)  and 
landless households (HH). Among these, the KP-RETP targeting will prioritise HH with 
PSC  0  –  34  range.  Women  and  youth  will  be  particularly  targeted  with  specific 
interventions aiming at economic empowerment. The target groups (small farmers, 
youth  and  women  target  groups)  will  be  pre-identified  through  the  implementing 
partners.  Youth  and  nutrition  will  be  mainstreamed  with  a  focus  on  women  as 
secondary  targeting  criteria.  For  the  youth  and  the  women  identification  and 
engagement  in  the  project  (and  based  on  the  successful  experience  of  the  NADP 
Diamer  project  in  gender  empowerment  in  a  similar  context),  the  religious  and 
community  leaders  and  village  elders/jirga  will  be  sensitized.  This  will  facilitate  the 
integration of groups who usually don’t have access to non-traditional activities. 
38.  Project Beneficiaries: Around 785’000 households (4.35 million persons) will 
benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP interventions through market oriented 
professional farmer organizations. Additionally, the target groups in the same districts 
will  benefit  from  a  specific  and  dedicated  skills  development  programme,  start-up 
capital  and  first  professional  exposure  (public  –  private  internship  programme)  in 
order to (i) ensure that the skills and services necessary for the success of the KP-
RETP agri-business component 1 will be available, (ii) respond to the local, provincial 
and national labour market and employer needs particularly in the sectors like agro-
industry, agro-tourism or tourism, mining, industry or civil works by valorising the KP 
local  employable  forces  and  in  particular  the  youth  and  women,  and  (iii)  boost  the 
employability  of  the  newly  graduated  students  (Master’s  holders  in  particular)  by 
ensuring  them  quick  professional  integration  through  a  one  year  public  –  private 
internship programme. 
39.  The target groups will benefit from technical / vocational / managerial training with 
official and recognized certificates or diplomas but will also have access to transversal 
capacity building, particularly in financial literacy, climate risk and resilience, nutrition 
for enhancing the effectiveness of their enterprise and business development as well 
as personal lives. Investment in PFOs and 4Ps will create additional jobs from which 
women and youth will specifically benefit, especially those trained under component 
2. 
40.  Project interventions:  The proposed project will have three components:  
I.  Agribusiness Development (Professional Farmers Organizations, 4P 
Development, Farm Service Centres, Support to MOA), 
Skills Development and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-
up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
Project Management and Policy Support.  
II. 
III. 
41.  The  project  approach  provides  integration  and  complementarities  between  the 
project components. Component 1 will create the necessary potential and conducive 
institutional set up within the repositioned agribusinesses approach (PFOs, 4Ps and 
FSCs) to absorb a significant part of the target groups supported by component 2 
(vocational  training,  start-up  capital,  public-private  internship  programme)  by 
developing  relevant  and  new  skills  or  services  necessary  to  the  business 
development of the PFOs, FSCs or 4Ps. The other category of the component 2 target 
groups will allow the project to better respond to the large local and national labour 
demand as well as to fight better against current migration of the unskilled. This will 
also help strengthen the impact delivered through component 1 seeking to deliver 
stronger institutions and players for the agribusiness sector to thrive. Experienced 
implementing  partner  (IPs)  (competitive  selection  process  by  sub  provincial  office 
(so 1 IP for 5 districts) will implement component 1 and component 2. Each IP will 
10 
have to implement the Nutrition and Youth mainstreaming themes in all its activities. 
Component 3 will provide support, monitoring for the smooth implementation of the 
RET-KP programme and ensure synergies between components 1 and 2, as well as 
(ii) advocate and support the GoKP in its agenda for policy reform to  improve the 
rural  poor’s  livelihoods  and  to  facilitate  and  ensure  the  sustainability  of  RET-KP 
activities initiated through the Agro-business development and Employment creation 
components.  This  will  allow  the  project  to  deliver  results  beyond  the  expected 
outcomes from this investment.   
42.  Project benefits: The project benefits are anticipated in the two project components 
including;  i)  agribusiness  development;  and  (ii)  employment  and  jobs  promotion 
while the third component i.e., project management, institutional and policy support 
will facilitate the two. The estimated incremental increase in income resulting from 
agribusiness development is US$400 per household ranging between USD200 and 
USD1 000 per household. The project support will enable to enhance monthly income 
to  an  average  of  US$130  per  month.  The  estimated  incremental  increase  is  on 
average USD300 – 400 per year 
11 
E.  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP).  
I. 
THE LEGISLATIVE, REGULATORY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
43.  National and Provincial Laws and Regulations: Policy, legal and administrative 
framework relevant to the environmental and social assessment of the proposed 
Project are reviewed below: 
44.  Pakistan Environmental Protection Act 1997: The Pakistan Environmental 
Protection Act 1997 is the basic legislative tool empowering the government to 
frame regulations for the protection of the environment, where the ‘environment’ 
has been defined as: (a) air, water and land; (b) all layers  of the atmosphere; (c) 
all organic and inorganic matter and living organisms; (d) the ecosystem and 
ecological relationships; (e) buildings, structures, roads, facilities and works; (f) all 
social and economic conditions affecting community life; and (g) the inter-
relationships between any of the factors specified in sub-clauses ‘a’ to ‘f’. The Act is 
applicable to a broad range of issues, including socioeconomic aspects: for example, 
land acquisition, air, water, soil, marine and noise pollution, and the handling of 
hazardous waste.  
45.  The requirement for environmental assessment is laid out in Section 12 (1) of the 
Act. Under this section, no project involving construction activities or any change in 
the physical environment can be undertaken unless an initial environmental 
examination (IEE) or an environmental impact assessment (EIA) is conducted, and 
approval is received from the federal or relevant provincial EPA. Section 12 (6) of 
the Act states that the provision is applicable only to such categories of projects as 
may be prescribed. The categories were later defined in the Pakistan Environmental 
Protection Agency Review of IEE and EIA Regulations, 2000. 
46.  The powers of the federal and provincial Environmental Protection Agencies (EPAs), 
established under the Pakistan Environmental Protection Ordinance 1983, have also 
been considerably enhanced under this legislation; they may conduct inquiries in aid 
of legislation into possible breaches of environmental laws either of their own 
accord, or upon the registration of a complaint. 
47.  Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and EIA 
Regulations 2000:  The Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE 
and EIA Regulations 2000 developed by the Pak-EPA under the powers conferred 
upon it by the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act, provide the necessary details 
on preparation, submission and review of the IEE and the EIA. Categorization of 
projects for IEE and EIA is one of the main components of the Regulations. Projects 
have been classified on the basis of expected degree of adverse environmental 
impacts. Project types listed in Schedule I are designated as potentially less 
damaging to the environment, and those listed in Schedule II as having potentially 
serious adverse effects. Schedule I projects require an IEE to be conducted, 
provided they are not located in environmentally sensitive areas. For Schedule II 
projects, conducting an EIA is necessary. A development project may not fall under 
either Schedule I or II. If the project for which this document was prepared includes 
construction of new irrigation canals, it will be considered a Schedule I project. If no 
new irrigation canal will be constructed and only the existing ones are to be 
rehabilitated or modernized, the project will be categorized under Schedule II. 
48.  National Environmental Quality Standards: The National Environmental Quality 
Standards (NEQS), promulgated under the Pakistan Environment Protection Act 
1997, specify the following standards: 
  Maximum allowable concentration of pollutants in gaseous emissions from 
industrial sources; 
12 
  Maximum  allowable  concentration  of  pollutants  in  municipal  and  liquid 
industrial effluents discharged to inland waters, sewage treatment and sea 
(three separate set of numbers); 
  Maximum allowable emissions from motor vehicles; 
  Ambient air quality standards; 
  Drinking water standards; and 
  Noise standards. 
49.  National Water Policy 2018: The objective of Pakistan’s first National Water Policy, 
approved in April 2018, is to take cognizance of the emerging water crisis and provide 
an overall policy framework and guidelines for a comprehensive plan of action. The 
policy concedes that management of water resources is a national responsibility, but 
irrigation, agriculture, water supply (including drinking water), the environment and 
other water-related sub-sectors are provincial subjects.  
50.  The  policy  covers  all  water-related  issues,  including:  water  uses  and  allocation  of 
priorities;  integrated  planning  for  development  and  use  of  water  resources; 
environmental integrity of the basin; impact of climate change; trans-boundary water 
sharing; irrigated and rainfed agriculture; drinking water and sanitation; hydropower; 
industry; groundwater; water rights and obligations; sustainable water infrastructure; 
water-related  hazards;  water  quality  management;  awareness  and  research;  water 
conservation  measures;  legal  framework and  capacity building  of institutions  in  the 
water sector. 
51.  National Climate  Change Policy 2012: The  goal  of  the  National  Climate  Change 
policy  is  to  ensure  that  climate  change  is  mainstreamed  in  the  economically  and 
socially  vulnerable  sectors  and  to  steer  Pakistan  towards  climate  resilient 
development.  
52.  The policy has the following main objectives: 
  To pursue sustained economic growth by appropriately addressing the challenges 
of climate change;  
  To integrate climate change policy with other interrelated national policies;  
  To focus on pro-poor gender sensitive adaptation while also promoting mitigation 
to the extent possible in a cost-effective manner;  
  To ensure water security, food security and energy security of the country in the 
face of the challenges posed by climate change;  
  To minimize the risks arising from the expected increase in frequency and intensity 
of extreme weather events such as floods, droughts and tropical storms;  
  To strengthen inter-ministerial decision making and coordination mechanisms on 
climate change;  
  To facilitate effective use of the opportunities, particularly financial, available both 
nationally and internationally;  
  To foster the development of appropriate economic incentives to encourage public 
and private sector investment in adaptation measures;  
  To enhance the awareness, skill and institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders; 
and 
  To promote conservation of natural resources and long-term sustainability. 
13 
53.  Climate  Change  Act  2017:  The  Climate  Change  Act  was  passed  in  2017.  The 
objective of the Act is to tackle the pressing climate risks and secure global funding 
to  implement  projects  to  boost  the  country’s  climate  resilience,  protect  lives  and 
livelihoods  of  the  people,  mainly  those  associated  with  agriculture.  The  new  law 
established  a  Pakistan  Climate  Change  Council,  Pakistan  Climate  Change  Authority 
and Pakistan Climate Change Fund. 
54.  Constitution,  Acts  and  Rules  on  Labour:  The  Constitution  of  Pakistan  defines 
labour rights in the following articles: Article 11 prohibits all forms of slavery, forced 
labour  and  child  labour;  Article  17  stipulates  the  rights  to  exercise  freedom  of 
association  and  to  form  unions;  article  18  establishes  the  right  to  enter  upon  any 
lawful profession or occupation and to conduct any lawful trade or business; article 25 
affirms  the  right  to  equality  before the  law  and  prohibition  of discrimination on  the 
grounds of sex alone; and article 37(e) makes provision for securing just and humane 
conditions of work, ensuring that children and women are not employed in vocations 
unsuited to their age or sex, and for maternity benefits for women in employment. 
55.  In  addition  to  Article  18  of  the  Constitution,  Industrial  Relations  Ordinance  2002 
pronounces on the conditions of termination of contracts. Maximum working hours are 
determined  in  Factories  Act  1934;  West  Pakistan  Shops  and  Establishments 
Ordinance1969  and  Mines  Act  1923.  Factories  Act  1934  makes  provisions  for  paid 
leave,  while  work  conditions  related  to  maternity  are  defined  by  Article  37  of  the 
Constitution, Maternity Benefit Ordinance 1958 and Mines Maternity Benefit Act 1941. 
Employment of children is framed by Article 11(3) of the Constitution, Factories Act 
1934 and Employment of Children Rules 1995 
II. 
OBLIGATIONS UNDER INTERNATIONAL TREATIES 
56.  Nagoya Convention on Biological Diversity: Nagoya Protocol, which entered into 
force in 2014, is a supplementary agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity 
adopted in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. The Convention has three objectives: to conserve 
biological  diversity;  to  promote  the  sustainable  use  of  its  components;  and,  to 
encourage  equitable  sharing  of  the  benefits  arising  out  of  the  utilization  of  genetic 
resources. The Protocol strengthens legal certainty and transparency for providers as 
well  as  users  of  genetic  resources.  It  does  so  by  making  conditions  for  access  to 
genetic resources more predictable; and supporting sharing of benefits that arise from 
genetic resources. In case indigenous and local communities have established rights 
to  grant  access  to  genetic  resources,  contracting  parties  must  obtain  their  prior 
informed consent and ensure fair and equitable benefit-sharing, by taking into account 
existing community and customary laws, procedures, use and exchange.  
57.  The original Convention was ratified by and entered into force in Pakistan in 1994. The 
Protocol entered into force in the country in February 2016. 
58.  Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl 
Habitat: The Convention, seeks to halt the progressive encroachment on and loss of 
wetlands,  which  are  among  the  most  diverse  and  productive  ecosystems  and 
indispensable for sustainable management of freshwater and biodiversity. According 
to  the  Convention,  wetlands  encompass:  lakes  and  rivers;  underground  aquifers; 
swamps and marshes; wet grasslands; peatlands; oases; estuaries; deltas and tidal 
flats; mangroves and other coastal areas; coral reefs; and all human-made sites such 
as fish ponds, irrigated lands, rice paddies, reservoirs and salt pans. 
59.  The parties to the Convention commit to: promote wise use of wetlands; designate 
qualified wetlands to the list of Wetlands of International Importance for its effective 
14 
management;  and  cooperate  internationally  to  manage  transboundary  wetlands, 
shared wetland system and species. Pakistan ratified the Convention in August 1976, 
and it entered into force four months later. 
60.  Four major wetland complexes exist in Pakistan: North Western Alpine, Salt Range, 
Central  Indus  Plain  and  Makran  Coast,  and  19  sites  designated  as  Ramsar  sites. 
Wetlands degradation  in  Pakistan,  as  elsewhere, is  believed  to  be:  changes in  land 
use; population growth; and, economic development. 
61.  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol 
and  Paris  Agreement:  The  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change )UNFCCC), sets its objective to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the 
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with 
the climate system. It has been ratified by 192 parties, which include all United Nations 
member states, and entered into force in 1992. The Kyoto Protocol to UNFCCC was 
agreed  in  1997,  although  the  discussions  on  the  details  contributed  until  2004. 
According to the Protocol, industrialized countries and countries of the former Soviet 
bloc must cut their emissions of greenhouse gases by an average of about 5% for the 
period  2008-2012  compared  with  1990  levels.  Kyoto  Protocol  was  ratified  by  and 
entered into force in Pakistan in January and April, respectively, in 2005. 
62.  At the Paris climate conference of UNFCCC in 2015, 195 countries adopted a universal, 
legally binding global climate agreement, the first of its kind: Paris Agreement. The 
governments agreed to the goal of limiting to  1.5oC the increase in global average 
temperature above pre-industrial levels. Paris Agreement was ratified by and entered 
into force in Pakistan in November and December, respectively, in 2016. In Pakistan, 
the Climate Change Act 2016 was passed in March 2017, establishing a policy-making 
Climate Change Council and a Climate Change Authority to prepare and supervise the 
implementation  of  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation  projects.  The  main 
concern in the country has been the scant amount of action on the ground because of 
lack  of  capacity  at  the  Provincial  level.  Pakistan  submitted  its  Intended  Nationally 
Determined Contribution (INDC) prior to the Paris Agreement; the country “intends to 
reduce  up  to  20%  of  its  2030  projected”  greenhouse  gas  “emissions  subject  to 
availability of international grants to meet the total abatement cost ... amounting to 
about US$ 40 billion at current prices.” 
63.  United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification  in  Those  Countries 
experiencing  Series  Drought  and/or  Desertification,  Particularly  in  Africa: 
The objective of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) is 
to “combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in countries experiencing 
serious drought and/or desertification, with a view to contributing to the achievement 
of sustainable development in affected areas  and with special attention to arid, semi-
arid and dry sub-humid areas.  
64.  Pakistan ratified the Convention in 1997, and it entered into force in the country in 
the same  year.  A National  Action  Programme to  Combat  Desertification  in  Pakistan 
was elaborated in 2002 in the framework for the Convention. It identified main causes 
of  desertification  as:  water  erosion;  wind  erosion;  soil 
fertility  depletion; 
deforestation;  overgrazing;  biodiversity  loss;  waterlogging  and  salinity;  drought; 
flooding;  and  socioeconomic  factors.  The  areas  estimated  to  be  affected  by  water 
erosion  and  wind  erosion  were  approximately  11  million  and  3-5  million  hectares, 
respectively. Wind erosion was considered responsible for close to one-third of total 
soil loss. Remedial measures proposed included: afforestation and agroforestry; crop 
production  management,  including  horticultural  crops;  livestock  and  rangeland 
management; soil and water resources management, especially related to water use 
efficiency and soil fertility rehabilitation; and biodiversity conservation. 
15 
65.  Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain 
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides: Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed 
Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides, or the Rotterdam 
Convention  for  short,  covers  pesticides  and  industrial  chemicals  that  have  been 
banned or severely restricted for health or environmental reasons by the Parties to 
the  Convention  and  which  have  been  notified  by  Parties  for  inclusion  in  the  Prior 
Informed (PIC) procedure. The Convention legally obligates implementation of the PIC 
procedure o these chemical products. By doing so, it promotes shared responsibility 
and cooperative efforts among Parties in the international trade of certain hazardous 
chemicals for the ultimate purpose of protecting human health and the environment 
from potential harm. The Convention also contributes to the environmentally sound 
use  of  those  hazardous  chemicals,  by  facilitating  information  exchange  about  their 
characteristics, by  providing  for  a national  decision-making  process  on  their  import 
and  export  and  by  disseminating  these  decisions  to  Parties.  Pakistan  signed  the 
Convention in 2005 and it entered into force in the country in the same year. 
66.  Stockholm  Convention  on  Persistent  Organic  Pollutants:  The  Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants was established to protect human health 
and  the  environment  from  chemicals  that  do  not  degrade  easily.  The  Convention 
obligates its parties to eliminate or reduce the release of persistent organic pollutants 
into the environment. Climate Change is expected to elevate the planet’s vulnerability 
to  persistent  organic  pollutants,  by  way  of  higher  atmospheric  temperature  and 
extreme weather events. 
67.  Pakistan affixed a simple signature to the Convention in 2001, which was subsequently 
ratified and entered into force in the country in 2008. It was followed by a “National 
Implementation  Plan  for  Phasing  Out  and  Elimination  of  POPs  from  Pakistan  Under 
Stockholm Convention Article 7(a)”in 2004. 
68.  Convention on the Rights of the Child: The Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
ratified by Pakistan in 1990, stipulates the civil, political, economic, social, health and 
cultural rights that should be enjoyed by any human being under the age of eighteen, 
unless the age of majority is attained earlier under national legislation. It focuses on 
the needs specific to children, including: right from birth to a name; right to acquire 
a nationality; right to know and be cared for by her or his parents; right to preservation 
of her or his identity; right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both 
parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child's best interests; right to 
express  her  or  his  own  views  freely  in  all  matters;  right  to  freedom  of  expression; 
right  to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and  religion;  and  right  to  freedom  of 
association and to freedom of peaceful assembly. According to one NGO, Pakistan's 
progress in safeguarding child rights remains slow, although children make up nearly 
half of Pakistan's population, making it one of the largest populations of children in 
the world.  
69.  Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women: 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, often 
described as the international bill of rights for women, obliges signatory countries to 
eliminate discrimination against women in political and public life and to promote equal 
rights  for  women  and  men.  It  also  requires  countries  to  take  measures  to:  change 
harmful stereotypes based on gender; end exploitation of prostitution and trafficking 
in  women;  ensure  equal  rights  in  education  for  women;  guarantee  equal  access  to 
health  care;  eliminate  discrimination  in  economic  and  social  life  against  women, 
including  employment,  payment,  law  application,  marriage  and  family  life;  give 
attention  to  the  role  and  problems  of  rural  women.  Pakistan’s  accession  to  the 
Convention took place in 1996. 
16 
70.  In terms of indices established by United Nations Development Programme – Human 
Development Index and Gender Inequality Index– Pakistan ranked 150th and 133rd, 
respectively, among 168 countries in 2017. Pakistan belonged to the group of least 
developed countries with respect to Gender Development Index among five groups. 
71.  Provincial policies and Acts in vogue include:  
a.  Climate Change Policy 2016. The goal of the policy is to ensure that climate 
action  is  mainstreamed  in  the  development  planning  and  especially  in  the 
economically and socially vulnerable sectors of the economy; and to steer Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa towards green growth and climate compatible development. Some 
of the important objectives include: 
i.   Enhance awareness of the impacts of climate change among all stakeholders 
for necessary appropriate measures to combat and minimize these impacts  
ii.  Mainstream climate change in long term development planning as a vehicle for 
the implementation of the provincial Green Growth Strategy  
iii.  Integrate  adaptation  and  mitigation  measures  into  key  relevant  sectors‘ 
policies, strategies, and plans  
iv.  Facilitate action in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on climate adaptation and mitigation, 
while promoting long term sustainability  
v.  Enhance interdepartmental coordination and cooperation for effective climate 
action.  
vi.  Ensure water,  food and energy security for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in 
the face of a changing climate  
vii.  Address  climate  change  risks  particularly  those  arising  from  climate  induced 
disasters. 
viii.  Ensure  interests  of  vulnerable  groups  and  gender  aspects  are  adequately 
addressed in climate development strategies and planning  
ix.  Develop  bases  to  secure  sufficient  financial  and  technological  support,  and 
strengthen  institutional  and  human  resource  capacities  to  achieve  policy 
objectives; 
x.  Be able to tap financial and technological opportunities available internationally  
b.  KP-Youth  Policy  2016. The  KP  government  links  its  youth  development  work 
with education, sports, mobility, tourism and culture in the short and prosperity 
in the long run. The government has visualized the youth policy for creating an 
enabling environment for the youth by providing them equitable opportunities to 
realize their full potential in a safe, secure, conducive and congenial environment, 
working for a developed and prosperous Pakistan. One of the major objectives is 
that the youth possess economic and social competencies for their future market 
and social roles through an enabling quality education. The focus of the policy on 
youth groups, including male and female, rural and urban, literate and illiterate, 
and vulnerable youth groups i. e. minority youth, workshop workers, differently 
abled  youth.  religious  seminary  students,  jail  inmates,  transgender;  internally 
Displaced Persons (IDPs) and refugee youth.  
c.  Wildlife and Biodiversity Act 2015. Main aim of this Act is to strengthen the 
administration  of  the  organization  to  effectively  manage  wild  animals and  their 
habitats  and  to  conserve  biological  diversity  and  to  realize  its  intrinsic  and 
extrinsic  values 
through  sustainable  use  and  community  participation. 
Management  of  hunting  and  protection  and  conservation  of  Wildlife  sanctuary, 
17 
Site  of  Special  Scientific  Interest,  Wildlife  Refuges,  National  Parks,  Biosphere 
Reserves, National Natural Heritage Sites and Game Reserves have been covered 
under this Act. 
d.  KP Water Act 2020. The Act authorizes the provincial government to establish 
Water Resources Regulatory Authority, Water  Resources Commission and other 
relevant  regulatory  organs  and  service  providers  for  the  conservation, 
management, protection and judicious distribution among different users and its 
safe disposal. 
e.  Agriculture Policy—A Ten Years Perspective 2015. The agriculture policy of 
the province goals and objectives of agricultural policy are to:  
 
 
 
Enhance  sector  productivity  and  competitiveness  by  activities  such  as 
improving the supply chain, technology dissemination and trade promotion;  
Address  food  security  and  incomes  needs  of  the  vulnerable  sections  of  the 
population and targeted actions are needed to improve food security, reduce 
poverty and enhance the role of women; and  
Improve  natural  resource  management,  adaptation  to  climate  change  and 
disaster risk management.  
f.  Food  Security  Policy.  The  final  draft  of  the  policy  is  aimed  at  attaining 
sustainable  food  security,  poverty  alleviation  and  generating  employment 
opportunities  through  achieving  higher  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the 
province.  Short term,  medium  term  and  long  term  plans  have  been  devised to 
ensure implementation of the policy.  
g.  KP  Prohibition  of  Employment  of  Children  Act,  2015  to  prohibit  the 
employment  of  children  and  to  regulate  employment  of  adolescents  in  certain 
occupations and processes in the Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 
h.  KP Child Labour Policy 2018. One of the most important objectives of the policy 
is  eradication  of  child  labour,  particularly,  of  its  worst  forms  and  gradual 
elimination of all forms of child labour from all the sectors of KP economy with the 
intention to declare KP a child labour free province. 
III. 
INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
72.  Climate Change Ministry and EPA: The Climate Change Ministry was established in 
April  2012  and is  headed  by  the  federal  minister.    The  Ministry  has  three  attached 
organizations: 
i)  Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) 
ii)  Zoological Survey Department, and  
iii)  Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) 
73.  The environment wing of the ministry is responsible for the Multilateral Environmental 
Agreements  (MEAs)  including  the  United  Nation  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) and Kyoto Protocol. The Ministry of Climate Change has prepared 
Framework  for  implementation  of  Climate  Change  Policy  (2013),  which  provides 
priority based adaptation and mitigation measures in Pakistan to cope with adverse 
impacts  of  climate  change  and  to  control  and  reduce  Green  House  Gases  (GHG) 
emissions during 2014-2030. 
74.  EPA. The KP government has established Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was 
established in 1989 under the administrative control of Physical Planning and Housing 
(PP&H) Department. However, it is now working under the newly created Environment 
Department. EPA head office at Peshawar while the three directorates at Abbottabad 
,D.I.Khan, and Swat along with regional offices at Gadoon Swabi are also functional 
75.  Irrigation Department is also involved in flood control and protection and drainage.   
18 
76.  KP Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) deals with natural or man-made 
disasters in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and is mandated to engage in activities concerning 
all four stages of Disaster Management Spectrum. 
77.  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism:  The  tried  and  tested  participatory  development 
model  prevailing  in  the  province  and  beneficiary  feedback  mechanisms  through 
regular community organisations conferences and participatory M&E are affective tools 
for grievance redressal and corrective measure by the project. Additionally, most parts 
of the province has a traditional alternative dispute resolution system called Jirga for 
individual and community level grievance redressal and dispute resolution. However, 
environmental and social policies related complaints can be registered in writing by 
post or by email with PMU and Regional Project Management office who will examine 
and resolve the issue to the satisfaction of complainant within two weeks.  
78.  Any  project  level  grievance  is  not  foreseen  as  it  is  being  developed  with  the 
involvement  of  the  KP  government  and  project  interventions  will  be  implemented 
through  community  participation.  However, 
issue  during 
implementation,  PMU  and  Project  Steering  Committee  will  be  the  right  fora  for  its 
resolution.  The  complaint  will  have  to  be  registered  with  PMU  who  will  collect  the 
required information, listen to the concerned parties and dispose of the complaint per 
merit within three weeks or refer it to PSC who will review it in detail and decided it 
within 
IFAD  by 
email   (SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org)  for  a  fair  and  timely  resolution  through  an 
independent process 
four  weeks.  Complaints  can  also  be 
in  case  of  any 
registered  with 
IV. 
IFAD ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS 
79.  RETP-KP  project  has  been  designed  considering  the  national  and  provincial  policies 
and guidelines together with IFAD Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change 
2019-2025. The Project has also been designed in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines on 
Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  Following  is  a 
summary of the relevant pieces of policies 
80.  IFAD Policy on Agriculture and Rural Development: In line with the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and other international relevant agreements IFAD’s core 
mandate  is  to  support  the social and  economic empowerment  of  poor  rural  women 
and men. As such, it is opposed to any investment that will have a negative impact 
on  its  target  groups.  In  respect  to  the  overall goal  of  environmental  and  economic 
sustainability,  IFAD  is  committed  to  take  a  proactive  and  innovative  approach  to 
promote  projects  and  initiatives  that  are  specifically  designed  to  deliver  significant 
environmental, social and climate adaptation and mitigation benefits.  
81.  IFAD  Gender  and  Targeting  Policy:  Poverty  targeting,  gender  equality  and 
empowerment are cornerstones of IFAD’s work to reduce rural poverty and food and 
nutrition  insecurity.  This  puts  people  –  rural  women,  men,  youth  and  indigenous 
peoples – at the centre of IFAD’s development projects and policy engagement. This 
unique approach aims to support the development of inclusive, equitable, sustainable 
and resilient rural societies and agriculture sectors that are food secure and able to 
take advantage of the opportunities provided by growing markets, thus providing a 
springboard to rural transformation. Thus, IFAD has developed a deliberate Policy to 
address this issue. 
82.  IFAD  Guidelines  on  SECAP:  These  are  Guidelines  on  Social,  Environmental  and 
Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP). IFAD remains committed to mainstreaming 
social,  environmental  and  climate  change  solutions.  IFAD's  updated  Social, 
Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  were  approved  in  July 
2017. This SECAP 2017 Edition provides guiding values and principles and defines an 
improved  course  of  action  for  assessing  social,  environmental  and  climate  risks  to 
enhance 
the  sustainability  of  results-based  country  strategic  opportunities 
programmes (RB-COSOPs), country strategy notes (CSNs), programmes and projects. 
19 
83.  Included in SECAP are  a series Guidance Statements which are used in guiding the 
programme in avoiding and mitigating any impacts that may arise due to the project 
(Annexure 1). These include: 
i.  Guidance statement 1 – Biodiversity 
ii.  Guidance statement 2 – Agrochemicals 
iii.  Guidance statement 3 – Energy 
iv.  Guidance statement 4 – Fisheries and aquaculture 
v.  Guidance statement 5 – Forest resources 
vi.  Guidance statement 6 – Rangeland-based livestock production 
vii.  Guidance statement 7 – Water (agricultural and domestic use) 
viii.  Guidance statement 9 – Physical cultural resources 
ix.  Guidance statement 11 – Development of value chains, microenterprises and 
small enterprises 
x.  Guidance statement 12 – Rural finance (under revision) 
xi.  Guidance statement 13 – Physical and economic resettlement (under revision) 
xii.  Guidance statement 14 – Community health 
84.  In case of resettlement or economic displacement, SECAP emphasises the application 
of the principles of “do no harm” and “free, prior and informed consent” at all times 
and for all beneficiaries for any intervention that might affect the land access and user 
rights  of  communities.  However,  in  the  current  project,  there  is  no  resettlement 
involved, therefore the SECAP does not provide any information about the same. 
V. 
SECAP - ENVIRONMENT, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE RISK SCREENING 
87.  IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B 
or  C)  and  one  of  three  climate  risk  classifications  (high,  moderate  and  low). 
Determination  of  the  category  and  classification  also  depend  on  the  national 
requirements  and  the  existing  national  capacity  to  promote  and  implement 
environmental and social mitigation measures.  
88.  A  positive  response  to  any  question  between  1  and  22  (see  questions  below) 
categorizes  the  project  as  A.  Similarly,  a  positive  response  to  question  23  to  38 
categorizes  the  project  as  B.  In case  all  answers  are  negative,  the  project  will  be 
categorized as C. 
89.  The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks categorization are given 
as Appendix-1 herewith where the RETP-KP project has been rated as Category B. 
VI. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN (ESMP)   
90.  The project mostly involves soft activities like mobilization/formation of professional 
farmers organisations, public-private-producer partnerships, vocational trainings and 
skills development for the target group employability and income increase. It does not 
involve infrastructure development or other hard core civil works, land acquisition or 
displacement  and  resettlement  of  people  that  would  require  detailed  analyses  and 
specific mitigation and adaptation measures. The project has been put in Category B 
as per SECAP guidelines. 
91.  Future proposed activities under Conponent-1 may involve climate smart agriculture 
technologies such as high efficiency irrigation systems, tunnel farming, raised beds, 
drought  resistant  varieties  and  land  levelling  etc.  All  of  these  activities  are  mostly 
environment and eco-friendly and will not have adverse impacts on the environment. 
92.  If  required,  pesticides  and  chemicals  will  be  used  according  to  recommended 
procedures and guidelines while awareness and capacity building activities will also 
be conducted. 
20 
93.  Activities  under  Component-2  on  economic  graduation  are  mostly  vocational  and 
technical  trainings  for  the  youth  and  poor  and  will  be  carried  under  the  prescribed 
recommendation of the concerned manuals. Special lectures on the use of machines 
and equipment will be organized for the trainees before the training starts. 
94.  The  ESMP  provides  guidelines  for  the  management  of  potential  environmental  and 
social impacts together with climate change aspects of the project interventions. The 
ESMP identifies parties responsible for monitoring actions, and any training or capacity 
building  needs,  Mitigation  measures  have  been  identified  to  reduce  present  and 
potential impacts associated with the proposed activities. Social mitigation includes 
the  measures  creating  awareness  and  proper  mobilization,  proper  participation  of 
members in the planning and implementation of activities, inclusion of women etc to 
mitigate  effects  of  local  disagreements  and  conflicts.  Physical  mitigation  includes 
measures  that  address  impacts  to  the  physical  environment,  such  as  biological 
communities, vegetation, water resources, air quality and others. 
95.  The  project  does  not  involve  infrastructure  and  other  civil  works  development, 
however, there are chances that the FPOs might go for establishing fruit, vegetable or 
dairy  processing  units  at  local  level.  Generally,  fruit  processing  (canning,  drying, 
freezing, and preparation of juices, jams, and jellies) steps include preparation of the 
raw  material  (cleaning,  trimming,  and  peeling  followed  by  cooking,  canning,  or 
freezing. Plant operation is often seasonal and typically generates volumes of effluents 
and  solid  waste.  The  effluents  contain  high  organic  loads,  cleansing  and  blanching 
agents,  salt,  and  suspended  solids  such  as  fibres  and  soil particles. They  may also 
contain pesticide residues washed from the raw materials. The main solid wastes are 
organic  materials,  including  discarded  fruits.  Odour  problems  can  occur  with  poor 
management of solid wastes and effluents. 
96.  Environmental impacts associated with a dairy processing unit are generation of waste 
and  wastewater.  Once  started,  it  is  a  regular  full-time  activity  to  be  monitored 
regularly to avoid environmental impacts. Wastewater and packaging material waster 
are generated that need to dispose-off properly to avoid any contamination especially 
water  resources.    Quality  control  mechanisms  to  be  in  place  from  processing  to 
storage and to consumer.  
97.   Details of the ESMP and mitigation measures are provided in APPENDIX-3. 
VII.  POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS 
98.  Environmental  and  Social  Impacts:  The  design  of  RETP  focuses  on  Professional 
Farmer Organizations (PFO) and Public Private-Producer Partnership (4P) and capacity 
building and trainings in employable trades for productive employment. As such the 
project does not entail activities that would warrant environmental hazards at least in 
the beginning, however, the business plans of PFOs and 4Ps might lead to sub-projects 
that may involve some construction activities whose potential impacts can be: 
 
Impacts on public health of surrounding communities and workers through air, 
water and soil pollution, noise or direct contact with hazardous material.  
  Soil erosion and displacement are expected as soil related impacts 
  Ecosystem and biodiversity degradation through new development and economic 
activities. 
  The sub-project may require establishment of temporary workforce during 
construction period, while permanent workforce after infrastructure development 
and capacity building through trainings, and will induce negative impact on 
overall construction, operation and maintenance cost. 
99.  However,  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  and  its 
implementation will minimize the adverse impacts. 
21 
100.  Climate  change.  Pakistan  is  among  the  top  ten  countries  that  are  highly 
vulnerable to climate change.  Being an agricultural country, its economy is also very 
sensitive to any change affecting temperature and rainfall in the country. Increasing 
temperatures  and  changing  rainfall  patterns  and  intensities  are  impacting  the 
livelihoods  in  Pakistan  and  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa.  Variations  have  been  observed  in 
temperature  and  rainfall  in  different  parts  of  KP  as  given  in  Table  4  based  on  a  30 
years (1980-2010) data analysis. The trend analysis reveals that climate change in KP 
has been perceived in the form of increased rainfalls and increased mean temperatures (S. 
Babar, 2012). 
101.  All the three regions, Southern, Central and Northern, are expected to receive more 
rains than before during Kharif while the overall increase for KP is expected to be 11 
mm. Maximum temperature has been decreasing for southern and central regions by 
1.3°C and 0.6°C, respectively and has been increasing by 0.7°C for northern region. 
Overall, the maximum temperature has decreased by 0.6°C while mean temperature 
has  decreased  by  0.3°C  for KP in  Kharif. The  trends  for  Rabi  season  are  increasing 
rainfalls and temperatures over a 30 year span (Table 4). 
Table 4. Trend in temperature and rainfall during Kharif and Rabi Seasons in KP. 
Region 
Kharif Season Trend 
Rabi Season Trend 
Rainfall   Max. 
Temp. 
Min. 
Temp. 
Mean 
Temp. 
Rainfall  Max. 
Temp. 
Min. 
Temp. 
Mean 
Temp. 
19mm↑ 
1.3°C↓  0.8°C↑  0.3°C↓ 
3mm↑ 
0.7°C↑  1.6°C↑  1.1°C↑ 
38mm↑ 
0.6°C↓  0.7°C↑  0.3°C↑  25mm↑ 
1.3°C↑  1.2°C↑  1.2°C ↑ 
4mm↑ 
0.7°C↑  1.3°C↓  No 
15mm↑ 
2.5°C↑  No 
1°C ↑ 
Change 
11mm↑  0.6°C↓  0.2°C↑  0.3°C↓ 
15mm↑ 
1°C↑ 
Change 
2°C↑ 
1.2°C ↑ 
Southern 
Region 
Central  
Region 
Northern 
Region 
KP 
Adapted from Climate Change and its Impact on Agriculture in Pakistan: A case Study of KP (1980-
2010). Ph. D Thesis by Samreen Babar 2012. University of Peshawar).   
102.  Being an  upper  riparian, KP  is  more  vulnerable  to  climatic  events and  disasters. 
Extreme  events  such  as  cloudburst  over  the  catchment  areas  of  Indus  and  its 
tributaries, have frequently occurred during the last several years’ monsoon seasons, 
especially  2010.  This  often  leads  to  flash  floods  and  landslides,  causing  damages 
across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, infrastructure, transport and 
communications,  and  housing.  Areas  near  swelling  rivers  and  low-lying  areas 
experience major floods causing all kinds of damages. KP is also facing an increased 
number  of  glacial  lake  outburst  floods  (GLOF)  due  to  increased  temperatures  and 
intense precipitation, mostly in Chital. Agro-ecological Zones A and B are at high risk 
of flooding while droughts are more common in the southern districts, Zones C and D. 
(KP Climate Change Policy 2016). 
103.  As  a  result  of  the  2010  floods,  KP  suffered  US$  1.1  billion  in  damages,  which 
included damages and losses of US$ 96 million to the agriculture sector in the province  
(https://ewsdata.rightsindevelopment.org/files/documents/74/WB-P163474.pdf).  A 
forecasting study by the Climate Change Centre of Agriculture University Peshawar in 
2019 in 10 districts of KP showed that with exception of Dir Upper and Shangla, wheat 
was affected due to changing climate in other areas whereas wheat could not be grown 
in the rainfed areas of central and southern districts because of shortage of moisture 
and delay in rainfall. Maize was affected in Lakki Marwawt, Nowshera and Dir Lower, 
while in Abbottabad, Mansehra and Shangla the area under maize has shrunk.  Rice 
was being gradually replaced by vegetables and maize. 
104.  Similarly, rice cultivation is affected throughout the province except in Upper Dir 
and Shangla, while the production of citrus, apples and peer is gradually decreasing 
22 
due to climate change. Maize was affected due to the shortage of water and rise in 
temperature in Lakki Marwat, Nowshera and Lower Dir districts. 
105.  Discussions  with  the  Agriculture  Department  and  farmer  groups  revealed  that 
rainfall  pattern  has  changed  in  D.  I.  Khan.  Rain  showers  during  pollination  and 
harvesting  of  date  palm cause  loss  of about  30  to  40  percent.  Rains  during  mango 
pollination  period  cause  malformation  of  fruit  and  decrease  production.  Also,  late 
cotton  sowing  is  more  beneficial  now  than  the  traditional  sowing  period.  Abrupt 
changes in day and night temperatures adversely date palm production in D.I. Khan. 
Climate Risk Screening 
106.  RETP  is  focusing  on  agribusiness  through  PFOs  and  4Ps  development  under 
Component -1 in the province. The project will develop 550 new or  restructured 
Professional  Farmer  Organizations  (PFOs)  with  300  -  700  producers  per 
organization.  The  sub-component  on  Agro  Value  Chain  4Ps  development  will 
develop 20 4Ps, with a minimum of 1,000 producers per 4P.The second component 
on Economic Graduation and Employment will support around 200,000 ultra-poor 
and poor households with limited access to land and with a specific focus on women 
(50 per cent) and youth (50 per cent) to develop their skills to become employable 
or  to  create  their  own  employment  /  business  in  order  for  them  to  improve 
significantly and in a sustainable way their livelihood. As such there is no hard core 
infrastructure  or  civil  works  involved  to  be  affected  by  climate  induced  hazards 
such as floods and GLOFs etc. 
107.  Overall, the province has experienced floods, droughts and GLOFs in various parts 
in the past and may face the same in the future as well. The northern and central 
regions are usually faced with the challenges of floods while the arid southern part 
experiences  droughts.  As  discussed  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  changes  in 
temperatures, rainfall patterns and intensities have advantaged and disadvantages 
depending upon the agro climatic zones of the province and, therefore, different 
mitigation measures suiting local conditions will have to be adopted. 
108.  The project area’s exposure to climate change is high to substantial but the nature 
of interventions is such that its impact will be moderate to low. Any proposed future 
interventions by PFOs and 4Ps will be subject to screening and will be implemented 
under appropriate guidelines and SOPs. 
109.  Risk analysis. There may be some environmental ad climate related risks which 
may  impact  the  project,  however,  appropriate  mitigation  measures  have  been 
proposed  to  minimize  the  impact.    Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Change 
impacts    and  mitigation  measures  for  various  activities  and  sub-projects  are 
provided  in  the  following  Table.  Please  see  more  detailed  Matrix  of  Social, 
Environmental  and  Climate  Risk  Factors  and  Mitigating  Measures  at  Table  1  of  
APPENDIX-3. 
Context 
Risks 
Mitigations 
Vulnerability 
to 
environment
al conditions 
vulnerability 
Rural population is faced with 
inherent 
to 
weather  causing  variability  of 
monsoons,  erosion  and  its 
impact  on  water  reservoirs, 
and 
events 
including floods and droughts. 
extreme 
The project activities will make the best 
use  of  climate  sensitive  resources  and 
will  put  in  place  measures  within  its 
components  to  minimise  any  risks. 
Some  proposed  mitigation  actions 
include  appropriate 
for 
climate  smart  agriculture,  food  and 
fruit  processing  facilities    and  other 
subprojects  to  be  proposed  by  PFOs  , 
and  capacity  building  of  government 
staff  and  beneficiaries  for  reduction  of 
screening 
23 
Vulnerability 
to climate 
change 
impacts 
Biodiversity 
Conservatio
n 
and 
trends 
Present and projected climatic 
patterns 
for 
precipitation  and  temperature 
indicate  that 
frequent  and 
intensified  extreme  weather 
events  will  occur  resulting  in 
food insecurity, degradation of 
ecosystems. However, most of 
the  proposed  activities  under 
the  project  are  soft  in  nature 
and  are  not  going  to  be 
by 
substantially 
climate change.   
impacted 
the 
to  or 
There  is  moderate  risk  of 
threat 
loss  of 
biodiversity,  availability  of 
diversified  nutritious 
food, 
ecosystems  and  ecosystem 
services, or the  unsustainable 
natural 
use/production 
resources. 
of 
risk level and building resilience. 
holder 
skills, 
The  project  will  ensure  prioritization 
and  selection  of  activities  in  line  with 
the  provincial  government’s  climate 
change policy. Support will be provided 
farmers  with 
to 
small 
knowledge, 
choices, 
crop 
selection of technologies and practices 
in different locations and  agro-climatic 
condition  to  minimize  climate  change 
impacts,    Approval  of  interventions 
to 
would 
an 
be 
screening 
environmental/climate 
the 
process 
to 
interventions 
climate 
friendly/resistant  and  do  not  have 
adverse social or environmental impact 
ensure 
are 
subject 
that 
Project will further initiate a detailed 
and robust analyses for natural resource 
base and foreseen climatic impacts 
during the design stage; that will guide 
and inform better design of 
interventions.  
The project is unlikely to have adverse 
impacts on biodiversity as investments 
will be made in eco-friendly and climate 
smart and sustainable technologies for 
agriculture and livestock.  Communities 
will 
concerning 
sensitised 
biodiversity conservation. There will be 
no  activities  national  parks  and 
protected areas. 
be 
Resource 
Efficiency 
and Pollution 
Prevention 
There  is  low  risk  of  causing 
pollution  to  air,  water,  and 
land,  and  inefficient  use  of 
natural  resources  that  may 
threaten  people,  ecosystem 
services and the environment.  
Cultural 
Heritage 
: No risk envisaged 
Indigenous 
People 
Not  applicable  and  no  risk 
envisaged. 
If  required,  the  project  will  invest  in 
various  measures  that  will  promote 
resource  efficiency  including  efficient 
smart 
water  use 
technologies 
and 
sustainable 
livestock 
livestock production.  
climates 
agriculture 
production, 
and 
for 
Labour and 
Working 
Conditions 
The  risk  that  the  project  may 
labour 
exploitative 
cause 
practices 
kind 
like 
community  contributions  of 
the 
labour 
chronically, 
and 
vulnerable poor. 
to 
left 
extreme 
are 
in 
The  risk  will  mitigate,  as  practiced  in 
other  IFAD  financed  project,  through 
exempting the chronically, extreme and 
vulnerable  poor  (BISP  Poverty  Score 
Card Category 0-16) from any cash or 
in kind contributions.   
24 
Community 
Health and 
Safety 
In  general,  the  nature  of 
project  interventions  is  such 
that  they  do  not  envisaged 
risks  of  significant  negative 
impacts  on  community  health 
and  safety.  High  nutrition 
value foods are expected from 
the project for households and 
to 
communities.  Exposure 
spread  of  COVID  19  in  group 
meetings  and  training  may 
pose a minor risk.  
Any sub-projects of PFOs will be subject 
to screening. When required, pesticides 
and  other  chemicals  will  be  used  with 
all precautionary measures. For COVID 
19,  mitigation  measures  will  include 
awareness  creation  and  sensitization 
most 
and 
updated 
Government/WHO 
related  guideline 
and  standard  operating  procedure  for 
social distancing, wearing of masks and 
regular  disinfection  of  frequently  used 
areas/surfaces etc.. 
following 
Physical and 
Economic 
Resettlement 
There is no probability of any 
resettlement  or  economic 
displacements 
Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions 
greenhouse 
The  risks  of  any  significantly 
increase 
gas 
(GHG)  emissions  and  thereby 
contribute  to  anthropogenic 
climate change, are minimal. 
 No  specific  mitigation  measures  are 
required. 
Vulnerability 
of target 
populations 
and 
ecosystems to 
climate 
variability and 
hazards 
Stakeholder 
Engagement/C
oordination 
ecosystems 
About  80  percent  of  KP 
population  is  rural  depending 
mostly  on  the  on  farm  and  off 
farm  sectors.    The  effects  of 
climate  change  are  being  felt 
across 
with 
adverse 
impacts  on  natural 
resources  and  the  livelihoods. 
Declining water availability and 
soil  degradation  is  impacting 
agriculture  at  a  time  when 
agricultural 
demand 
products  continues  to  rapidly 
rise  due  to  population  growth 
and  improving  diets.  The  poor 
are  likely  to  be  hit  hard      by 
climate  change,  and 
their 
capacity  to  respond  to  climate 
change is lowest.  
for 
investment 
in  climate 
To  reduce  exposure  to  the  inherent 
risks,  the  project  will  apply  promotion 
of production technologies that reduce 
exposure to increased variability as well 
as 
smart 
technologies.  Awareness  raising  and 
building  resilience  particularly  among 
the poor will be a key capacity building 
intervention. 
All proposed interventions will undergo 
climate screening checklist/criteria 
before implementation to ensure 
required adaptability at design stage 
employing needed mitigation measures 
during implementation. 
Further  a planned  detailed  analysis on 
climate (as described above) at project 
in 
early  stage  will  better  guide 
designing 
smart 
interventions.   
climate 
the 
Stakeholder  engagement  and 
coordination  risks  are  low  as 
the  project  will  use 
the 
successfully  tried  and  tested 
institutional  arrangements  for 
stakeholder consultation during 
cycle 
and 
the 
and 
among 
coordination 
between 
implementation 
agencies and stakeholders. The 
province  has  long  history  of 
donor 
implementation 
funded participatory integrated 
development projects.  
project 
of 
25 
learnt. 
The project design and its institutional 
arrangements  are  based  on  extensive 
discussion  with  government  and 
  Key  stakeholders 
lessons 
include  the  government  planning  and 
development  and  line  departments, 
NGOs/Rural  Support  Programmes, 
community 
existing 
organisations/groups 
private 
sector  engaged  in  agriculture  value 
chain. The Project Steering Committee 
level 
will 
coordination  and  mechanisms  have 
been  put  in  place  at  operational/field 
provincial 
facilitate 
and 
There  is  minimum  risk  related 
to selection of the target group 
and  their  participation  poor, 
farmers,  women 
smallholder 
and,  youth) 
in  the  project 
activities.  
Stakehold
er 
Grievances 
is 
risk 
low  as 
the 
The 
development 
preparatory 
approach 
that 
beneficiaries, target groups and 
lodge 
stakeholders 
grievances and have corrective 
measures taken by the project. 
warrants 
can 
for 
level 
NGOs/RSPs, 
community level coordination 
inter 
private 
departmental, 
and 
sector 
of 
group 
Selection 
and 
target 
households  particularly  the  extreme, 
chronically and vulnerable poor, will be 
guided  by  BISP  Poverty  Scorecard. 
IFAD  has  successfully  used 
this 
strategy  for  poverty  reduction  and 
smallholder  agriculture  development 
and is being adopted across the country 
by government and donors 
through 
The  tried  and  tested  participatory 
development  model  prevailing  in  the 
feedback 
province  and  beneficiary 
mechanisms 
regular 
community  organisations  conferences 
and  participatory  M&E  are  affective 
tools 
for  grievance  redressal  and 
corrective  measure  by  the  project. 
Additionally, most parts of the province 
have  a  traditional  alternative  dispute 
for 
resolution  system  called  Jirga 
individual 
level 
and  dispute 
grievance 
resolution.  
and 
redressal 
community 
26 
APPENDIX-1 
SECAP - Environmental, Social and Climate Risk Screening 
1. 
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B 
or  C)  and  one  of  three  climate  risk  classifications  (high,  moderate  and  low). 
Determination  of  the  category  and  classification  also  depend  on  the  national 
requirements  and  the  existing  national  capacity  to  promote  and  implement 
environmental and social mitigation measures.  
2.  A positive response to any question between 1 and 22 (see questions below) 
categorizes the project as A. Similarly, a positive response to question 23 to 38 
categorizes the project as B. In case all answers are negative, the project will be 
categorized as C. 
3.  The  checklists  for  environmental  and  social  and  climate  risks  is  attached  herewith 
where the RETP-KP project has been rated as Category B. 
Guiding questions for environment and 
social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not 
readily remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any 
wetlands? (Guidance statement 1) 
2.  Would the project cause significant 
adverse impacts to habitats and/or 
ecosystems and their services (e.g., 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of 
natural forest, loss of habitat, 
erosion/other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation and hydrological 
changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 
and 5) 
3.  Does the proposed project target area 
include ecologically sensitive areas,7 
areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation, and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats 
depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
No 
No 
No 
The project covers the 
entire province which 
has national parks and 
wildlife reserves but, 
there are no activities 
under the project that 
will affect these areas in 
any way. 
7 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere 
reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and 
variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
27 
The project covers the 
entire KP province where 
hazards may occur in 
specific locations, 
however, the project is 
financing soft activities 
and no civil works are 
involved to be affected 
by  geophysical hazards 
The project will be 
supporting agribusiness 
activities but will not be 
involved in any direct or 
significant use of 
agrochemicals 
4.  Is the project location subjected to 
major destruction as a result of 
geophysical hazards (tsunamis, 
landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
No 
Natural resources 
5.  Would the project lead to 
No 
unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
exceeding carrying capacity. For 
example, is the development 
happening in areas where little up-to-
date information exists on sustainable 
yield/carrying capacity? (Guidance 
statements 4, 5 and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-scale8 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or 
where their development involves 
significant alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant 
use of agrochemicals which may lead 
to life-threatening illness and long-
term public health and safety 
concerns? (Guidance statement 14) 
No 
No 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based 
No 
(groundwater and/or surface water) 
development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion 
and/or reduced flow has occurred from 
the effects of climate change or from 
overutilization? (Guidance statement 
7) 
9.  Does the project pose a risk of 
introducing potentially invasive 
species or genetically modified 
organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have 
an adverse effect on local 
biodiversity? (Guidance statement 1) 
No 
10.  Does the project make use of 
No 
wastewater (e.g., industrial, mining, 
sewage effluent)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
8 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where 
they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
28 
Infrastructure development 
11.  Does the project include the 
No 
construction/ rehabilitation/upgrade 
of dam(s) and/or reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following 
criteria?  
-  more than 15 metre high wall;  
-  more than 500 metre long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir 
capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 
2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale 
irrigation schemes rehabilitation 
and/or development (more than 
100 hectares per scheme)?9  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared 
above 10 km long, or any farmer with 
more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (Guidance 
statement 10). Will the works entail 
temporary and/or permanent resident 
workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or 
correction of natural waterbodies  
(e.g., river training)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
15.  Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of 
surface water, leaving the river flow 
below 20 per cent environmental flow 
plus downstream user requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
No 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic 
No 
displacement10 or physical 
resettlement of more than 20 people, 
or impacting more than 10 per cent of 
an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion 
No 
and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources? (Guidance statement 9) 
No infrastructure related 
activities in the project.  
No infrastructure and, 
therefore, no  
displacement or 
resettlement 
9 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations 
determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they 
exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
10 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or 
means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
29 
Actually, the project 
activities will increase 
the income of such 
communities and will 
provide skills to their 
youth for reducing 
poverty and increasing 
income. 
18. Would the project generate significant 
social adverse risk/impacts to local 
communities (including disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups, indigenous 
people, persons vulnerable to GBV and 
sexual exploitation and abuse and 
people with disabilities) or other 
project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19. Does the project include the 
manufacture and transportation of 
hazardous and toxic materials which 
may affect the environment? 
(Guidance statement 2) 
20. Does the project include the 
construction of a large or medium-
scale industrial plant? 
21. 
 Does the project include the 
development of large-scale production 
forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22. Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 1 to Question 21) 
through the provision of a line of credit 
to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or 
social implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural 
No 
intensification and/or expansion of 
cropping area in non-sensitive areas 
that may have adverse impacts on 
habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include 
No 
rangeland and livestock development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries 
No 
where there is information on stocks, 
fishing effort and sustainable yield? Is 
there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing 
zones and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
There are no such 
activities that may 
adversely impact 
sensitive areas  
The project’s focus is on 
skill and capacity 
development for 
increasing production 
and incomes. 
The project activities will 
not  risk fish stock in any 
way.  
26.  Would the project activities include 
No 
aquaculture and/or agriculture in 
newly introduced or intensively 
No new developments 
under the project and 
there is no coastal in 
30 
project area.  
Aquaculture (fish 
farming) may be 
involved in the existing 
area by PFOs. 
The project may involve 
in small enterprise 
development depending 
upon business plans of 
PFOs. 
However, no activity will 
involve physical or 
economic displacement.  
The project will not 
develop agrochemicals, 
however, but PFOs may 
opt for community level 
development of fruit, 
vegetable or dairy 
processing units.   
practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and 
clearing of coastal vegetation, change 
in hydrology or introduction of exotic 
species? (Guidance statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include 
No 
natural resource-based value chain 
development? (Guidance statements 
1, 6 and 12) 
28.  Do the project activities include 
watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
No 
29.  Does the project include large-scale 
No 
soil and water conservation 
measures? (Guidance statements 1 
and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale 
No 
irrigation and drainage, and small and 
medium dam subprojects (capacity < 
3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 
7 and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and 
microenterprise development 
subprojects? (Guidance statements 12 
and 13) 
Yes 
32.  Does the project include the 
No 
development of agroprocessing 
facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would the construction or operation 
No 
of the project cause an increase in 
traffic on rural roads? (Guidance 
statement 10) 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities 
have minor adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
No 
35.  Would the project result in physical 
No 
resettlement of 20 people or less, or 
impacting less than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term 
public health and safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
No 
31 
37.  Would the project require a migrant 
No 
workforce or seasonal workers (for 
construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 23 to Question 37) 
through the provision of a line of 
credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme 
climatic events, such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves? 
Yes  No 
Yes 
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area 
foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or 
extreme weather that will adversely affect 
the project impact, sustainability or cost 
over its lifetime? 
Yes 
32 
Additional 
explanation of 
“yes” response* 
The project 
covers all 35 
districts of the 
province including 
areas vulnerable 
to flooding and 
droughts Increase 
in water  
availability will be 
observed in the 
near future 
causing floods, 
but decrease in 
medium future 
and after 2050 
causing droughts 
There will be 
changes in 
temperature and 
rainfall.  By 2050, 
the temperature 
in the Province is 
expected to 
increase 
throughout the 
year by 1-1.5 0C. 
The rainfall 
projection 
indicates that the 
summer monsoon 
will bring much 
more rain in 2050 
than in 1960-
1995 and the 
winter monsoon 
slightly less. 
3.  Would the project make investments in low-
lying coastal areas/zones exposed to 
tropical storms? 
4.  Would the project make investments in 
glacial areas and mountains zones? 
Yes 
5.  Would the project promote agricultural 
activity in marginal and/or highly degraded 
areas that have increased sensitivity to 
climatic events (such as on hillsides, 
deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
6.  Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced 
significant weather-related losses and 
damages in the past? 
7.  Would the project develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with a track record of 
extreme weather events? 
8.  Is the project target group entirely 
dependent on natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rainfed agricultural plots, 
migratory fish stocks) that have been 
affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events? 
9.  Would climate variability likely affect 
agricultural productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access to 
33 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No low lying 
coastal areas in 
KP.  
The northern part 
of KP is mostly 
mountainous and 
is famous for 
orchards and 
fruits. 
Agribusiness will 
be more 
rewarding there. 
Not for projects of 
this type which do 
not involve 
infrastructure and 
other civil works.   
There have been 
very specific 
localized cases 
with hard-core 
infrastructure 
development 
projects.  
The two 
components of 
the project mostly 
involve farmers’ 
organizations 
mobilization and 
capacity building, 
provision of 
vocational and 
skill development 
trainings. No 
infrastructure or 
civil works 
involved.  
They have other 
sources of 
livelihoods as 
well.  
Yes 
In some cases, 
productivity may 
be affected due to 
markets and/or the associated incidence of 
pests and diseases for the project target 
groups? 
10. Would weather-related risks or climatic 
extremes likely adversely impact upon key 
stages of identified value chains in the 
project (from production to markets)? 
11. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are diversified? 
12. Is the project investing in infrastructure that 
is exposed to infrequent extreme weather 
events? 
13. Is the project investing in institutional 
development and capacity-building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer groups, 
cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
14. Does the project have the potential to 
become more resilient through the adoption 
of green technologies at a reasonable cost? 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
15. Does the project intervention have 
opportunities to strengthen indigenous 
climate risk management capabilities? 
16. Does the project have opportunities to 
integrate climate resilience aspects through 
policy dialogue to improve agricultural 
sector strategies and policies? 
No 
Yes 
34 
floods and 
droughts which 
will also affect 
market 
accessibility. . 
The project 
focuses on 
agribusiness 
development and 
training youth in 
skills for 
employable 
trades to 
generate income. 
No specific value 
chains identified 
at this stage. 
No such activities 
envisaged under 
the project. 
The project will 
establish PFOs 
and strengthening 
FSCs who will be 
trained in running 
agri businesses 
and generating 
incomes on 
sustainable basis 
Depending upon 
the business 
plans of PFOs, 
the project has 
the potential to 
adopt green 
technologies at 
small scales for 
small holders 
Component-3 of 
the project  
provides 
opportunities for 
improving such 
strategies and 
policies. 
17. Does the project have potential to integrate 
climate resilience measures without 
extensive additional costs (e.g., improved 
building codes, capacity-building, or 
including climate risk issues in policy 
processes)? 
18. Based on the information available would 
the project benefit from a more thorough 
accounting of GHG  emission ? 
No 
No 
*The additional explanation, where possible, will provide the justification for classification. 
Consideration should be given particularly to provide additional explanations for questions 13 to 17. 
35 
APPENDIX - 2 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
1.  This section describes the process for risk assessment of the potential 
environmental, social and climate change impact of PFOs and 4Ps sub-projects. The 
sub-projects will be categorized as per SECAP criteria. 
2.  Sub-Project Selection and Screening: RETP will consider sub-projects with 
Category B and C only, while screening will be carried out per IFAD screening 
checklist and following the Rapid Assessment checklist.  Screening for environmental 
and social impacts using the Rapid Assessment Checklist (Attachment A) will be 
introduced for all subprojects before implementation. The screening process will 
include: assessing impacts; examining alternatives to minimize the negative 
impacts; enhancing positive impacts; and compensating for adverse impacts. If the 
Rapid Assessment Checklist indicates that the possible negative impacts from 
implementation of the subproject would be minimal and that the positive impacts 
would certainly outweigh them, further action with respect to environmental and 
social safeguards will not be required upon approval of the Checklist results by PMU. 
If the negative impacts are more than minimal or irreversible according to the 
Checklist, an Environmental Impact Assessment must be conducted and an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) developed, whose suggested 
methodology and structure is shown in Attachment B, to mitigate the negative 
impacts.   
3.  Attachment A: Rapid Assessment Checklist 
“Additional Information” field investigations and visits must be completed when negative 
impact  is  identified  or  expected.  For  the  purpose  of  allowing  examination  from  various 
angles, some impacts are addressed more than once through different questions. 
Section A: Project Siting 
Name of staff  
Date: 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Type, location and 
area of the sub-
project 
Type (infrastructure, agro processing, dairy 
processing, cold storage) 
The approximate area (ac/ha)? 
The GPS co-ordinates? 
The estimated number of population (male, 
female, aged over 70, aged under 15)? 
36 
a.  Beneficiaries 
b.  Affected 
Dominant environmental feature (e.g., 
rainforest, dry forest, savannah, barren 
land, agricultural land, pasture, other)? 
Likelihood of recurrent natural disasters 
(e.g., drought, flood, wildfire, strong wind) 
in the area? 
The level of economic resilience? 
Is the 
project/subproject 
area in or close to: 
Densely populated 
areas? 
Cultural heritage 
sites? 
Protected areas? 
Wetlands? 
Estuarine? 
Buffer zones of 
protected area? 
Special areas for 
protecting 
biodiversity? 
Other 
Will the project/subproject require support 
facilities (water, electricity, gas, access 
road etc.)? 
Source and quality of water? 
Section B: Project Environmental Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the 
impact 
37 
Will the 
project/ 
subproject 
cause: 
Ecological disturbances or 
loss of ecological functions 
due to infrastructure 
construction? 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Environmental degradation 
from any of interventions? 
Environmental degradation 
from construction activities 
and equipment? 
Accidental release of 
hazardous chemicals? 
Increase in generation of 
solid waste? 
Whether the design 
includes safe waste 
disposal 
Occupational health 
hazards due to exposure to 
dust, hazardous material, 
noise, etc. 
Public health risks from 
solid, liquid, gaseous waste 
discharges? 
Changes in water flows? 
Eventual degradation of 
surface water bodies? 
Eventual degradation of 
groundwater bodies? 
Soil contamination? 
Decrease in soil fertility? 
Air pollution?  
38 
Section C: Social Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the 
project/ 
subproject:  
Operate where property 
rights on resources (e.g., 
land and water) are legally 
and traditionally recognized? 
Cause changes to land 
tenure, land use, access to 
or use of resources? 
Require land acquisition? 
- 
 How will the cost be shared between the 
project and the landowner? 
Obtain private land with 
project/community funding 
and through willing-buyer-
willing-seller arrangement? 
Involve dislocation or 
involuntary resettlement of 
inhabitants? 
Cause modification in 
technology and land uses, 
which affect current 
socioeconomic activities? 
Increase unemployment? 
Cause influx of laborers 
from other areas? 
Create a possibility of 
uncontrolled in-migration of 
people and overloading of 
infrastructure from 
improved transportation 
system? 
39 
Have disproportionate 
impacts on the vulnerable 
groups (e.g., the poor, 
women, children, indigenous 
peoples, disabled)? 
Involve or be complicit in 
alteration, damage or 
removal of cultural 
heritage? 
Section D: Other Considerations 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project stage for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the 
impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the national regulation in country 
require EIA or ESIA for the activities under 
the project? 
Does local capacity exist for fulfilment of 
EIA and ESIA requirements in 
country/countries affected by the project? 
Does the project address issues that have 
also been addressed by other projects or 
approaches? 
What are  the project/subproject 
cumulative or long-term impacts? 
Is it possible to isolate the impacts from the 
project/subproject for monitoring? 
4.  Attachment  B:  Suggested  Methodology  and  Structure  of  Environmental  and 
Social Management Plans: An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
will be prepared for each subproject where initial screening demands preparation of 
such a plan. 
5.  Suggested Structure: A suggested structure of ESMF is as follows: 
40 
A.  Executive Summary 
A summary of the contents and key findings written in a way that is easily understood by 
the general public. It should be concise, about 3 to 5 pages. 
B.  Background 
Subproject specific background information will be included in this section. 
C.  Subproject Overview 
This section will provide an overview of the subproject and its relation to the project to 
which the subproject belongs. 
D.  Objectives 
The  section  will  list  the  objectives  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
specific to the subproject, based on its detailed information provided by the appropriate 
Project Management Unit. The project and subproject details should include their precise 
nature and scope, site location, activities to be undertaken, and timing and scheduling. 
E.  Scope of Work 
This section should list and describe all national, provincial legislations and regulations as 
well as IFAD policies that give rise to the Environmental and Social Management Plan. The 
scope should take into account the nature and the magnitude of the potential impacts in 
addition to the project location and size. 
F.  Screening of Environmental and Social Impacts  
This  section  will  contain  the  assessment  results  of  anticipated  impacts  of  the  project 
activities  on  the  environment  and  the  people,  including  the  list  of  key  concerns  and 
potential impacts of the subproject on the environment and the people. The assessment 
will be the base for deciding whether any auxiliary plan would be required:  
G.  Baseline information 
This  section  will  describe  proposed  sites  and  their  immediate  surroundings  with  texts, 
maps,  photographs  as  well  as  key  environmental  and  social  aspects  of  the  sites  and 
surroundings, such as  demography,  ethnicity, socio  economic activities, occupation  and 
livelihoods, land form and land use, land ownership, water resources, settlements, critical 
habitat or protected areas, formal and informal groups,  methods of communication and 
transport,  cultural  heritage  sites  or  graveyards,  sensitive  receptor  such  as  schools, 
hospitals  and  access  routes.  The  section  will  also  include  baseline  data  necessary  to 
monitor all key environmental and social impacts identified through screening. 
H.  Environmental and Social Impacts 
This section will outline both positive and negative impacts, including cumulative ones, of 
the subproject by each type of intervention, assess the severity of these impacts and the 
range  of  measures  required  to  avoid  (mitigate,  in  case  avoiding  is  not  possible)  the 
negative impacts and enhance positive ones. 
I.  Stakeholder Consultations and Information Disclosure 
This  section  will  describe  the  objective,  process,  and  outcome  of  the  stakeholder 
consultations---with community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and NGOs 
with  experience  in  the  area---that  are  carried  out  during  the  ESMP  preparation.  The 
emphasis  will  be  on  the  concerns  and  suggestions  regarding  the  subproject  and  its 
potential impacts. 
This  section  will  also  list  all  project  and  subproject  information  shared  with  the 
stakeholders during the preparation of the plan and arrangements for disclosing subproject 
information.  
J.  Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
The section will describe all impacts (including cumulative ones), mitigation measures for 
each  impact,  indicators  for  each  impact,  the  parties  responsible  for  implementing  each 
mitigation  measure,  and  the  parties  responsible  for  monitoring  each  indicator.  A  single 
indicator may be monitored in different ways by multiple stakeholders to allow maximum 
41 
participation  of  various  stakeholders,  and  subsequently  enhanced  ownership  and 
implementation of the project. 
K.  Capacity Assessment and Training 
This  section  will  detail  capacity  assessment  among  the  relevant  officials  and  other 
stakeholders  on  implementing  environmental  and  social  management  plan.  It  will  also 
include  a  plan  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  stakeholders  while  implementing  the 
subproject and the ESMP. 
L.  Cost Estimates and Sources of Funds 
The section will indicate cost estimates and sources of funds for institution development 
activities,  training  programs  for  implementation  teams  and  local  institutions,  technical 
assistance to authorities, costs for preparation of ESMP and other safeguard documents, 
and their implementation.  
EXCLUSION LIST 
6.  The criteria for exclusion of sub-projects are provided in the following Table: 
Negative sub project list 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
The proposed RETP will automatically exclude sub-projects that:  
Require acquisition of land and physical or economic displacement of any number 
of people 
Block the access to or use of land, water points and other livelihood resources 
used by others 
Encroach onto fragile ecosystems, marginal lands or important natural habitats of 
national or international importance (e.g., ecologically sensitive ecosystems; 
protected areas; natural habitat areas, forests and forest reserves, wetlands, 
national parks or game reserve; any other environmentally sensitive areas) 
without adequate mitigation measures  
4 
Impact on physical cultural resources of national or international importance and 
conservation value 
7. 
In addition to the above, sub-projects that would be categorised as Category “A” sub-
projects based on the SECAP should be avoided in order to limit the costs of further 
EIA  work  that  may  be  required.  However,  if  sub-project  of  high  economic  value  is 
identified, the necessary EIA work should be done and the project carried out. 
8.  Approval of Environmental and Social Work: The completed screening form along 
with any additional planning reports will be forwarded to the review authority, which 
is the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The review team 
will  be  assisted  by  environmentalists  from  the  PMU  to  make  sure  that  all  the 
requirements are in place to avoid delays. 
9.  The first step in the approval process is to determine if all the relevant information 
has been provided, and that it is adequate. EPA will also check if the technical team 
has  thoroughly  considered  all  environmental  and  social  issues  with  regards  to  the 
identification  of  potential  adverse  effects  arising  from  the  sub-project  as  well  as 
mitigating measures to adequately address negative impacts.  
42 
10.  Based on the desk appraisal and if needed, the field appraisal, EPA will grant approval, 
and monitor the mitigation measures during implementation.  
11.  Quarterly  and  Annual  Monitoring  and  Reviews:  Environmental  and  social 
monitoring  needs  to  be  carried  out  during  the  implementation  of  the  sub-projects. 
Monitoring  of  the  compliance  of  sub-project  implementation  with  the  mitigation 
measures set out in the sub-project’s ESMP will be carried out jointly by the RETP PMU 
and its regional offices and the implementing partners team. The projects concerned 
staff should supervise the monitoring activities which should be reported quarterly and 
annually during the implementation phase.  
12.  Compliance  monitoring  comprises  on-site  inspection  of  activities  to  verify  that 
measures  identified in  the ESMP  are  being  implemented. This type of  monitoring is 
similar  to  the  normal  tasks  of  a  supervising  staff  whose  task  is  to  ensure  that  the 
Contractor  is  achieving  the  required  standards  and  quality  of  work.  The  appointed 
environmental  and  social  safeguards  specialists  will  have  the  responsibility  of 
conducting  the  environmental  and  social  inspections.  Quarterly  and  an  annual 
inspection report must be submitted (together with the monitoring report) to the IFAD 
for review and approval. 
13.  Monitoring  Indicators:  In  order  to  be  able  to  assess  the  effectiveness  of  the 
proposed mitigation measures for the impacts that will arise from the potential project 
activities, the dedicated staff from PMU, regional offices and implementing partners 
will conduct regular monitoring of all the sub-projects. The overall performance and 
effectiveness  of  the  project  can  be  assessed  through  monitoring  the  following 
indicators: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Area (hectares/acres) of vegetation clearance; 
Incidences of work-related illnesses at construction sites or project areas. 
Incidences of work-related injuries at sites 
Number of pit latrines for excreta disposal for workers; 
Number of agro- infrastructure rehabilitated; 
Number of direct beneficiaries; 
Quality  of  construction  materials 
infrastructure; 
for 
the  agricultural,  agro-processing 
Quality of water discharged from the establishments; 
Number of employment opportunities for locals; 
Number of new employees engaged by the project; 
Ratio of men to women employed by the project (ensure equity in the recruitment 
processes); 
Percentage of youth engaged in the projects; 
Number of safeguards training courses conducted for all staff including extension 
officers; 
Number of safeguards training courses conducted for beneficiaries; 
Ratio of men to women trained (ensure equity in the training processes); 
Implementation of the public consultation plan; 
Institution of planned maintenance of machines and infrastructure; 
Number of climate smart technologies adopted; 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Area of degraded land reported and or restored; 
Area of land under climate smart agriculture; 
Quantity of pesticides and fertilizer used; 
Use of IPM; 
Water and soil conservation structures established; 
Climate change coping mechanisms, and adaptation strategies employed. 
44 
APPENDIX - 3 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 
1.  Environmental and Social Management Plan: The ESMP provides guidelines for 
the management of potential environmental and social impacts together with climate 
change aspects of the project interventions. The ESMP identifies parties responsible 
for monitoring actions, and any training or capacity building needs, Mitigation 
measures have been identified to reduce present and potential impacts associated 
with the proposed activities. Social mitigation includes the measures creating 
awareness and proper mobilization, proper participation of members in the planning 
and implementation of activities, inclusion of women etc. to mitigate effects of local 
disagreements and conflicts. Physical mitigation includes measures that address 
impacts to the physical environment, such as biological communities, vegetation, 
water resources, air quality and others. 
2.  The project does not involve infrastructure and other civil works development, 
however, there are chances that the FPOs might go for establishing fruit, vegetable 
or dairy processing units at local level. Generally, fruit processing (canning, drying, 
freezing, and preparation of juices, jams, and jellies) steps include preparation of 
the raw material (cleaning, trimming, and peeling followed by cooking, canning, or 
freezing. Plant operation is often seasonal and typically generates volumes of 
effluents and solid waste. The effluents contain high organic loads, cleansing and 
blanching agents, salt, and suspended solids such as fibres and soil particles. They 
may also contain pesticide residues washed from the raw materials. The main solid 
wastes are organic materials, including discarded fruits. Odour problems can occur 
with poor management of solid wastes and effluents. 
3.  Environmental impacts associated with a dairy processing unit are generation of 
waste and wastewater. Once started, it is a regular full time activity to be monitored 
regularly to avoid environmental impacts. Wastewater and packaging material 
waster are generated that need to dispose-off properly to avoid any contamination 
especially water resources.  Quality control mechanisms to be in place from 
processing to storage and to consumer.  
4.  Details of the ESMP and mitigation measures are provided in the Table 3, while 
climate change adaptation and mitigation measures are provided in Table 1, 2. 
Table 1. Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Factors and Mitigating 
Measures 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
Social 
Mobilization and 
Development 
(such as 
participatory 
planning, 
selection of 
target area and 
intervention, 
agri-business 
development 
Social: 
Social: 
  Clear mechanism for 
social mobilization 
based on 
predetermined criteria 
for selection of 
members is not 
institutionalized/ 
defined 
  Community 
participatory planning 
  Well-defined community 
mobilization and development 
mechanism will be ensured  
  Participatory planning and 
design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of 
women will be ensured) 
  Community organizations will 
ensure coordination with local 
government department 
45 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Role of and access to various 
community development 
facilities will be made clear to 
the community through 
consultations, meetings and 
seminars 
  Technical and business support 
will be provided to cooperatives 
including business plan 
development  
 Clarity about the role and 
responsibilities made  
Environmental and Climate: 
  Ensure easy access with 
transport availability and on 
main road 
  Measures taken to avoid noise 
and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
measures taken care of 
  Good quality and well-
maintained generators installed 
  Smooth and calm operations of 
office.to avoid inconvenience to 
neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to 
protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid 
waste material will be ensured 
  Proper sewerage and drainage 
will be ensured 
is not 
institutionalized/ 
defined  
  Limited awareness of 
the community about 
the project goals and 
objectives  
  Limited scope for 
gender based 
community 
development 
  Poor strategies for 
involvement of 
women 
  Lack of awareness 
about Farm Services 
Centres and limited 
accessibility to 
cooperatives  
  Lack of clarity about 
the role and 
responsibility of FOs 
Environmental and 
Climate: 
Office establishment 
  Location; Easily 
accessible to all   
  Noise and dust 
pollution during 
construction 
  Labour and staff 
protection and safety 
at risk 
  Disposal of debris and 
other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution 
due to due to 
operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on 
plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and 
movement may 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Inadequate solid 
waste disposal  
46 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
Establishment 
and Operation 
of PMU and 
Regional offices  
  Poor sewerage and 
drainage system 
Social: 
Social: 
  Ensure easy access with 
transport availability and on 
main road 
  Easy community access to 
PMU/Regional ensured with 
phone and email address 
widely circulated and displayed 
in PFOs offices, 
  Participatory planning and 
design to be considered a pre-
requisite (particularly 
participation of women will be 
ensured) 
  Adequate complaint 
registration and redressal 
mechanism to be 
operationalized 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Measures taken to avoid noise 
and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
measures ensured 
  Good quality and well-
maintained generators installed 
  Smooth and calm operations of 
office.to avoid inconvenience to 
neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to 
protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid 
waste material will be ensured 
  Proper sewerage and drainage 
will be ensured 
  Location and 
accessibility 
  Community access to 
PMU/regional offices 
is not available or 
limited 
  Unavailability of 
Community complaint 
mechanism at 
PMU/Regional offices 
  Lack of mechanisms 
for participatory 
planning (particularly 
involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and 
Climate: 
  Noise and dust 
pollution during 
construction 
  Labour and staff 
protection and safety 
at risk 
  Disposal of debris and 
other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution 
due to due to 
operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on 
plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and 
movement may 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Inadequate solid 
waste disposal  
  Poor sewerage and 
drainage system 
47 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
Climate smart 
technologies—
HIES, raised 
beds, land 
levelling, 
tunnels, etc. 
drought 
resistant 
varieties 
Vocational and 
skill 
development 
trainings  
Social: 
Social: 
  Lack of knowledge and 
information about new 
technologies 
  Selection of appropriate 
technology 
  Use of selected 
technology 
  PFOs will organize awareness 
campaigns about the benefits of 
such technologies. 
  PFOs and project staff will help 
select the right technology for 
the right interventions 
  Proper trainings will be 
organized on the use and 
maintenance of the proposed 
technologies and interventions. 
Environment: 
Environment: 
  Air, water and noise 
pollution 
  Oils, grease pour and 
spill around 
  Machinery will be properly used 
and maintained to avoid and 
minimize any pollution 
  Ensure proper packing and 
  Parking 
  Use of new varieties of 
handling of oils and lubricants 
  Vehicles and machines will be 
fruits, vegetables and 
other seeds. 
properly parked under 
designated sheds 
  Certified varieties and seeds will 
be recommended and used 
under PFO and project 
staff/service provider guidance. 
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of candidates, 
  Criteria developed for selection 
courses, training 
institutes 
  Gender parity 
  Incentives and facilities 
for deserving 
candidates 
  Number of trainees per 
class 
  Location of and 
accessibility to selected 
training centre 
  Language of trainings  
  Familiarity with the 
machine/equipment 
and its use  
Environment 
48 
of providing the right and 
required training to the right 
persons in the right institute for 
getting the employment.  
  Equal opportunity provided to 
the women candidates in the 
selected field 
  Appropriate number of students 
per class to receive proper 
attention and time during 
lectures and practical 
  Poor and deserving candidates, 
especially women, should be 
provided with incentives and 
facilities 
  Preferably local language or Urdu 
will be used for lectures and 
teaching material. 
  Centres should be easily 
accessible with public transport 
  Special lectures on the use of 
machine and equipment with 
emphasis on precautions. 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Classrooms with 
Environment 
adequate space and 
facilities for the trainees 
  Proper seating and 
audio-visual facilities  
  Separate washrooms 
and other facilities for 
women 
  Availability of all 
equipment, tools and 
material for training 
  Ensure selection of centres with 
proper facilities 
  Ensure required facilities for 
women 
  Ensure all tools, equipment, 
electronic and mechanical 
devices are available 
Fruit 
/vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of site 
  Infrastructure 
development may 
affect neighbourhood 
environment during 
construction period 
  Participatory and consensus 
approach for site selection 
  Adequate project construction 
planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on 
the neighbourhood 
  Mechanism for 
  Ensure access to information and 
members’ access to 
various details and 
facilities   
  Limited awareness of 
member about design 
and other details  
  Lack of mechanisms for 
participatory planning 
(particularly 
involvement of women) 
  Access  of  and  inclusion 
of  poor,  marginalized 
and vulnerable  
privacy 
gender elements 
  Local 
and 
  Local 
community, 
gender,  neighbourhood 
& 
stakeholder 
participation  
all details  
  Access to alternate routes to be 
ensured during construction 
period    
  Participatory planning and 
design to be ensured 
(particularly participation of 
women to be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation 
and Maintenance will be well-
defined, and spread through 
workshops and meetings 
  Access to various facilities and 
finances will be made clear to 
members through consultations, 
meetings and seminars and 
records availability 
  Community  consent  regarding 
gender  elements,  particularly 
privacy  of  women  shall  be 
addressed  
  Stakeholders 
consultation 
including  nearby  communities, 
women shall be ensured and their 
concerns  shall  be  addressed  for 
sustainability  
Environmental and 
Climate: 
  Noise, dirt, dust and air 
pollution may raise 
Environmental and Climate: 
49 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Labour and staff 
  Measures taken to minimize 
protection and safety at 
risk 
pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
  Material storage and 
measures ensured 
vehicle movement may 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Proper storage of material and 
vehicle maintenance and 
movement ensured to avoid 
inconvenience. 
  Training on occupational 
hazards, storage and use of 
chemicals, on maintenance and 
operation machinery and 
vehicles for involved personnel 
will be organized. 
  Materials and chemicals that 
consist of small particles or 
pieces must be stored in a 
container with a watertight 
cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with 
water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles must 
be operated with designated 
fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be 
placed along the routes 
  Adequate planning of labour and 
worker camps with WASH, 
sewerage and drainage system 
will be ensured 
  First aid facilities to be provided 
at site.  
  Processing units shall not be 
installed in ecologically sensitive 
or protected areas 
  Waste generated shall be 
disposed of at suitable sites and 
after treatment to reduce the 
potential for acidification  
  Waste treatment and 
management plan shall be 
devised and implemented  
  Eco-friendly energy supply shall 
be preferred.  
  Carbon footprint of the 
processing unit shall be 
calculated and mitigation 
measures shall be ensured  
  Use of water in large quantity 
shall be avoided and recycled  
  Lack of essential 
facilities for labour and 
workers   
  Use of chemicals during 
construction and 
processing of products.  
  Improper waste and 
chemicals disposal 
during construction and 
operation of units 
  Wastewater disposal 
  Inadequate sewerage 
and drainage system 
  Adverse impacts on 
migratory birds 
movement 
  Construction of cold 
storages (insolation 
needs) 
  Storage of fruits for 
processing  
  Health and safety 
  Quality control 
50 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Processing units shall have 
proper health & safety 
arrangements for workers 
  Ensure quality standards of the 
product  
51 
Climate change adaptation/mitigation measures are provided in following Table. 
Table 2: Climate change impacts together with adaptation and mitigation measures. 
Main themes 
Fruit 
/vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
Main challenges 
under Future 
Climate Change 
Scenarios 
  GHG emissions 
  Increased 
water use 
Adaptation/Mitigation 
Measures at the design 
stage 
Tentative 
Cost 
Estimate  
USD 7000 to 
10000 per 
plant.  
  Inclusion of climate 
change assessment 
during infrastructure 
design. 
  Climate resilient 
design of 
infrastructure 
  Awareness raising of 
the farmers and line 
departments (through 
trainings and 
seminars) on climate 
change and its impacts 
  Construction and 
curing of concrete 
need adequate care 
and consideration due 
to expected rise in 
temperature 
  Sheds and first aid 
should be made 
available at sites for 
labours (to protect 
them from heatwaves 
and hot weather)   
52 
Table - 3: Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements  
Actions 
Indicator  
Responsibility 
Time Frame  
Cost/ 
Budget 
Source 
Environment  
Project (and sub-
projects) 
environmental 
requirements and 
responsibilities need 
to be clearly defined. 
Preparation of 
environmental 
guidelines for sub-
projects. 
Environmental guidelines 
including screening, 
approvals, mitigation 
measures and well defined 
responsibilities. 
2022-2027 
USD 0.20 m 
PMU will be 
responsible for 
elaborating and 
defining details of 
guidelines and then 
oversee overall 
implementation 
under the project 
while regional offices 
will monitor and look 
after the projects in 
respective regions. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will also support and 
monitor the  
implementing 
partners in sub-
projects. The 
concerned line 
departments (EPA) 
are expected to 
provide guidance and 
approve sub-projects 
when submitted 
53 
Detailed plans and 
designs for sub-
projects developed. 
Design consultant to 
prepare detailed plans 
and designs for sub-
projects. 
Detailed Plans and Designs 
for sub-Projects. 
project 
implementation 
period 
(2022-
2027). 
in 
Included 
project 
cost—Comp-
1 
Design consultants 
prepare design in 
consultation and 
coordination with  
PMU/Regional 
officesPMU reviews 
the designs and the 
social,  
environmental and 
climate change 
checklists. 
Consultation with 
PFOs and 4P will be 
required.  
Community and 
stakeholders 
Endorsement/consultation 
undertaken of plans 
Approval of plans by PMU 
and Concerned line 
department (EPA), if 
required. 
Plans to be endorsed 
by communities and 
approved by the 
project 
management/social 
mobilization partners. 
Environmental  
mitigation actions, 
such as solid waste 
management, water, 
air and noise quality, 
eco-system, agro-
chemicals, and other 
hazardous chemicals   
Plans to include 
details of 
infrastructure 
development together 
with financing details 
including O&M 
responsibilities. 
Plans to include 
detailed social, 
environmental and 
climate change 
assessments. 
Plans to be approved 
by the project team 
and relevant line 
departments. 
Guidelines prepared 
for reducing 
environmental impacts 
for various sub-
projects of 
Component-1 
Guidelines prepared 
Increased awareness and 
capacity of stakeholders 
groups 
Consultants will 
prepare the 
guidelines to be 
reviewed and 
approved by PMU. 
PMU/Regional offices 
and implementing  
partners will monitor 
and implement the 
54 
2019 and project 
implementation 
(2022-
period 
2027). 
Included 
in 
project  cost 
—Comp-1 
Training and 
awareness of 
stakeholders groups 
Sub-project cost includes 
investment in 
environmental  
Mitigation Measures 
Investment in 
environmental 
mitigation 
measures including 
safe disposal of waste, 
chemicals reduction, 
adoption of IPM 
. 
Implementation of the 
Environmental and 
Social 
Management 
(ESMP) 
Plan 
Implementation 
responsibilities to be 
defined, allocated and 
costed. 
Bid documents include 
requirements 
for the environment 
safety 
measures. 
and  mitigation 
Bid Documents and 
ToRs for the various 
components need to 
incorporate the 
ESMP requirements 
guidelines and 
organize trainings 
and capacity building 
programs for the 
concerned 
stakeholders. 
PFOs and 4Ps will 
ensure safe disposal 
of waste material. 
PMU to ensure that 
ESMP requirements 
are part of the bid 
documents and that 
cost is also included 
in the bid.  
Contractors will be 
responsible for the  
implementation of 
the guidelines while 
PFOs/4Ps and 
implementing 
partners will monitor 
under the overall 
supervision of 
PMU/Regional 
offices.  
project 
implementation 
(2022-
period 
2027). 
Included 
in 
project  cost 
—Comp-1 
Climate Change 
Indepth analysis of 
Preparation of 
Indepth/Detailed Climate 
PMU will have  
Included in 
55 
Climate change 
impacts assessment, 
and 
adaptation/mitigation 
measures need to be 
understood. 
indepth/detailed 
climate change 
analysis and 
adaptation/mitigation 
guidelines for 
projects. 
Change Analysis and 
Adaptation Guidelines 
Training for the 
community and 
government officials 
to understand climate 
change impacts 
together with 
adaptation and 
mitigation measures 
(awareness granted). 
Responsibilities and 
financing for climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation 
is agreed. 
Participative and 
sustainable climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation 
program is 
implemented.. 
Climate change adaptation 
initiatives are being 
implemented. 
Monitoring of climate 
adaptation/mitigation 
programs and climate 
damage. 
56 
Potential Climate 
Change Risks are 
reduced. 
project cost —
Comp-1 
2022-2027 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost —
Comp-1 
specialized climate 
change staff to be 
respponsible for 
climate change 
related activities 
including preparation 
of guidelines.  
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure 
adaptation and 
implementation by 
PFOs/4Ps and 
implementing 
partners. 
Cost for climate 
related activities 
included in the 
design estimates and 
bid documents of all 
sub-projects. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure that  
climate change 
adaptation/mitigation  
activities under sub-
projects are 
prepared by PFOs in 
consultation and 
agreement with 
Social 
A well-defined and 
strong social 
mobilization process 
to facilitate the 
delivery of programme 
activities in an 
inclusive and effective 
manner 
Detailed technical 
proposal of the social 
mobilisattion partner 
elaborate mobilization 
strategy 
Approved social 
mobilisation 
plan/strategy/poverty 
graduation strategy 
Implementation of the 
social mobilisation 
/poverty graduation 
strategy 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost 
concerned members 
and are then 
implemented as per 
design guidelines 
and requirements 
RSPs and 
implementing 
partners will provide 
detailed 
methodology and 
strategy with work 
plans in their 
proposals for 
inclusive and 
effective social 
mobilization of the 
concerned 
stakeholders in 
coordination with 
PMU and regional 
offices. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will monitor and 
ensure quality of 
social mobilization. 
Labor standards and 
Healthy and safe 
All facilities are physically 
Implementing 
57 
working conditions 
working conditions 
provided where 
normal facilities like 
wash rooms (separate 
for mael and female), 
personal protection 
equipments (PPEs), 
first aid box and clean 
water are available. 
provided and register 
maintained. 
partners  ensure all 
facilities and 
PMU/Regional offices 
regularly monitor 
and check facilities 
and register. 
2022-27 
Working hours are 
properly observed  
Eight hours working 
days are oberved 
Registers are maintained 
for all staff with in-out 
timings. 
Child labour and 
underpaymnet 
Age of intending 
labourers to be 
checked from valid 
identity cards. 
Identity card numbers and 
mobile numbers entered in 
daily rosters.  
Implementing 
partners maintain 
the register, 
PMU/regional offices 
monitor with field 
visits  and checking 
of registers 
Implementing 
partners to ensure 
no underage 
labourers are hired 
for any job under the 
project. All labour 
are paid per market 
rates. PMU/Regional 
offices will regularly 
monitor by visits, 
daily rosters and 
payment receipts. 
Stakeholders 
participatory planning, 
Detailed information 
and engagement with 
Guidelines for stakeholder 
engagement in design of 
Sub-project and  
activities to be 
2022-27 
Included in 
project cost 
58 
design and 
implementation of the 
sub-projects 
stakeholders including 
farmers, 
disadvantaged groups, 
women and youth 
sub projects. 
Final plan and design 
to be endorsed by 
representative 
stakeholders. 
Documentation of 
stakeholder engagement 
and endorsement. 
Gender equitable 
approaches are 
developed for 
improving income, 
food, nutrition. 
Gender equitablity is 
adhered in 
selection/targetting 
criteria. 
Gender equitability plan 
prepared. 
Training and 
implementation of the 
Community Led 
Empowerment 
planned by 
PMU/Regional 
offices, PFOs and 4Ps 
will be participatroy 
in all respects from 
design, planning and 
impmlementation. 
PMU and regional 
offices will ensure 
proper social 
mobilization and 
awareness of 
concerned members 
and their 
involvement from the 
beginning till end.  
PMU/Regional offices 
to ensure the 
partcipation of 
women and extra 
poor with support 
from implementing  
partners according to 
targets set in the 
project.  
Included in 
project cost 
2022-2027 
Monitoring 
Effective consultation 
and public disclosure 
of social, 
Requirements to be 
defined in compliance 
to EPA and IFAD 
Public 
consultation/disclosure 
effectively documented. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure that all 
details of sub-
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost 
59 
environmental and 
climate change 
documentation 
requirements. 
Overall monitoring 
and evaluation needs 
to be coordinated and 
effective to meet 
project evaluation 
requirements. 
Monitoring and 
evaluation 
requirements would 
be defined; including 
physical and financial 
progress and 
reporting  
Approved plan for 
monitoring and evaluation 
include social, 
environmental and climate 
change mitigation 
indicators.  
Monitoring and evaluation 
reports. 
Quarterly and annual 
reports. 
ESMP Reports as required 
Routine monitoring of 
social, environmental 
and climate change 
risks activities 
especially progress of 
ESMP. 
projects along with 
their benefits social, 
environmental and 
climate change 
impacta are shared 
with all stakeholders. 
Easy access to 
record and 
documatation will be 
provided to all. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will supervise and 
monitor the physical 
and finalcial progress 
of activities by PFOs, 
4Ps with the help of 
implementing 
partners within the 
agreed schedules 
and quality. 
Implementing 
partners will carry 
out routine 
monitoring  while 
PMU/Regional offices 
will supervise and 
evaluate the 
progress.   
Included in 
project cost 
2022-2027 
2022 to 2027 
Included in 
project cost 
60 
ATTACHMENT 
SUMMARY OF IFAD GUIDANCE STATEMENTS. 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 1 :   BIODIVERSITY  
Biodiversity or biological diversity refers to the full range and variety of the world’s biota, 
and its living organisms. Biodiversity is usually considered at three levels: (i) generic, (ii) 
species,  and  (iii)  ecosystem  diversity.  Conservation  of  biological  diversity  aims  at 
maintaining  global  biological  resources  to  meet  the  needs  of  humanity  today  while 
ensuring their availability for future generations – a fundamental criterion of sustainable 
development (IFAD, 2017). 
Conservation  of  biodiversity  is  a  cornerstone  of  IFAD  projects,  particularly  those  for 
agricultural development. Value chain development projects may also offer opportunities 
for  preserving  biodiversity  by  promoting  the  sustainable  harvesting  and  marketing  of 
products derived from old plant varieties and breeds (e.g., underutilized species), locally 
used plants (e.g., medicinal plants) and non-timber forest products. Short  value chains 
supplied by many small producers, who use considerably more species and varieties than 
larger farms, are more suitable for the conservation of agrobiodiversity than long value 
chains served by a few large farms with monocultures. In addition, agricultural practices 
such  as  mixed  cropping  and  agroforestry  have  proved  beneficial  for  climate  change 
adaptation and improved agricultural productivity.  
IFAD does not implement projects in areas of critical habitats, or which result in conversion 
or degradation of such habitats. Emphasis will be to identify alternatives and ensure that 
any  potential  degradation  or  conversion  is  appropriately  mitigated.  IFAD  will  protect 
biodiversity by designing its projects appropriately, ensuring that they are implemented 
sustainably with full community participation, and providing sound recommendations for 
improving borrowing countries’ agricultural policies. 
Biodiversity  should  be  identified  at  an  early  stage  of  project  preparation  to  allow  for 
optimum integration of conservation and development objectives. The following are some 
of the issues to be considered in this identification process: 
  Adopt  an  ecosystem  perspective  and  multisectoral  approach  to  developmental 
programmes; 
  Promote  fair  and  equitable  sharing  of  costs  and  benefits  from  biodiversity 
conservation  and  sustainable  use  at  all  levels:  local,  national,  regional  and 
international;  
  Encourage  full  stakeholder  participation,  including  partnerships  between  civil 
society, government and the private sector; 
  Ensure  that  IFAD  programmes  and  projects  are  consistent  with  the  wider  policy 
framework, and/or changes are made for supportive policies and laws; 
  Ensure  that  institutional  arrangements  are  effective,  transparent,  accountable, 
inclusive and responsive; 
  Provide and use accurate, appropriate, multidisciplinary information, accessible to, 
 
and understood by, all stakeholders; 
IFAD’s  investments  should  be  sensitive  to,  and  complement,  local  and  national 
structures, processes and capacities; 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 2 – AGROCHEMICALS 
Increased food production is one  of IFAD’s central objectives; the use of agrochemicals 
(mainly fertilizers and pesticides) may be necessary to achieve higher yields per unit area. 
However, the environmental and social (including health) concerns raised by such use of 
agrochemicals must be carefully considered (IFAD, 2017). 
61 
Agrochemicals include fertilizers, liming and acidifying agents, soil conditioners, pesticides, 
and  chemicals  used  in  animal  husbandry  such  as  antibiotics  and  hormones.  The  use  of 
agrochemicals  has  been  critical  to  raising  crops  for  food.  However,  some  of  these 
chemicals  cause  substantial  damage  to  the  environment,  ecology  and  human  health, 
greatly reducing their net benefits.  
IFAD  projects  promote  the  use  of  agrochemicals  directly,  as  a  project  component  for 
increased crop productivity, or – more commonly – indirectly, by increasing the availability 
of  short-term  credit  for  farm inputs or  water for  irrigation, which encourages increased 
use of agrochemicals.  
Careful  selection  of  the  type  of  agrochemicals  and  management  of  their  use  (timing, 
dosage, mode of application, etc.) can reduce to acceptable levels the environmental risks 
they pose while providing the needed benefits for increased production with lower financial 
and health risk costs.  
IFAD projects should strive to improve existing pesticide and fertilizer use by ensuring that 
the  proper  institutional,  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  in  place  and  that  sufficient 
technical  and  managerial  capacity-building  is  provided  for  the  selection,  application, 
storage,  disposal  and  monitoring  of  pesticides,  which  are  often  hazardous  if  they  are 
misused or handled improperly.  
The  use  of  agrochemicals  can  also  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  promoting  indigenous 
farming practices, such as: 
 
 
 
 
the cultivation of locally adapted crops and varieties, which are often resistant to 
local pests and diseases;  
the  use  of  locally  available  natural  biopesticides  and  pest-repellent  crops,  with 
adapted cultivation strategies (seeding periods and methods, etc.);  
the use of natural on-farm animal and green manure; and  
the utilisation of organic farming techniques.  
Ensuring diversity in the crops and varieties cultivated on a farm, especially indigenous 
crops, reduces the risk of high-level pest infestations and disease epidemics and facilitates 
enhanced  ecosystem  services,  including  through  pollinators  and  active  soil  fauna  and 
flora.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 3 – ENERGY 
Worldwide, 2.4 billion people rely on traditional biomass such as fuelwood and charcoal 
for cooking; 1.3 billion people do not have access to electricity (REN21, 2012). Households 
expend significant proportions of their disposable incomes, time and labour on low-quality 
energy  sources.  This  situation  entrenches  poverty,  constrains  the  delivery  of  social 
services, limits opportunities for women, and erodes environmental sustainability at the 
local, national and global levels (UN-Energy, 2004).  
Modern bioenergy technologies can offer a wide range of solutions that are appropriate to 
rural domestic energy needs (e.g., for cooking on flexi-biogas) or to energy demand for 
productive uses (e.g., water pumping for irrigation). 
Broad  and  reliable  access  to  energy  allows  the  powering  of  agricultural  and  transport 
equipment, is particularly important for producers who are off the power grid or connected 
to  an  unreliable  power  supply  and  reduces  rural  poverty  through  increased  agricultural 
and labour productivity (IFAD, 2017). 
Energy  security  is  receiving increased  attention  in  the  IFAD  portfolio,  which  focuses  on 
improving access to energy for domestic, processing and farming purposes, to enhance 
the  quality  of  life  and  living  standards  of  poor  rural  people.  In  partnership  with  other 
entities, and in support of country-owned initiatives, IFAD explores alternative sources of 
energy for poor people, to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels or traditional biomass 
62 
by  capitalizing  on  opportunities  to  use  renewable  energy  sources  at  the  farm  and 
community levels and promoting low-cost technologies that use local resources to provide 
energy to rural areas.  
Renewable energy is of growing interest because of its potential to diminish reliance on 
fossil  fuels, reduce  carbon  emissions and  mitigate  climate  change.  For  example, biogas 
can provide poor rural people in developing countries with clean and renewable energy all 
year  round.  The  use  of  biogas  stoves  frees  women  from  the  need  to  collect  fuelwood, 
enabling them to undertake other productive activities.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 4 – FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE 
Fisheries  projects  can  be  divided  in  two  groups:  (i)  capture  fisheries  (harvest  of  wild 
stock); and (ii) culture fisheries or fish farming (freshwater aquaculture, brackish water 
aquaculture and Mari culture). Capture fisheries include marine operations (offshore and 
near-shore) and inland operations (rivers and lakes). Fish farming produces more fish than 
is  normally  available  from  wild  stock,  by  manipulating  or  managing  the  fish  and  food 
resources (by containment in ponds or specific productive areas, creating new or improved 
use of natural habitats). 
The demand for fish has steadily increased over the past five decades and it is no longer 
possible to meet this demand from wild fish stocks alone. Increased fish production can 
only  be  achieved  through  better  management  of  capture  fisheries  resources  and  the 
aquatic ecosystem and expansion of aquaculture. Aquaculture can improve food security 
and  diversification  of  livelihoods,  thereby  reduce  households’  vulnerability  to  natural 
hazards and economic uncertainty. However, aquaculture must be managed responsibly 
to avoid negative social and environmental impacts, including pollution, damage to aquatic 
biodiversity,  conflicts  over  resource  rights,  and  marginalization  of  small-scale  actors 
(IFAD, 2017).  
Climate change poses new  challenges  for the  sustainability of fisheries and aquaculture 
systems all across the globe. Coastal communities are in the frontline of climate change 
impacts  and  are  vulnerable  to  sea  level  rise,  extreme  weather  events,  changing 
distribution  and  abundance  of  fish  stocks,  eroding  coastlines,  saltwater  intrusion, 
expansion of tourism amenities, and the impacts of ocean acidification on food security 
and coastal resources.  
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011) explains the broad 
environmental  objectives  for  IFAD  fisheries  and  aquaculture  sector  interventions  to:  (i) 
strengthen fisheries management and the tenure rights of fishing communities to common 
pool resources; (ii) introduce ecosystem approaches for both fisheries and aquaculture; 
(iii)  restore  and  develop  protected  areas;  (iv)  promote  integrated  coastal  and  marine 
resource management to ensure sustainable fishing practices; (v) invest in retraining and 
education for fishers to create alternative employment opportunities; and (vi) encourage 
sustainable forms of aquaculture.  
The GS serves to protect the environment from the effects of both capture and fish farming 
which include over exploitation and habitat destruction. Through this GS, IFAD seeks to 
achieve the following social, economic and environmental outcomes through investments 
in fisheries and aquaculture:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase food production;  
improve  nutrition  for  fishing  and  fish  farming  communities,  surrounding 
communities and extending to the national level;  
increase incomes and employment opportunities, including for youth and women;  
improve the health and quality of life in fishing communities;  
increase national trade and exports of fisheries and aquaculture products;  
reduce the immigration of young fishers to urban areas;  
63 
  provide access to financial services for small-scale fishers and fish farmers;  
  preserve and strengthen habitats that are important for rejuvenating fish stocks, 
such as mangroves and coral reefs;  
  enhance  access  to  knowledge  and  sustainable  fisheries  and  aquaculture 
 
technologies;  
strengthen policies and institutions for fisheries resource management, tenure and 
access rights of local people; and  
  enhance resilience of coastal communities against climate change and other shocks 
by  incorporating  climate  change  impacts  in  the  design  of  new  fisheries  and 
aquaculture projects.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 5 – FOREST RESOURCES 
Forests  have  an  important  role  in  supporting  local  and  global  ecosystem  services  and 
providing resources to some 1.6 billion people (UNEP, 2008), due to their highly productive 
nature. They are used and managed for different – often competing – purposes, such as 
timber  and  fuel  wood  production,  Non-Timber  Forest  Products  (NTFPs)  collection, 
watershed management, shelter and food supply for indigenous people (forest dwellers), 
emergency shelter and food supply for surrounding farming communities or herders, and 
conservation of biological diversity. Natural stands of trees and shrubs play an important 
supportive role in savannah pastoralism and are used as a restorative measure for fertility 
improvement  in  shifting  cultivation.  Tree-based  production  systems  do  not  require  the 
continuous managing of the soil (IFAD, 2017). 
Forests  equally  have  untapped  potential  to  lift  rural  people  out  of  poverty  (Sunderlin, 
Angelsen and Wunder,  2010), providing a source of employment, income,  food, energy 
and  housing.  Forest-based  livelihood  activities  include  livestock  grazing,  controlled 
hunting, and the collection of wild fruits and insects, all of which provide highly nutritious 
resources that can contribute to food security and alleviate dietary deficiencies.  
IFAD  recognizes  the  importance  of  managing  forests  sustainably  to  reduce  land 
degradation  while  improving  food  security  and  providing  alternative  income  sources  for 
communities  and  small  farmers.  Thus,  the  GS  seeks  to  protect  natural  forests  from 
destructive  activities  such  as  crop  production  &  logging.  It  promotes  management  of 
natural forests by rural and indigenous communities, who can be provided livelihoods and 
adequate  income  generating  activities  through  alternative  livelihood  activities  such  as 
livestock  grazing,  natural  honey  collection/production,  collection  of  firewood,  medicinal 
plants, wild fruits & nuts, controlled hunting, etc.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 6 – RANGELAND-BASED LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION 
Livestock  production  is one  of  the  fastest  growing  agricultural  subsectors  in  developing 
countries, Accounting for 30 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and spurring 
a  demand  for  animal-source  food products that  is likely to  double  in  the  next 20  years 
(FAO, 2002). The growth of the sector exerts some pressure on natural resources such as 
the rangelands for the livestock, and without adequate measures being taken, in rangeland 
and  feed  stock  management,  may  lead  to  an  increase  in  greenhouse  gases  and  thus 
contribute to climate change (IFAD, 2017).  
Rangelands  include  grasslands,  woodland  savannahs,  open  forest  (and  in  some  cases 
cleared areas of closed forests), shrub lands, wastelands, abandoned agricultural areas, 
and deserts  that  support domestic ruminants  and  wild  herbivores. The  targets  of  these 
range  areas  vary  from  large-scale  commercial  ranching  to  mixed  farming  or  traditional 
pastoral systems. Hence, depending on the scale of the operation, different measures will 
be adopted. Rangeland and pastoralist activities are two areas in which IFAD is very active. 
These areas support a large number of herders and livestock producers, however, open 
access to these areas has resulted in grave environmental consequences. Over-grazing is 
64 
one of the most notorious of these impacts (others include human settlement, roads, and 
harvesting fuel wood) leading to a loss of surface topsoil and losses in soil fertility.  
Managing  the  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  the  livestock  sector  requires,  at  a 
minimum,  disaggregating  between  extensive  and  intensive  production.  In  extensive 
livestock production, the livestock are reared outdoors on natural and semi-natural forage, 
and in intensive production the livestock, are reared indoors and based on cultivated inputs 
or  by-products.  The  nature  of  the  environmental  impact  and  the  appropriate 
environmental  responses  vary  entirely  between  these  two  broad  types  of  systems 
(McGahey et al., 2014).  
These  guidelines  address  extensive  livestock  production  on  rangeland  resources,  i.e., 
some form of pastoralism. In developing countries, it is recommended to focus on both 
greening  the  intensive  livestock  sector  and  capitalizing  on  the  inherent  sustainability  of 
pastoralism for local, regional and international markets (McGahey et al., 2014).  
The  basic  guidance  and  good  practices  for  IFAD  interventions  in  the  management  of 
rangeland-based livestock involve promoting and supporting: (i) integrated crop/livestock 
systems; (ii) development of improved, locally adapted livestock genetics, and avoidance 
of erosion or loss of animal genetic resources; (iii) pastoral institutions and recognition of 
tenure rights and customary grazing lands; (iv) strengthened local governance capacity, 
national  governance  policy  and  institutional  coherence;  (v)  livestock  diversity;  (vi) 
management  and  recycling  of  livestock  manure  as  organic  nutrients  for  restoring  soil 
fertility;  and  (vii)  range  restoration,  enhancement  and  sustainable  rangelands 
management.  
The  primary  beneficiaries  are  poor  livestock  keepers,  particularly  those  who  are 
economically or socially at risk and politically marginalized, such as rural women, youth, 
landless poor people, and people for whom animals such as poultry and small ruminants 
provide,  at  most,  subsistence  or  a  minimum  contribution  to  daily  nutritional  guidance. 
IFAD is committed to developing a sustainable livestock sector in which poor farmers and 
herders might obtain higher incomes and better access to assets, services, technologies 
and markets. Thus, the GS seeks to promote sustainable rangeland management curbing 
all these negative impacts.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 7 – WATER (AGRICULTURAL AND DOMESTIC USE) 
Many poor rural people face severe constraints in their access to adequate quantities of 
good quality water for domestic and agricultural uses. Clean water supplies and sanitation 
remain  major  problems  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  with  11  per  cent  of  the  global 
population lacking access to safe drinking water. Agricultural production accounts for 70 
per cent of global freshwater use, mainly through crop irrigation (IFAD, 2017). 
In irrigation, water is managed for agricultural production. Most systems are established 
to improve crop yields per unit of land. Irrigation systems include: (i) water storage; (ii) 
water  conveyance;  (iii)  water  delivery  to  plants;  and  (iv)  disposal  of  drainage  water. 
Irrigation water is conveyed and delivered to plants by gravity, sprinkler or drip irrigation. 
The setting up of these systems impacts on the environment in many ways. Facilities for 
drainage of excess water are not always provided in irrigation systems which may lead to 
water logging and soil salinization. 
Water management in agriculture includes projects fed by surface water or groundwater 
and/or rainfall in irrigation, soil and water conservation, swamp rehabilitation, watershed 
management, water for livestock, and inland fisheries and aquaculture.  
The  potential  negative  impacts  of  water  investments  affect  several  environmental  and 
social aspects and include soil degradation, water quality, public health, effects on flora 
and fauna and disruption of ecosystem services, particularly when introduced on a large 
scale.  In  the  near  future,  accelerating  changes  in  the  global  climate  will  cause  major 
alterations in the patterns of the water cycle and the geographical distribution of water, 
65 
with  significant  effects  on  agricultural  activities.  Climatic  change  will  have  significant 
consequences on water supply, water systems, infrastructure and agriculture. It could also 
undermine  IFAD’s  investments  and  reduce  the  long-term  sustainability  of  results. 
Therefore, FAD aims to reduce the vulnerability of water management and infrastructure 
to current climate variability while also considering the long-term effects of climate. Thus, 
this GS seeks to protect the environment from the adverse effects that can be inflicted by 
irrigation schemes. 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 9 – PHYSICAL CULTURAL RESOURCES 
For purposes of this guidance statement, physical cultural resources (PCR), also known as 
cultural heritage or cultural property, may be defined as movable or immovable objects, 
sites,  structures,  groups  of  structures,  and  natural  features  and  landscapes  that  have 
archaeological, historical, religious, spiritual or  other  cultural  significance.  As  such,  PCR 
may be found almost anywhere, in urban or rural settings, above or below ground, or even 
under water.  
PCR may derive their significance from various sources, whether as part of a community’s 
cultural identity and heritage, as assets for economic or social development, or as sources 
of valuable scientific or historical information. As a result, their cultural significance may 
be local, provincial, national, or even international in nature (IFAD, 2017). 
Although the likelihood that IFAD programmes and projects will involve or affect PCR is 
small, in such unlikely cases where PCR is found, IFAD will assist borrowers in avoiding, 
minimizing  or  mitigating  adverse  impacts  on  PCR  in  the  development  programmes  and 
projects that it finances. To this end, IFAD will use due diligence in applying its SECAP to 
ensure that PCR are properly identified and adequately addressed, and that any measures 
to protect PCR comply with the borrower’s national legislation as well as with its obligations 
under  relevant  international  treaties  and  agreements  (e.g.,  UNESCO  Convention 
Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 1972).  
While  it  is  unlikely  that  IFAD’s  portfolio  of  agricultural  and  rural  development 
programmes/projects  will  involve  or  affect  PCR,  IFAD  is  committed  to  identifying  and 
protecting  PCR  in  all  its  operations.  After  all,  even  smallholder  agriculture  and  rural 
development projects on marginal lands may, depending on location, involve resources of 
archaeological (e.g., ancient ruins, monuments, prehistoric caves), historical (e.g., original 
structures,  architectural  works,  historic  sites),  religious  (e.g.,  churches,  mosques, 
temples,  sacred  grounds)  or  cultural  (e.g.  cemeteries,  traditional  meeting  places) 
significance. Of particular concern are IFAD programmes/projects: (i) involving significant 
excavations,  demolition,  movement  of  earth,  flooding  or  other  environmental  changes; 
and (ii) located in, or in the vicinity of, a PCR site recognized by the borrower. For this 
reason, IFAD will use its SECAP to ensure that any PCR involved in or potentially affected 
by an IFAD programme/project are properly identified and adequately protected.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 11 – DEVELOPMENT OF VALUE CHAINS, 
MICROENTERPRISES AND SMALL ENTERPRISES  
A value chain is a vertical alliance of enterprises that collaborate, to a greater or lesser 
extent, to bring a product from the initial input supply stage, through the various phases 
of production, processing and distribution, to the final marketing to consumers  
The  main  goal  of  IFAD’s  value  chain  projects  is  to  integrate  target  groups  (small  rural 
producers) into viable value chains to improve their access to secure markets and to raise 
their incomes sustainably. These projects finance activities to address constraints to small 
producers’ participation in, and their benefits from, value chains. In general, value chain 
projects  include  one  or  more  of  three  categories  of  intervention:  (i)  process/product 
upgrading;  (ii)  functional  upgrading;  and  (iii)  upgrading  of  coordination  and  business 
models. In practice, these interventions can entail a wide variety of approaches, depending 
66 
on local challenges and opportunities. The interventions combine value chain development 
with  development  of  microenterprises  and  small  enterprises  (MSEs)  and  support  small 
producers’ organizations and their capacity for collective action (IFAD, 2017). 
Micro and Small enterprise (MSE) development consists of a series of support measures 
to ease constraints posed by existing MSE policies including, trading laws and regulations, 
capital  and  administrative  requirements,  credit  services,  legal  status  etc.  Additionally, 
micro  and  small  enterprise  development  concentrates  on  intervention  points  along  the 
value chain. As such, micro and small enterprise development initiatives do not in and of 
themselves produce negative environmental impact. They can be used to lessen the impact 
of small enterprises on natural resources. Several issues feature prominently in this GS: 
  Environmental issues associated with value chains fall into two categories: green 
issues, i.e., enhancement or depletion of natural resources including water, soils 
and biodiversity; and brown issues, i.e., pollution of air, water and land through 
the waste generated by production processes; 
  A key issue is the capacity for value chain segments to drive positive and negative 
environmental outcomes in other geographies or for other stakeholders through a 
cascade along the value chain; 
  From  a social perspective, well-designed value chain projects can improve  social 
inclusion as well as improve average incomes; 
  other  two  key  issues  to  manage  in  all  value  chain  projects  are  gender  and  food 
security. Different stages and functions of any value chain will be associated with 
gender-specific knowledge, assets, decision-making powers and responsibilities; 
  Household food security and nutrition may be at risk in value chain designs that 
emphasize monocropping and commercial sales at the cost of local food access or 
labour demands.  
Inclusion of youth is also a growing issue in value chains; 
 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 12 – RURAL FINANCE  
Developing  inclusive  rural  financial  systems  and  fostering  innovations  to  increase  the 
access of poor people in rural areas to a wide range of financial services and sound financial 
institutions  is  central  to  IFAD’s  mandate  and  key  to  agricultural  and  rural  livelihoods 
development.  IFAD  concentrates  on  rural  microfinance, which  refers  to  the  provision  of 
financial  services  to  people  with  low  incomes  in  rural  areas  for  both  on-  and  off-farm 
activities.  This  includes  the  provision  of  a  wide  range  of  financial  services  to  farming 
communities, including savings, deposits, money transfers, insurance, and credit. Diverse 
funding mechanisms such as supplier credit, contract farming, crop and investment loans 
all  provide  farmers  with  external  sources  of  capital  during  the  production  cycle  (IFAD, 
2017). 
Rural finance is also used by most farming families to support non-farm income generating 
activities such as food processing, buying and selling, micro-enterprise, and the migration 
of family members for seasonal employment in cities. And finally, finance also supports 
critical  life  cycle  needs  such  as  the  education  and  marriage  of  children,  medical 
emergencies, housing solutions, and the acquisition of assets for old age. All these have 
to be done with the environment in mind, so that they do not end up impacting on the 
environment. 
The  provision  of  financial  services  to  poor  rural  households  faces  many  challenges, 
including  weak  infrastructure  and  low  population  density  located  in  marginal  areas, 
inherent  risks  of  serving  low-income  clients  living  and  working  in  ecologically  fragile 
environments and areas with demarcated natural resources, lack of typical client collateral, 
the limited capacity of Financial service providers (FSP), and low levels of client education. 
The  overall  financial  market  may  be  stunted  and  distorted  from  subsidized,  targeted 
lending.  Taken  together,  these  challenges  increase  the  transaction  costs  and  risks  of 
serving  rural  areas  and  require  continual  attention  and  innovation.  The  contemporary 
67 
approach to rural finance focuses on building the sustainability of FSPs, thinking beyond 
the short life cycle of donor-driven projects.  
To  foster  financial inclusion  for  poor  people  in rural  areas,  IFAD’s  Rural Finance Policy1 
requires  compliance  with  six  guiding  principles  in  IFAD-financed  rural  finance 
interventions:  
(i)  support access to a variety of financial services;  
(ii)  promote a wide range of financial institutions, models and delivery channels; 
(iii)  support demand driven and innovative approaches, including providing a full range 
of  financial services  to  poor families who  live  in  degraded  areas,  which  may,  for 
example,  support  natural  resource  management  practices  and  alternative 
livelihoods that are less harmful to the ecosystem; 
(iv) encourage, in collaboration with private sector partners, market-based approaches 
that strengthen rural financial markets, avoid distortions in the financial sector and 
leverage IFAD’s resources;  
(v)  develop  and  support  long-term  strategies  focusing  on  sustainability  and  poverty 
outreach; and  
(vi) participate  in  policy  dialogues  that  promote  an  enabling  environment  for  rural 
finance. Any deviation from these principles requires clear justification and approval 
by management.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 13 – PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC RESETTLEMENT 
This  GS  provides  guidance  to  country  programme  managers  (CPMs)  and  country 
programme management teams (CPMTs) who are envisaging or dealing with activities or 
interventions that could imply physical relocation or any change in land use and livelihoods 
options resulting from an investment supported by IFAD that could negatively impact on 
some elements of IFAD’s target groups and the wider communities where they are found. 
The  GS  identifies  key  principles  and  measures  that  the  Fund  should  follow  in  order  to 
minimize potential risks and avoid any possible negative impacts of physical resettlement 
or economic displacement (IFAD, 2017). 
The GS considers resettlement not only as the physical relocation of people but also as 
restrictions on or loss of access to means of livelihoods. Physical displacement refers to 
relocation,  loss  of  residential  land,  or  loss  of  shelter,  while  economic  displacement 
implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods. 
Physical and economic resettlement could be either agreed/negotiated or involuntary:  
  Involuntary Resettlement: This is when affected people or communities do not 
have the capacity to refuse it – because the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) 
principle is not properly implemented and they do not have power of choice – or 
their rights to refuse it are over-ridden by national law or are simply denied.  
  Agreed/Negotiated Resettlement: This is when, in the respect  of the do-no-
harm principle and after having properly informed people and gone through the 
FPIC  process,  people  potentially  involved  in  the  resettlement  agree  on  being 
relocated and/or selling or relinquishing access to assets, against fair and timely 
compensations for their losses.  
IFAD’s core mandate is to support the social and economic empowerment of poor rural 
women and men. As such, it is opposed to any investment that will have a negative impact 
on  its  target  groups.  Should  resettlement  or  economic  displacement  be  envisaged,  the 
FPIC and the do- no-harm principles – which are two pillars of IFAD's Policy "Improving 
Access  to  Land  Tenure  Security  Policy"–  will  be  followed  at  all  times  and  for  all  its 
beneficiaries for “any development intervention that might affect the land access and use 
rights of communities.” Thus, IFAD will make sure that 
 
the “do-no-harm principle” is adhered to at all times.  
68 
  The project affected people’s free, prior and informed consent has been solicited 
through inclusive consultations based on full disclosure of the intent and scope of 
the activities planned and their implications. 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 14 – COMMUNITY HEALTH  
This GS concerns itself with the health and safety risks associated with agriculture, as well 
as the use of improved technology and personal protective equipment (PPE). Generally, 
there  is  a  lack  of  knowledge  about  how  farmers  are  affected  by  their  exposures  to  the 
variety  of  health  risks  that  they  are  confronted  with  every  day.  Even  the  general 
improvements  in  health  and  safety  in  the  workplace  and  the  implementation  of  the 
International Labour Organization policies and procedures have not found their way into 
the  agricultural  sector.  Furthermore,  there  is  little  medical  surveillance  in  this  sector, 
resulting in a lack of credible research data and evidence (IFAD, 2017).  
This guidance statement aims to identify the main health issues arising from agricultural 
projects,  the  causative  factors  and  potential  mitigation  measures.  A  health  impact 
resulting from an IFAD-funded project, plan or programme is a measurable change on the 
health status of an individual, group or population, which may be attributable to the direct 
or  indirect  effects  of  an  agricultural  development.  The  impacts  may  be  intended  or 
unintended and may not become apparent for many years after prolonged exposure, or 
due  to  long-term  latency  in  the  human  body.  The  main  health  impacts  related  to 
agricultural projects are:  
  occupational diseases, disorders and injuries;  
  waterborne  diseases  spread  to  humans  through  pathogens  in  water  and  on 
irrigated crops;  
  vector-borne diseases caused by habitat change;  
  non-communicable diseases;  
  nutritional disorders; and  
 
communicable diseases from interaction between people.  
There  are  a  number  of  occupational  health  issues  associated  with  agriculture,  fishing, 
aquaculture and forestry projects:  
traumatic injury;  
respiratory illnesses;  
 
 
  noise-induced hearing loss;  
cancer and other disorders from exposure to chemicals;  
 
zoonoses;  
 
  dermatoses;  
  heat and cold stress; and  
  musculoskeletal disorders.  
Climate change will cause a number of environmental changes which could affect human 
health  in  one  or  more  ways.  Where  rainfall  and  flooding  are  predicted  to  increase 
(southeast Asia, Asia, the Caribbean, northern South America and West Africa), there will 
be  an  increased  risk  associated  with  vector-borne  diseases,  especially  those  carried  by 
mosquitoes and ticks. 
On the other hand, drought and increasing aridity are inimical to most pathogens, while 
some, such as cysticercosis, bovine TB, rabies, brucellosis and echinococcosis are unlikely 
to be sensitive to climate change. 
Hotter,  drier  conditions  will  result  in  greater  amounts  of  dust  and  respiratory  illnesses, 
while these conditions will also increase the risks of heat stroke.  
69 
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
AWPB (RETP-KP) 2022 (BUDGET CATEGORIES)
CATEGORIES
IFAD Amount
GoKP Amount
%
%
I. Investment Costs:
A. Civil Works
B. Vehicles 
C. Equipment and Materials 
D. Technical Assistance, Trainings and Studies
E. Grants to Beneficiaries
F. Credit
-
0.10
-
4.40
9.60
-
Sub-total :
14.10
78.50
78.00
45.50
56.30
-
52.60
-
-
-
-
4
2
22
22
42
9
-
-
-
-
-
1
6
5.70
21.20
7.10
26.20
%
-
-
12
34
-
Total Investment Costs:
II. Recurrent Costs:
A. Salaries & Allowances
B. Operating Costs
1
1
1.50
70
70
70.00
0
0
0.60
30
30
30.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
Subt-total:
%
-
0.60
0.10
33.10
58.80
-
92.60
5
2
7.40
-
0.10
-
9.70
17.10
-
26.90
1
1
2.10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
TOTAL BUDGET (PKR Billion)
Beneficiary 
Contribution
Total
For Exch.
Local (Excl. 
Taxes(
Duties & 
Taxes
IFAD Amount 
GoKP Amount
TOTAL BUDGET (US$ Million)
Beneficiary 
Contribution
Total
For Exch.
%
%
%
%
             -   
                 -   
            -            -   
             0.10            0.04           0.90     78.50 
                 -             0.00           0.10     78.00 
             9.20            0.42         28.00     45.50 
             -          61.60     56.30 
           17.00 
 - 
             -   
                 -   
            -   
       0.20 
           -             -   
    21.50 
           -       22.00 
           -          -   
           -   
           -   
     25.90 
     10.20 
    42.20          7.60 
      9.30        37.70 
           -   
          -   
           -   
-
1.10
0.10
61.40
109.50
-
%
-
0.60
0.10
33.10
58.90
-
           26.30            0.46         90.60     90.60 
     36.30 
    21.10        45.30    26.30     172.10 
    92.70 
             1.33            0.10           6.40 
             0.60            0.10           3.10 
             1.93            0.20           9.50 
       2.70 
       1.30 
       4.00 
           -   
           -   
9.20
4.50
     13.70 
4.90
2.40
      7.30 
   185.80 
  100.00 
Local 
(Excl. 
Taxes)
(C) 
Duties & 
Taxes
-
0.90
0.10
58.80
109.50
-
169.30
8.40
3.60
12.00
181.30
-
0.25
0.03
2.68
-
-
2.96
0.70
0.90
1.60
4.56
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Total Project Costs
15.60
53.90
6.30
21.80
7.10
26.20
29.00
100.00
           28.23            0.66       100.10 
     40.30 
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Timetable for 
implementation
Project Indicators
RIMS Indicators
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
(A)
(B)
(C) 
(D)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Project Goal: To contribute to poverty reduction, 
nutrition and food security of rural households in 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.
Beneficiary households reporting 
improved income
Beneficiary households reporting to have 
improved their nutrition
Development Objectives: Income of rural 
households enhanced in a sustainable manner
Households satisfied with project-
supported services
Households reporting they can influence 
decision making of local authorities and 
project supported service providers
 C1: 
Agribusiness Development
Outcome 1: Enhanced capacity of smallholder 
farmers for increased market access (Professional 
Farmer Organizations and Farm Service Centres)
Supported rural enterprises 
reporting an increase in profit
A
Output 1.1: Rural producer organisations 
formed and strengthened
Mobilization and Registration of FOs
Rural Producers' organizations 
(RPOs) Supported
Business Development Planning
Leveraging FOs Investment
B
Output 1.2: Coaching of producers for increased 
capacity on business planning, production 
practices and market advice
Mobilization and Registration of FOs
Persons trained in production 
practices and/or technologies
Business Development Planning
Leveraging Investment in FSC
 C 
Output 1.3: Producer-Public-Private-Partnerships 
(4Ps) established
Mobilization and Match Making
Producers engaged in 4P 
collaborations
Business Development Planning
Leveraging Private Sector Investment
 D 
Strengthening Institutional Services
Policy Reforms
Agriculture/Livestock Research Support 
Services
 E 
Agribusiness Mobilization Partner
Total Component Cost
f
f
a
t
S
/
t
i
n
U
i
l
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
(E)
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
t
i
n
U
(F)
Schemes
4P
4P
4P
PMU
Lumpsum
PMU
Farmer
PMU
Farmer
Fiscal Year:2013-14
Spent 
(Cumulat
ive)
%
Spent 
(Annual)
%
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
Annex-I Detailed Annual Work Plan
Community Development
Implementation targets 
Appraisal 
(Total)
Revised 
(Total)
Planned 
(Annual)
 Unit Cost (PKR) 
Achieved 
(Cumulativ
e)
% Achieved 
%
Appraisal (Total)
Revised (Total)
Planned (Annual)
(Annual)
Budget (PKR 000)
Budget 
Category
Financiers
(G)
(G.a)
(H)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
(O)
IFAD
Gov.
(P)
Beef
550
550
550
35
35
35
20
20
20
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
175
175
175
                           3 667 000 
10.5
18
18
                         36 670 000 
6
6
6
                         18 335 000 
1.5
                         22 800 000 
1.5
                       120 840 000 
1.5
                       153 900 000 
            356 212 000 
                          -                   -   
                     -   
         -   
               -                      -                   -   
Page 2 of 6
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Timetable for implementation
Project Indicators
RIMS 
Indicators
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
i
l
/
t
i
n
U
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
f
f
a
t
S
(A)
(B)
(C) 
(D)
(E)
Implementation targets 
Budget (PKR 000)
t
i
n
U
(F)
Appraisal 
(Total)
Revised 
(Total)
Planned 
(Annual)
Unit Cost   (PKR)
Achieved 
(Cumulativ
e)
%
Achieved 
(Annual)
%
Appraisal 
(Total)
Revised (Total)
Planned 
(Annual)
Budget 
Category
Financiers
IFAD
Gov.
Benef
Spent 
(Cumulative)
%
Spent 
(Annu
al)
%
(G)
(G.a)
(H)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
(O)
(P)
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
Annex 1 - Detailed AWPB Table
Fisheries Development
Fiscal Year: 2013-14
Project Goal: To contribute to poverty reduction, 
nutrition and food security of rural households in 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.
C2
Component 2: Skills development and 
Employment Promotion
Outcome 2: Improved capacity for obtaining 
jobs and engage in entrepreneurship 
A
B
Output 2.1. Vocational, technical and entrepreneurial skills 
trainings provided
Vocational/Technical & Enterpreneurship Training
Persons trained in income-
generating activities or business 
management
Output 2.2: Provision of start-up capital for establishing 
business and self-employment
PMU
Trainee
60000
0
15000
      684 000 000 
Start up provided for self employment
Start up provided for self 
employment
PMU
Trainee
42000
0
10500
      478 800 000 
Output 2.3: Number of new job enterants integrated to job 
market
C
Job Market Integration/Internship
Persons receiving support
PMU
Study
25000
0
4000
      729 600 000 
              -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
Outcome 3: Increased availability of nutritious food and 
awareness
Output 3.1: Households provided with nutrition education
Women reporting minimum 
deitary diversity (MDDW)
Households provided with 
targeted support support to 
improve their nutrition
D
Outcome: 4: Capacity for policy dialogue/reform 
strengthned (Farmer Services Center Act Cooperatives Act, 
Seed Act Amended)
Output 4.1: Policy development and reform supported
Job Market Study and Outlook
Training Need Assessment of Instructers
Training of Instructers
Institutional  Support Services
Engagement for Job Placement
Technical Support Provider (s)
Total Cost Component 2:
E
F
PMU
Study
PMU
TNA
PMU
Event
2
2
8
PMU
Palcements
25000
Lumpsum
6
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
          6 840 000 
1.5
          2 280 000 
3
          1 596 000 
500
1.5
      185 820 000 
   2 088 936 000 
              -   
                    -   
             -                -    #REF!
#REF!
#REF!
Page 3 of 6
Annex 1 - Detailed AWPB Table 2013-14
Project Management Unit
Fiscal Year: 2013-14  
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
i
l
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
f
f
a
t
S
/
t
i
n
U
(A)
(E)
Project Goal: To contribute to poverty reduction, nutrition 
and food security of rural households in Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa province.
C3 
Component 3: Programme Management, Policy and 
Institutional Support 
I.
A
Investment Cost.
1 Office Establishment and Equipment
Computers/laptops
Printers
UPS/Internet Connectivity
Power Generator
Photocopier 
Mobile Phone
Furniture and Fixtures
Air Conditioners (DC Inverter)
Subtotal
2 Vehicles for PMU
Vehicles - DC Pickups
Vehicles - Car 1300cc
Motorcycles
Subtotal
3 Technical Assistance for Policy Engagement
Regional Agribusiness Platforms a/
Establishing Provincial Agribusiness Plattform /b
Subtotal
4 Monitoirng and Evaluation
Set
Unit
Set
Unit
Unit
Unit
Set
Unit
Vehicle
Vehicle
Vehicle
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Baseline/Gender Assessment
Nutrition Sensitive Commodity Chains Prioritization
Subtotal
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
B Regional Coordination Units
1 Equipment
Laptops
Desktop Computers
3 in 1 Printers
Photocopier
Multimedia Projector
LCD
Air Conditioners
Generators
Furniture
Miscellaneous
Subtotal
2 Vehicles
Vehicles - DC Pickups
Vehicles - Car 1300 CC
Motorcycles
Subtotal
Recurrent Costs
1 Project Management Staff
Project Director
Agribusiness and Skills Manager
Employment and Jobs Placement Manager
Administration & Finance Manager
M&E and Transversal Themes Manager
M&E/SDGs Specialist
KM/Communication Specialist
Gender/Nutrition/Climate Change Specialist 
Business Development Officer
Agribusiness Policy Officer
Institutional Officer
Labour Market Specialist
Employment Policy Officer
Accounts Officer
Procurement Officer
Grants and Contract Management Officer
Human Resource Officer
Audit/Budget Officer
IT Officer
Subtotal
2 Support Staff
Accounts Assistants (4)
M&E Assistants (2)
Office Assistants (2)
Drivers (8)
Peon (4)
Guards (4)
Gardeners (2)
Sweepers (2)
Subtotal
3 Office running costs
Set
Set
Unit
Unit
Set
Unit
Unit
Unit
Set
Set
Unit
Unit
Unit
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Rent PMU
Utilities
Stationery and Supplies
POL
Vehicle O&M costs
Communication, postage, email, internet
Seminars, Workshops, Meetings
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Lumpsum
t
i
n
U
(F)
No. 
10
4
1
1
1
15
10
5
5
3
2
4
1
1
1
16
8
8
4
4
4
12
4
4
4
12
8
4
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
72
36
36
144
72
72
36
36
18
18
18
144
144
18
18
Implementation targets 
Budget (PKR 000)
Unit Cost (PKR) Total Cost (PKR)
Achieved 
(Cumulativ
e)
Achieved 
(Annual)
%
%
Appraisal (Total)
Revised (Total)
Planned 
(Annual)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
Spent 
(Cumulati
ve)
Spent 
(Annual)
%
%
Financiers
IFAD
Gov.
Ben
ef
(P)
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
Budget 
Categor
y
(O)
                          -   
80%
80%
80%
80%
80%
80%
80%
80%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
120 000
50 000
10 000
1 000 000
350 000
50 000
100 000
90 000
8 000 000
3 500 000
80 000
760 000
3 648 000
5 000 000
3 426 038
120 000
80 000
55 000
250 000
150 000
160 000
90 000
300 000
1 000 000
240 000
8 000 000
3 500 000
80 000
500 000
300 000
300 000
300 000
300 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
250 000
150 000
150 000
150 000
150 000
150 000
150 000
70 000
70 000
70 000
35 000
30 000
30 000
30 000
25 000
450 000
80 000
50 000
50 000
30 000
50 000
70 000
1 200 000
200 000
10 000
1 000 000
350 000
750 000
1 000 000
450 000
4 960 000
40 000 000
10 500 000
160 000
50 660 000
3 040 000
3 648 000
6 688 000
5 000 000
3 426 038
8 426 038
1 920 000
640 000
440 000
1 000 000
600 000
640 000
1 080 000
1 200 000
4 000 000
960 000
12 480 000
96 000 000
28 000 000
320 000
124 320 000
9 000 000
5 400 000
5 400 000
5 400 000
5 400 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
2 700 000
2 700 000
2 700 000
2 700 000
2 700 000
2 700 000
82 800 000
5 040 000
2 520 000
2 520 000
5 040 000
2 160 000
2 160 000
1 080 000
900 000
21 420 000
8 100 000
1 440 000
900 000
7 200 000
4 320 000
900 000
1 260 000
                                             Note:   The Vehicles and Equipments against which the Planned Column is given nil/zero, have already been purchased by the Govt: of Balochistan through Bridge Financing.
4
Annex 1 - Detailed AWPB Table 2013-14
Project Management Unit
Fiscal Year: 2013-14  
Office maintenance
Subtotal
4 Travel Costs
TA/DA (day)
Rental Vehicles
Air Tickets
Subtotal
II
1 Regional Coordination Units
Regional Coordinator (5)
Regional M&E Officer (4 Agribusiness 4 
Employment  Total 8)
Accountants (5) 
Subtotal
f. Support Staff
Office Assistant (5)
Drivers (20)
Peon (8)
Guards (8)
Sweepers (4)
Field Consultants 
Subtotal
2 Office Running Costs
Rent RCU
Utilities
Stationery and Supplies
POL
Vehicle O&M costs
Communication, postage, email, internet
Seminars, Workshops, Meetings
Office maintenance
Travelling and Daily Allowance
Subtotal
GRAND TOTAL
Months
18
30 000
Days
Veh/Day
Numbers
18
18
52.5
1 095 000
760 000
23 000
Months
90
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Lumpsum
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Months
Lumpsum
Months
Lumpsum
144
90
90
360
144
144
72
1.5
72
72
72
360
360
72
72
72
1
300 000
150 000
150 000
70 000
35 000
30 000
25 000
25 000
25 000 000
100 000
50 000
50 000
50 000
35 000
30 000
50 000
15 000
2 000 000
540 000
24 660 000
19 710 000
13 680 000
1 207 500
34 597 500
27 000 000
21 600 000
13 500 000
62 100 000
6 300 000
12 600 000
4 320 000
3 600 000
1 800 000
37 500 000
66 120 000
7 200 000
3 600 000
3 600 000
18 000 000
12 600 000
2 160 000
3 600 000
1 080 000
2 000 000
51 840 000
551 071 538
0
0
0
#REF!
#REF!
                                             Note:   The Vehicles and Equipments against which the Planned Column is given nil/zero, have already been purchased by the Govt: of Balochistan through Bridge Financing.
5
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
s
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators 
Project 
Indicator
RIMS 
indicator
Approved (total)
Implementation Targets
Planned 
(annual)
Achieved 
(cumulative)
%
Achieved 
(annual)
%
Appraisal 
(total)
Budget (PKR 000)
Planned 
(annual)
Spent 
(cumulative)
%
Spent 
(annual)
%
Comments
AWPB 2022 (Summary)
1. Agribusiness Development
A
B
C
D
E
Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs) Development
Strengthening Public-Private Partnership
Farm Services Center
Strengthening Institutional Services
Agribusiness Mobilization Partner
Sub-Total
2. Skill Development & Employment Promotion
A
B
C
D
E
F
Vocational and Enterpreneurship Training
Startup Capital for Self-Employment
Job Market Integration/Internship
Capacity building for skills development
Institutional support services
Technical Support Providers
3. Project Management & Policy Support
Project Management
GRAND TOTAL
Sub-Total
Sub-Total
3 667 000
18 335 000
36 670 000
143 640 000
153 900 000
356 212 000
684 000 000
478 800 000
729 600 000
10 716 000
185 820 000
2 088 936 000
551 071 538
551 071 538
2 996 219 538
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
Total
IFAD Share
19 711 971
10 644 464
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Non-
Consulting:
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Equpment of PMU
Procurement of DC 4x4 Vehicles for 
PMU
Procurement of 1300cc Cars Vehicles 
for PMU
Motorcycles for PMU 
Furniture & Fixture 
Computers/Laptops 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Printers 
7
Heavy Power Generator
8
Photocopier
9
Air Conditioners (DC Inverter)
10
Multimedia Projector
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
5
3
2
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
10 Sets
PMU - KP
10
PMU - KP
4
1
1
5
3
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40,000,000.00 
-
10,500,000.00 
-
160,000.00 
-
1,000,000.00 
-
1,200,000.00 
-
200,000.00 
-
1,000,000.00 
-
350,000.00 
-
450,000.00 
-
150,000.00 
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
10
Multimedia Projector
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
11
Telephone Exchange
12
Digital Camera
13
Development of Project MIS / 
Website
14
Accounting Software
15
Mobile Phones
Equipments for RCUs
Procurement of DC 4x4 Vehicles for 
PMU
Procurement of 1300cc Cars Vehicles 
for PMU
Motorcycles for PMU 
Furniture & Fixture 
1
2
3
4
5
Laptops 
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
1
1
1
1
15
12
8
4
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
PMU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
4 RCUs
RCU - KP
16
PMU - KP
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
DC
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50,000.00 
-
100,000.00 
-
5,000,000.00 
-
6,000,000.00 
-
750,000.00 
-
96,000,000.00 
-
28,000,000.00 
-
320,000.00 
-
4,000,000.00 
-
1,920,000.00 
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
6
7
Desktop Computers 
3 in 1 Printers 
8
Generators
9
Photocopier
10
Air Conditioners (DC Inverter)
11
Multimedia Projector
12
LCD
13
Digital Camera
14
Miscellaneous
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
8
8
4
4
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
12
RCU - KP
4
4
4
4
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
RCU - KP
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
640,000.00 
-
220,000.00 
-
1,200,000.00 
-
1,000,000.00 
-
1,080,000.00 
-
600,000.00 
-
600,000.00 
-
400,000.00 
-
1,200,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
1
Baseline/Gender Assessment
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
2
3
4
Nutrition Sensitive Commodity Chains 
Prioritization
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Technical Assistance for Policy 
Engagement for Regional Agribusiness 
Platform 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Technical Assistance for Policy 
Engagement for Establishing Provincial 
Agribusiness Platform
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
5
Policy Reforms
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
6
Job Market Study and Outlook 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
7
Technical Support Providers (s)
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
PMU Technical and Professional Staffing
8
Project Director
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
9
Agribusiness  and Skills Manager
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
10
Employment and Jobs Placement 
Manager
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5,000,000.00 
-
3,426,038.00 
-
3,040,000.00 
3,648,000.00 
-
15,200,000.00 
-
4,560,000.00 
123,880,000.00 
6,000,000.00 
-
3,600,000.00 
-
3,600,000.00 
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 4 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
1
11
Baseline/Gender Assessment
Administration & Finance Manager
IFAD
IFAD
All KP selected 
All KP selected 
districts
districts
12
M&E and Transversal Themes Manager
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
13
M&E/SDGs Specialist
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
14
KM/Communication Specialist 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
15
Gender/Nutrition/Climate Change 
Specialist 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
16
Business Development Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
17
Agribusiness Policy Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
18
Institutional Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
19
Labour Market Specialist 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
20
Skills Development Specialist 
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3,600,000.00 
-
3,600,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
3,000,000.00 
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 5 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
1
21
Baseline/Gender Assessment
Employment Policy Officer
22
Accounts Officer
IFAD
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
All KP selected 
districts
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
23
Procurement Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
24
Grants/Contract Management Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
25
Human Resource Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
26
Audit/Budget Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
27
IT Officer
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
RCUs Technical & Professional Staffing
25
Regional Coordinators (5)
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
26
Regional M&E Officers (4 Agribusiness / 
4 Employment)
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3,000,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
18,000,000.00 
-
14,400,000.00 
-
29
Regional Accountants (5)
IFAD
All KP selected 
districts
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
9,000,000.00 
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 6 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Version
1.0
12-Jun-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
29
1
Regional Accountants (5)
Baseline/Gender Assessment
Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding
30
Hiring of Field Consultants
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
All KP selected 
districts
All KP selected 
districts
All KP selected 
districts
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
-
-
-
25,000,000.00 
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 7 of 7
Printed on: 22/06/2021
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Pakistan 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa – Rural Economic Transformation Project (KP-
RETP)  
Project Implementation Manual 
Document Date:  2-Aug 2021 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ......................................................................................................................................... i 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS ............................................................................................................................... vi 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES .............................................................................................................................. vi 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................. vii 
I. 
PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL ..................................................................................................................... 9 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ........................................................................................................................... 9 
A. 
B. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Project Components ............................................................................................................................... 10 
Component 1: Agribusiness Development ........................................................................................ 11 
Component 2: Skills Development and Employment  Promotion ..................................................... 12 
Component 3: Programme Management and Policy Support .......................................................... 13 
. Governance and Institutional Arrangements ....................................................................................... 13 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) ..................................................................................................... 13 
Project Management Unit (PMU) ...................................................................................................... 14 
PMU Structure and Staffing Positions ............................................................................................... 15 
III. 
PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM .......................................................................... 15 
A. 
Planning .................................................................................................................................................. 15 
Planning Process/AWP/Budgets ........................................................................................................ 16 
Project Baseline ................................................................................................................................. 16 
Quarterly Plans and Reviews ............................................................................................................. 17 
1. 
2. 
3. 
B. 
C. 
Annual Progress Review and Planning Meeting ..................................................................................... 17 
PSC Meetings .......................................................................................................................................... 17 
D.  Monitoring and Evaluation ..................................................................................................................... 17 
E. 
F. 
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PME) .................................................................................... 18 
Economic Graduation Tracking - Methodology and Process .................................................................. 18 
G.  M&E Personnel ....................................................................................................................................... 19 
H. 
Youth and Nutrition strategy .................................................................................................................. 19 
I.  M&E Function and the Project’s Theory of Change ................................................................................ 20 
J. 
K. 
L. 
Progress Reporting, Knowledge Management and Communication ....................................................... 1 
1. 
Baseline ............................................................................................................................................... 1 
2.  Mid Term Review (MTR) ...................................................................................................................... 1 
3. 
Annual Outcome Surveys .................................................................................................................... 1 
4.  Management Information System (MIS) ............................................................................................. 1 
Project Completion Review and Evaluation ........................................................................................ 1 
5. 
Learning and Knowledge Management ............................................................................................... 1 
6. 
Implementation Partners’ M&E Responsibilities ...................................................................................... 2 
Donor and Development Partners’ Coordination ..................................................................................... 2 
IV. 
TECHNICAL AND OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES FOR IMPLEMENATION OF COMPONENTS.......................... 4 
A. 
Component 1 – Agribusiness Development .............................................................................................. 4 
Sub-component 1.1 –Professional farmer organizations (PFOs) Development .................................. 4 
Sub Component 1.3 –Farms Service Companies ............................................................................... 16 
1. 
2. 
i 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
3. 
Sub-Component 1.4: Institutional Support Services ......................................................................... 18 
B. 
C. 
D. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Component-2 – Skills Development and EmploymentPromotion ........................................................... 18 
Purpose, Objective, Outcome and Output ........................................................................................ 18 
Sub-component 2.1: Vocation and entrepreneurship skill training .................................................. 19 
Sub-Component 2.2: Start-up capital for employment promotion ................................................... 20 
Sub-Component 2.3 Job placement of graduated students .............................................................. 22 
Institutional Strengthening Support under Component 2................................................................. 23 
Eligibility and Other Parameters for Trainings ....................................................................................... 23 
Indicative Type of Trainings ............................................................................................................... 25 
Target Group and Geographic Focus ................................................................................................. 26 
Implementation Arrangement........................................................................................................... 27 
Summary of Eligibility Criteria for Participants .................................................................................. 27 
Type of Support of Participants ......................................................................................................... 28 
Eligibility Criteria for VOETO .............................................................................................................. 28 
Contracting and Reporting ................................................................................................................ 29 
Exist and Sustainability Strategy ............................................................................................................ 29 
Component-1 Agri-business Development ........................................................................................ 29 
Skills Development and Employment Promotion .............................................................................. 30 
Project Management and Policy Support .......................................................................................... 30 
E. 
SECAP Compliance .................................................................................................................................. 31 
V. 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ..................................................................................................... 33 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
General ................................................................................................................................................... 33 
Preparation for recruitment ................................................................................................................... 33 
Advertisement & Selection ..................................................................................................................... 34 
Recruitment of individual consultant/consulting firms .......................................................................... 34 
Remuneration Package ............................................................................................................................ 34 
Performance Evaluation ......................................................................................................................... 35 
Renewal of Contracts.............................................................................................................................. 35 
Leave Policy ............................................................................................................................................ 35 
Procurement Management .................................................................................................................... 35 
Principles of Procurement....................................................................................................................... 36 
Ethics ................................................................................................................................................. 36 
Competition ....................................................................................................................................... 36 
Fairness .............................................................................................................................................. 37 
Transparency ..................................................................................................................................... 37 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
K. 
L. 
M. 
1. 
2. 
Procurement Monitoring System ........................................................................................................... 45 
Procurement Cycle .................................................................................................................................. 46 
Planned Completion or Delivery Date ..................................................................................................... 47 
Consulting Services (QCBS, FBS, LCS, and CQS) ................................................................................. 54 
General Procurement ........................................................................................................................ 55 
N. 
Types of Contracts .................................................................................................................................. 61 
Framework Contracts ........................................................................................................................ 62 
1. 
O. 
P. 
Contract Administration ......................................................................................................................... 63 
Contract Register (CR)/Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) ....................................................................... 63 
VI. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ................................................................................................................... 69 
ii 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
Project Cycle and Financial Management Activities ............................................................................... 70 
Pre-Implementation Activities ................................................................................................................ 71 
Principles of Financial Management ...................................................................................................... 71 
IFAD’S Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption................................................................................. 72 
Prohibited Practices ........................................................................................................................... 72 
General Principles .............................................................................................................................. 72 
Responsibilities of the Provincial Government/Project..................................................................... 73 
Reporting ........................................................................................................................................... 73 
Remedies ........................................................................................................................................... 74 
FM Organizational Structure, Roles and Responsibilities ....................................................................... 74 
FM Organizational Structure ............................................................................................................. 74 
Role of Finance Manager ................................................................................................................... 76 
Role of Budget and Finance Officer (1 Position) ................................................................................ 78 
Role of Accounts Officer (1 Position) ................................................................................................. 79 
Role of Budget and Finance Coordinator (5 Positions—one each in the RCU) .................................. 80 
Procurement and Contract Management ......................................................................................... 81 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Annual Work Plan & Budgeting .............................................................................................................. 81 
Pakistan’s PFM system and its link with the KP-RETP ............................................................................ 81 
Project design changes during project life.............................................................................................. 81 
AWP/Budget Process ......................................................................................................................... 82 
Preparation of the Annual Work Plan ............................................................................................... 83 
Preparation of the Annual Budget ..................................................................................................... 84 
Budget Monitoring ............................................................................................................................ 85 
Budget Revision ................................................................................................................................. 86 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Flow of Funds.......................................................................................................................................... 86 
Financiers of the KP-RETP and Flow Chart ......................................................................................... 86 
1. 
Evidence of authority to sign Withdrawal Applications .................................................................... 88 
2. 
Designated Account ........................................................................................................................... 88 
3. 
Imprest Account ................................................................................................................................ 89 
4. 
Recovery of Initial Advance ............................................................................................................... 89 
5. 
Direct Payment Procedures ............................................................................................................... 90 
6. 
Statement of Expenditure (SOE) Procedure ...................................................................................... 91 
7. 
Preparation of Withdrawal Applications ........................................................................................... 91 
8. 
Counterpart Funds ............................................................................................................................. 93 
9. 
10.  Beneficiaries’ Contributions .............................................................................................................. 93 
Disbursement Process............................................................................................................................. 93 
Classes of expenditure ....................................................................................................................... 93 
Expenditure Request and Authorization ........................................................................................... 94 
Payment Request............................................................................................................................... 94 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Accounting Procedures ........................................................................................................................... 95 
Accounting Rules and Principles ........................................................................................................ 95 
1. 
Accounting Software/Financial Information System ......................................................................... 96 
2. 
Recording of Transactions ................................................................................................................. 96 
3. 
Transaction Voucher (or bill form) .................................................................................................... 96 
4. 
Input of Transactions ......................................................................................................................... 97 
5. 
Backup of Accounting Records .......................................................................................................... 97 
6. 
7. 
Filing of Accounting Records ............................................................................................................. 97 
8.  Monthly and Annual Closing of Accounts .......................................................................................... 97 
9.  Monthly Verification of Accounts ...................................................................................................... 98 
10.  Annual Closing of Accounts ............................................................................................................... 98 
L.  Maintenance of separate accounts and records .................................................................................... 99 
iii 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Filing and storage of the financial records ........................................................................................ 99 
Off-site archiving of financial records ................................................................................................ 99 
Electronic back-up procedures ........................................................................................................ 100 
Retention period.............................................................................................................................. 100 
Fixed Asset Management ................................................................................................................ 100 
Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel ........................................................................................................ 101 
M. 
Internal Controls ................................................................................................................................... 102 
General ............................................................................................................................................ 102 
1. 
Segregation of duties ....................................................................................................................... 102 
2. 
Authorization ................................................................................................................................... 102 
3. 
Verification ...................................................................................................................................... 103 
4. 
Reconciliation and checks ................................................................................................................ 103 
5. 
Reviews of operating performance ................................................................................................. 103 
6. 
7. 
Restricted access ............................................................................................................................. 103 
8.  Monitoring and review .................................................................................................................... 103 
Supervision ...................................................................................................................................... 103 
9. 
Information and technology related controls ................................................................................. 103 
10. 
11.  Controls related to PFOs/FSCs ......................................................................................................... 104 
12.  Controls related to Private Partners under 4Ps Arrangements ....................................................... 105 
13.  Controls related to Service Providers (Trainings) ............................................................................ 105 
N. 
Financial Reporting ............................................................................................................................... 105 
Annual Project Financial Statements ............................................................................................... 106 
Interim Financial Reports ................................................................................................................ 106 
Analytical Reviews ........................................................................................................................... 106 
1. 
2. 
3. 
O. 
Internal Audit........................................................................................................................................ 107 
Responsibilities ................................................................................................................................ 107 
Process modalities ........................................................................................................................... 107 
1. 
2. 
P. 
External Audit ....................................................................................................................................... 108 
General considerations .................................................................................................................... 108 
Types of audit opinion ..................................................................................................................... 109 
Key requirements in Management Letter ....................................................................................... 110 
Audit Follow-up ............................................................................................................................... 110 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Q. 
R. 
Completion and Financing .................................................................................................................... 111 
IFAD’s Financial Management Support ................................................................................................ 112 
Overview of IFAD support ............................................................................................................... 112 
Roles and responsibilities related to IFAD support ......................................................................... 113 
1. 
2. 
ANNEXURES ................................................................................................................................................. 114 
Annexure-1: Organizational Chart and TORs of Key Positions ....................................................................... 115 
Annexure-2: Outline of Diagnostic Study ....................................................................................................... 143 
Annexure-3: Detailed checklist of factors for baseline study ......................................................................... 144 
Annexure-4: Business Planning Format ......................................................................................................... 145 
Annexure-5: FPO Institutional maturity index computation .......................................................................... 146 
Annexure-6: Template for Expression of Interest (EOI/Concept Note) Stage................................................. 147 
Annexure-7: Template for proposal development ......................................................................................... 150 
Annexure-8: Scope of work and Evaluation Criteria ...................................................................................... 153 
Annexire- 9:  Score card (Business Proposal Evaluation Committee) ............................................................. 154 
Annexure-10: Business Planning Guidelines for NFSC .................................................................................... 157 
iv 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-11:Indicative list of sector-wise training under component-2 ....................................................... 158 
Annexure-12: TORs for the Vocational/Entrepreneurship Training Service Provider ..................................... 160 
Annexure-13: Guidelines for Managing Social, Environmental and Climate Risks in Implementation .......... 162 
Annexure-14: Annual Work Plan/Budget Format .......................................................................................... 167 
Annexure-15: Measuring Progress against the AWP/B ................................................................................. 168 
Annexure-16: Steps in the opening of Assignment Account/Designated Account ......................................... 169 
Annexure-17: Checklist for reviewing withdrawal applications ..................................................................... 175 
Annexure-18: Designated Account Reconciliation (Imprest Fund) ................................................................. 178 
Annexure-19: Sample Financial Statements .................................................................................................. 180 
Annexure-20: Guidelines for Interim Financial Reporting .............................................................................. 192 
Annexure-21: TORs of Internal Auditing Firm ................................................................................................ 197 
Annexure-22: Financial Tables for the Supervision Missions ......................................................................... 205 
Annexure-23:   Format for measuring compliance with legal covenants ....................................................... 206 
v 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
= 
Rs. 152.00 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
vi 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
4P/PPPP 
ACE 
ADP 
AG 
AGP 
APRM 
AWPB 
BISP 
CMF 
CMFS 
CMO 
COs 
COA 
CQS 
CR 
DAC 
DC 
DDO 
EAD 
EOI 
EOI 
FA 
FATA 
FBS 
FSC 
FD 
FIA 
GFR 
GoKP 
GoP 
GPN  
IA 
IAC 
ICB 
ICP-CM 
IFAD 
ISO 
IT 
ITB 
IUFR 
KP-PPRA 
LCS 
LO 
LSO 
LTB 
M&E  
MFA 
MM 
MTR 
NAB 
Public Private Producers’ Partnership  
Anti-Corruption Establishment 
Annual Development Programme 
Accountant General 
Auditor General of Pakistan 
Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Benazir Income Support Program 
Contract Monitoring Form 
Community Managed Financial Services 
Contract Management Officer 
Community Organizations 
Chart of Accounts 
Consultant’s qualifications-based selection. 
Contract Register 
Departmental Accounts Committee 
Director Contracting 
Drawing and Disbursement Officer 
Economic Affairs Division 
Expression of Interest 
Expression of Interest 
Financing Agreement 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
Fixed-budget Based Selection 
Farm Service Centers 
Finance Department 
Federal Investigation Agency 
General Financial Rules 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Government of Pakistan 
General Procurement Notice 
Implementing Agency 
Internal Audit Cell 
International Competitive Bidding 
IFAD Client Portal – Contract Monitoring 
International Fund for Agricultural Development  
International Standards Organization  
Information Technology 
Invitation to Bid 
Interim Unaudited Financial Reports 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Public Procurement Regulatory Authority 
Least-cost-based Selection 
Local Organisation 
Local Support Organisation 
Letter to the Borrowers 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Manager Administration and Finance 
Mitigation Measures 
Mid Term Review 
National Accountability Bureau 
vii 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
NCB 
NBP 
NFSC 
NS 
OBB 
O&M 
OSR 
PC1 
PD 
PDR 
P&DD 
PEFA 
PFOs 
PIAC 
PIM 
PMU 
PO 
PP 
PPRA 
PS 
PSC 
PTS 
QBS 
QCBS 
QPR 
REOI 
KP-RETP 
REOIs 
RFP 
RFP 
RFQ 
RFQ 
RMU 
RCU 
SBD 
SBP 
SFO 
SOE 
SPN 
SRSP 
SS 
SSS 
SWOT 
TEVT 
TEVTA 
TOR 
UNDB 
VFM 
VO 
WA 
National Competitive Bidding 
National Bank of Pakistan 
New Farm Services Center 
National Shopping 
Output Based Budget 
Operation and Maintenance 
Own Source Revenue 
Planning Commission Performa 1 
Project Director 
Project Design Report 
Planning and Development Department 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Professional Farmers Organizations 
Provincial Internal Audit Cell 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Management Unit 
Purchase Order 
Procurement Plan 
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority 
Procurement Specialist  
Project Steering Committee 
Procurement Tracking System 
Quality-based Selection 
Quality and Cost-based Selection 
Quarterly Progress Report 
Request for Expression of Interest 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion 
Request for Expressions of Interest 
Request for Proposal 
Request for proposal as selection method 
Request for quotation as selection method 
Request for Quotation  
Regional Management Unit 
Regional Coordination Unit 
Standard Bidding Document 
State Bank of Pakistan 
Selection of Farmer Organizations  
Statement of Expenditure 
Special Procurement Notice 
Sarhad Rural Support Programme 
Sole Source 
Single Source Selection 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats 
Technical and Vocational Training 
Technical and Vocational Training Authority 
Terms of Reference 
United Nations Development Business 
Value for Money 
Village Organisation 
Withdrawal Application 
viii 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
I. 
PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL  
1. 
This PIM has been developed to support PMU in general and technical teams in particular to understand 
and comply with technical requirements while establishing/managing work at Professional Farmers Organization 
(PFOs),  Farm  Services  Centers  (existing/new  ones),  Private  Partners  under  4P  arrangements,  Technical  and 
Vocational Education Services Providers (KP TEVTA and/or partner engaged for this purpose). It includes detailed 
guidance  including  workable/simple  templates  for  consistent  application  of  required  guidance  in  field  and 
holding the staff  accountable—if  they deviate  from  the established  technical requirements.  The  manual  also 
briefly describes institutional arrangements---including project governance, staffing, and M&E to establish the 
context. 
2. 
In addition to this volume of PIM—which focuses mostly on technical requirements, the KP-RETP shall 
follow  the  requirements  contained  in  the  FM  PIM,  and  Procurement  PIM  which  are  separately  provided. 
References have been given in this manual where appropriate for this purpose. PIMs are living documents. They 
will change as the KP-RETP learns from implementation and adapts to delivering the intended outcomes of the 
project. 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
3. 
Project  Goal.  The  overall  goal  of  the  programme  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction,  food  and 
nutrition security, and strengthened resiliene of rural households. The development objective is improved rural 
income and employment through high value agriculture—off-farm and on-farm related activities in a sustainable 
and climate-resilient manner. 
4. 
Target Area. The project will cover all the 35 districts of the province in a phased manner—starting in 
the    10  poorest  districts  and  gradually  expanding  by  including  3  additional  districts  per  region  annually.  The 
project shall, thereby, cover all 35 districts by the MTR (End of Third Year). The decisions regarding which districts 
will be included in which phase or project year, will be undertaken by the project steering committee at project 
start-up  while  paying  due  attention  to  prevalence  of  poverty,  potential  for  project  interventions  and  recent 
security developments in the province. This approach will allow flexibility in terms of geographic targeting in 
case of force issue.  
5. 
The project will also create complementarity and synergies with the IFAD financed National Poverty 
Graduation Programme (NPGP) in 10 districts of the province[1], Kohat Division Development Project (KDDP) in 
3  districts[2],  other  donor  funded  projects  such  as  the  WB  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Irrigated-Agriculture 
Improvement Project and ADB’s ongoing and pipeline investments. In addition synergies will be ensured with 
the  ongoing  operations  of  TEVTA.  Coordination  among  complementary  projects  and  programmes  will  be 
facilitated  by  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  relevant  sections  of  the  planning  and  development 
department at the provincial level. Coordination for complementarities and synergies will be the responsibility 
of Project Management Unit (PMU). IFAD country office and EAD will facilitate experience sharing among the 
different projects funded by IFAD and other relevant development partners. A coordination mechanism with 
WFP and FAO shall be formalized regarding policy support to Government especially with regards to nutrition, 
food security and climate smart agribusiness development. 
6. 
Target  Groups.  The  KP-RETP  target  groups  will  fall  under  the  category  of  smallholders  (as  per  the 
definition  of  the Government <12.5  acres  or  5  ha) and landless  households (HH).  Among  these,  the  KP-RETP 
targeting will prioritise HH with PSC 0 – 34 range. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific 
interventions aiming at economic empowerment. The target groups (small farmers, youth and women target 
groups)  will  be pre-identified  through  the implementing partners.  Youth  and  nutrition will  be  mainstreamed 
with a focus on women as secondary targeting criteria. Local organizations and in particular the village councils 
/  community  organizations,  combined  with  the  decentralized  PMU  team  will  check  and  validate  /  confirm 
Poverty  Scorecard  data  (0-34)  of  the  eligible  households.  For  the  youth  and  the  women  identification  and 
engagement  in  the  project  (and  based  on  the  successful  experience  of  the  NADP  Diamer  project  in  gender 
empowerment  in  a  similar  context),  the  religious  and  community  leaders  and  village  elders/jirga  will  be 
sensitized. This will facilitate the integration of groups who usually don’t have access to non-traditional activities.  
7. 
Nutrition, Youth and Gender. With regards to nutrition, the project will build upon the lessons learned 
from IFAD financed projects and through active engagement with ongoing initiatives of WFP and FAO. Special 
attention will be made to the food security policy (currently being developed) and adopting guidelines related 
to selection of nutrition sensitive value chains, creating nutrition related awareness, and promoting nutrition 
9 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
sensitive labelling and packing thus impacting both producers and consumers. The project will ensure women’s 
inclusion in value chains and advance equitable opportunities in skills development. All efforts will be made in 
this very conservative region in order for gender to be mainstreamed by ensuring a minimum of 25% quota for 
female participation in all project activities and by the development of women centered value chains, and 4Ps. 
Youth will be also mainstreamed in all project interventions (50% of all support will go to youth). At the start-up 
phase, the districts will be formally mapped and consequently, based on FAO and WFP existing programme, KP-
RETP will adjust and complement these activities in order to reach the objective described in the log-frame. This 
exercise will be repeated annually and assessed at MTR and before completion date.  FAO and WFP, and IFAD 
will  have  a  formal  MOU  setting  out  the  principles  for  planning,  coordinating,  and  jointly  supporting  all 
government policies related to youth and nutrition. The PSC shall closely monitor the process. 
8. 
Project Beneficiaries: Around 785,000 households or around 4.35 million persons will benefit directly 
or indirectly from household level interventions including (i) economic graduation and insertion (assets transfer, 
youth  job  market  readiness/employment  skills  and  vocational  trainings;  productive  investments  -  start-up 
capital) and (ii) market oriented FPOs, and FSCs with market study, business plan, professional management, 
matching grant investments, private partnership, processing development and clear break-even point as well as 
exit strategy. 
9. 
Additionally,  the  target  groups  in  the  same  districts  will  benefit  from  a  specific  and  dedicated  skills 
development  programme,  start-up  capital  and  first  professional  exposure  (public  –  private  internship 
programme)  in  order to  (i)  ensure  that the  skills and services  necessary for  the  success of  the  KP-RETP agri-
business  component  1  will  be  available,  (ii)  respond  to  the  local,  provincial  and  national  labour  market  and 
employer needs particularly in the sectors like agro-industry, agro-tourism or tourism, mining, industry or civil 
works by valorizing the KP local employable forces and in particular the youth and women, and (iii) boost the 
employability  of  the  newly  graduated  students  (Master’s  holders  in  particular)  by  ensuring  them  quick 
professional integration through a one year public – private internship programme. 
10. 
The  target  groups  will  benefit  from  technical  /  vocational  /  managerial  training  with  official  and 
recognized  certificates  or  diplomas  but  will  also  have  access  to  transversal  capacity  building,  particularly  in 
financial literacy, climate risk and resilience, nutrition for enhancing the effectiveness of their enterprise and 
business development  as  well  as  personal  lives.  Investment in  PFOs  and  4Ps will create additional  jobs  from 
which women and youth will specifically benefit, especially those trained under component 2.  
11. 
Theory of Change. Transfer of productive asset to the poor combined with vocational and managerial 
trainings  and  start-up  capital  establish  enabling  environment  for  graduating  them  out  of  poverty.  Similarly, 
into  market-oriented  professional  cooperatives  as  well  as  4Ps  (dairy 
organizing  very  small  farmers 
transformation in particular) puts them on sustainable economic graduation KP-RETP will benefit in particular 
from the tools and methodologies / approaches developed for this purpose. 
A. 
Project Components 
12. 
The proposed project will have three components: (i) Agribusiness Development (Professional Farmers 
Organizations and 4P Development), (ii) Economic Graduation and Employment Promotion (Assets Provision and 
Skills  Development);  and,  (iii)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support.  Component  1  will  create  the 
necessary potential within the repositioned agribusinesses and 4Ps while the asset and skills creation will enable 
poorer households to avail to opportunities of both income and employment. 
10 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
1. 
Component 1: Agribusiness Development  
13. 
This component shall consist of four mutually reinforcing subcomponents as follows: (i) Professional 
Farmer Organizations Development and (ii) Agro Value Chain 4Ps with the aim of including farmers in value chain 
process and increasing their incomes; (iii) revamping of existing Farms Services Centres (FSCs) and (iv) agriculture 
extension/research. The target population is one that has a Poverty Score Card score between 0-40. The project 
will validate BISP data to ensure that only those who meet the PSC criterion are actually targeted. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Professional  Farmer  Organizations  Development.  The  project  will  develop  550  multi-purpose 
restructured  Professional  Farmer  Organizations  (PFOs)  with  on  average  400    producers  per 
organization. In general, one village or cluster of village (between 1,000 to 2,000 families) will have one 
PFO.  Twenty-five percent of the membership will be women. PFOs shall be managed professionally by 
qualified  staff  recruited  through  proper  testing.  FPO  shall  be  formally  registered  and  provided 
mentoring over short to medium term. An investment ranging between USD 70,000 and USD 100 000 
is estimated to be required for each PFO to which 30% will be provided by members of FPOs whereas 
the  remaining  70%  will  be  contributed  by  the  project.  FPOs  will  use  the  funds  to  lend  money  to 
members for inputs/services and also provide support for improving the marketability of the produce 
by aggregation, grading, processing, packaging, and certification—where needed generate best value 
for farmers. The PFO's net profit will be limited to the operational cost recovery to maximize profit for 
farmers. The average estimated net incremental income generated per farmer will be in the rage of 
USD 1000 – 2,000 per year.  
Public  Private  Producer  Partnerships  (4Ps).  The  project  will  establish  20Producer  Public  Private 
Partnerships  (4Ps)—each  covering  at  least  1,000  producers.  For  this  purpose,  well-qualified  and 
experienced  private  partner  shall  be  selected  through  a  competitive  process..  The  project  seeks  to 
increase average income of a project beneficiary (farmer) USD 150 equivalent per month. The project 
shall provide financing (up to the maximum amount of PKR 78 million-USD 500 000) to each 4P against 
a  business  plan.  The  share  of  the  project  and  the  private  producer  shall  be  50:50  respectively.  The 
selected  private  firms—engaged  on  a  5  years  contract,  shall enable producers to  meet  the  demand 
characteristics  and  requirements  of  the  private  company.  The  project  shall  provide  financing  for 
investment for this purpose. The 4Ps model will also be developed as a link to the PFOs under a contract 
farming  modality.  Each  4P  shall  act  as  a  holistic  win-win  platform  where  multiple  partners  could 
leverage  their  investment  in  selected  value  chains  led  by  private  companies  facilitating  access  to 
markets, knowledge, technology and capital for smallholder rural poor farmers. 
Farm  Services  Companies  (FSCs).  The  project  shall  make  the  existing  Farms  Services  Centers 
(established under KP FSC Act 2014)  more responsive to the needs of the farmers in terms of input 
supply (fertilizers, seeds, pesticides etc.) and services (mechanized labor, technical advises, certification 
and marketing etc.) to complement and make fully operationalize the sub component 1 (PFOs) and 2 
(4Ps). These FSCs shall be made fully functional, autonomous and sustainable. . In total 35 FSC—one in 
each  district,    will  be  supported  with  an  average  of  1000  –  2000  farmers  as  shareholders  and  an 
expected  outreach/market  to  be  serviced  of  20,000  famers  per  FSC.  Each  FSC  may  establish 
branches/franchisee/agents’ network in their respective territories or beyond. FSCs will be managed as 
private  companies  offering  services  to  the  PFOs  mainly  supply  of  good  quality  seed,  agrochemicals, 
improved  technology,  packaging  material  and  may  also  assist 
in  matchmaking  with  end-
buyers/suppliers.  
Institutional Support Services. The main objective of the sub-component is to provide demand driven 
institutional services to PFOs/4Ps/FSCs, s to meet the market demand and buyers requirements. . The 
PMU will enter into multiple results based MoUs with the relevant public/Government departments 
(academic,  research  and  extension  services)  for different  activities  with  clear  responsibilities  and 
deliverables. The scope of work will emerge from the aggregated needs of PFOs/4Ps/FSCs and will be 
translated into work plan, timeline and cost estimates. The engagement plan will be developed by PMU 
and approved by PSC as and when the need arise on a rolling out basis. Performance assessment will 
be done on an annual basis and presented for review to PSC.  The capacitated line departments will 
more  effectively  support  the  PFOs  and  4ps  envisaged  in  the  project.    Department  of  Agriculture 
11 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Extension and Department of Agriculture Research will be two of the several partners with which the 
project will work to deliver institutional support services to the target beneficiaries.  
2. 
Component 2: Skills Development and Employment  Promotion 
14. 
This  Component  shall  consist  of  two  mutually  reinforcing  sub-components  as  follows:  (i)  Skills 
Development and (ii) start-up capital for entrepreneurship and employment promotion. The first subcomponent 
2.1 will ensure that all the skills necessary for a smooth implementation of Component 1 on the agribusinesses 
development approach (PFOs, 4Ps, NFSC (both staff and members)) are available locally, and adapted to the 
needs  and  success  of  these  new  institutions  or  private  initiatives.  The  second  subcomponent  2.2  will 
complement  Component 1  in  terms of  new rural services  development  and  rural  employment  promotion by 
offering the possibility for skilled youth or women to develop their own private business and services. This will 
allow  them  to  better  serve  but  also  benefit  from  the  opportunities  created  under  Component  1  and/or  to 
respond to the existing market or business gaps observed in their respective rural areas.  The special support for 
economic insertion of the recent student graduates (through the public – private internship programme), as well 
as the specific partnership with TEVTA, will be inserted in subcomponent 2.2.  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Vocation  and  entrepreneurship  skill  Development  training.    This  subcomponent  will  focus  on  the 
technical,  financial,  managerial, or  business  skills needed  to ensure  the  management,  development, 
success, profitability,  and sustainability. A  total of  60,000  trainees  will benefit  from the  reorganised 
approach  of  TEVTA.  In  addition,  the  sub-component  shall  support  (i)  the  550  Professional  Farmers 
Organizations supported and their members, (ii) the 20 Public-private-producer partnerships and (iii) 
the 35 New Farm Service Centres a dedicated training activity. As many as 5,000 individual/ per year – 
145 per districts per year shall be trained  based on the active and effective roles of the individuals in 
the institutions supported and the personal needs expressed / assessed (backed by the business plan 
and capacity building plan of the institutions supported). 
Start-up capital for Eemployment promotion.  This subcomponent will  (i) create jobs (including self-
employment) for the ultra-poor and poor households having limited access to land, with a specific focus 
on youth (50%) and women (25%), and (ii) facilitate the employability and the active integration in the 
economy of newly graduated students. Pakistan produces around 450 000 new graduates each year – 
70 000 annually in KP province. The project will provide start up grants to enable graduates to initiate 
self-employment  and  entrepreneurship.  Vocational/Entrepreneurial  Training  Organizations 
(VOETO)/Service provider(s) will be selected to support implementation.  Around 30% of the trainees 
will  respond  to  the  local,  provincial,  national,  or  even  international  employment  market  (e.g.  GCC 
countries). The other 70% who have demonstrated interest, willingness and capacity will be supported 
to  become  self-entrepreneurs  with  an  additional  package  (start-up  capital  and  management 
coaching/mentoring) averaging USD 300 per person, expected to yield an average income of USD 180 
to 200 per month. 
Job placement of graduated students:  Each student will have the possibility to do 2 internships of 6 
months each. The recruiting enterprise will be allowed to keep the same student for a second period 
of 6 months only if it provides a formal offer of employment to the student. In case of non-compliance, 
the enterprise will no longer be eligible to participate in the programme. Each enterprise will have a 
maximum of 2 students at the same time. Around 145 interns per district and per year will be eligible 
to  this  programme.  Priority  will  be  given  to  those  coming  from  the  poorest  families.  50%  of  this 
economic integration programme will be dedicated to women. Annual assessments of this activity will 
be conducted and the approach will be adjusted if needed.  The total investment amount of this sub 
component includes the contribution of the private sector to benefit from the placement programme. 
The internships will facilitate the transitioning of graduates to full time jobs subsequently 
15. 
The target population is one that has a Poverty Score Card score between 0-23. The project will validate 
BISP data to ensure that only those who meet the PSC criterion are actually targeted. This component will focus 
on  creating  sustainable livelihoods for  the target beneficiaries. It is estimated  that about 25,000  jobs  will be 
created because of project activities involving PFOs, FSCs, and 4Ps. The project will work with KP  TEVTA and 
Service  Provider  to  impart  target  beneficiaries  skills  based  trainings,  mentoring  and  financial  assistance  to 
generate self-employment for an estimated 60,000 beneficiaries. The beneficiaries of this component will be 
women (50%) and youth (50%). Implementing Partners to be engaged for services under this component shall 
12 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ensure  that 70% of  the  trainees  under  the  component  either find sustainable  jobs  or  start  business  after  six 
months of training. 
16. 
The component shall provide institutional support to emerging sectors by facilitating the establishment 
of state of the art skills development facilities around key economic zones. The policy support will particularly 
focus, during the initial project years, on developing an extended competency based testing framework covering 
agribusiness and women empowerment; developing framework for skills development fund to cover start up 
capital  for  self-employment,  and  developing  capacity  for  job  market  assessments  and  development  of  job 
market  outlook  on  a  continual  basis.  The  project  will  also  provide  technical  assistance  to  facilitate  curricula, 
testing and certification of skills training by TEVTA under the overall umbrella of the National Vocational and 
Technical Education Commission (NAVTEC).    
17. 
Detailed technical guidelines are provided in Section IV of this PIM to support project implementation.   
3. 
Component 3: Programme Management and Policy Support  
18. 
Based on previous good experience, the project will be placed under the Planning and Development 
Department. A Project Management Unit will be established at Peshawar and three Regional PMUs will also be 
set up in order to handle the distance / geographic coverage of the project. The PMU will report to the Project 
Steering Committee (PSC). The component includes Technical Assistance (TA) for policy and regulatory reforms 
which—among other things, will focus on (a) developing a comprehensive nutrition and food security policy and 
action plan; (b) mainstreaming of Information Technology for Development (ICT4D) i.e  formulate, edit, evaluate, 
approve, and monitor business plans for producers’ organisations, e-commerce, digital money and e-advisory, 
etc.  Digital systems may also be used to develop credit history and scoring of farmers under the PFOs. This will 
foster sound policy formulation and changes beyond the project immediate results. 
B. 
. Governance and Institutional Arrangements 
19. 
At  federal  level,  Economic  Affairs  Division  (EAD),  Government  of  Pakistan  will  be  the  overall 
coordinating agency at the Federal level for IFAD financing. Provincial Planning and Development Department 
(P&DD) shall be the lead implementing agency—because of the multisector nature of the project.  The provincial 
government shall notify a Project Steering Committee (PSC) and establish a PMU as briefly narrated below for 
project oversight and implementation.   
1. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): 
20. 
Given the multi sectoral nature of the project will be placed in the P&DD, GoKP which will be main lead 
implementing agency for KP-RETP. The policy level guidance, coordination and oversight will be provided by a 
Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC).  The  PSC  will  grant  approval  of  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPBs), 
Procurement Plans (PPs), conduct regular progress reviews and take corrective actions where warranted. PSC 
will have following composition and will be formally notified prior to start of the project: 
i.  Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Development   
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v.  MD, KP TEVTA                               
vi. 
Secretary Finance                                                                                     (Member) 
(Member) 
Secretary Industry, Commerce, and Technical Education  
(Member) 
Secretary Local Govt. and Rural Development  
(Member) 
Secretary Zakat, Ushar, Socia Welfare, Special Education                (Member) 
 and Women Empowerement 
(Chairman) 
vii.  A representative of Civil Society Organization                                     (Member) 
viii. 
Project Director (KP-RETP) 
                 (Secretary) 
21. 
The PSC shall co-opt a member or expand membership by including additional members—as the case 
may be subject to the need of project implementation. The PSC shall examine the need for such additions to the 
existing membership in its meetings and take a formal decision thereon. The PSC will convene bi-annually (more 
often if necessary) on the basis of the agenda items prepared by PMU. 
13 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
22. 
The specific responsibilities of the PSC include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Provide  overall  guidance  and  oversight  to  enable  the  project  to  reach  its  development 
objective in line with the financing agreement;  
Take  timely  decisions  and  issue  necessary  direction  to  create  enabling  policy/regulatory 
environment for project implementation; 
Ensure  fair  allocation  of  funds  to  the  districts/regions  by  considering  population,  poverty 
profile, and value chain potential in each district/region. In cases where a region/district is 
not able to achieve performance targets established in the AWPB persistently, divert funds to 
the districts/regions that are performing as per established targets with.    
Examine  proposals  for  partnerships  with  government  departments/agencies  and  approve 
MOUs for execution of such partnerships; 
Identify and approve ADP projects that shall be implemented under the project as part of the 
government’s financing stream; 
Approval of Annual Work Plans, Budgets and Procurement Plans;  
Review  performance  of  PMU/Service  Providers/  line  departments  under  MOUs,  against 
established  targets  and  take  remedial  actions  to  keep  implementation  on  track;  progress 
against the work plans/budgets and take remedial actions where needed; 
Approve  the  PIM  as  a  guideline  for  project  implementation  and  its  periodic  updating  as 
needed; 
Ensuring timely provision of counterpart funds (cash) and sufficient allocations for provincial 
ADP-funded projects that have been selected for leveraging under the project. 
2. 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 
23. 
 A fully autonomous PMU for KP-RETP —along with five (5) Regional Coordination Units (RCUs) will be 
established within Provincial Planning and Development Department (P&DD). PMU will be responsible for all 
aspects including operations, finance, procurement, human resource, M&E related to the implantation of the 
project.  
24. 
to Project Steering Committee (PSC). Following are the major responsibilities of PMU;   
PMU will be administratively linked to P&D Department but accountable for its work and performance 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Project planning, implementation, monitoring and coordination with the participation of all 
implementing partners and stakeholders 
Preparation of the consolidated AWPB and the associated procurement plan (PP); once the 
AWPB  and  PP  is  approved  by  PSC  and  cleared  by  IFAD,  the  PMU  will  ensure  its  efficient 
implementation. 
Quarterly and monthly plans for project implementation 
Conduct of financial, accounting, procurement and administrative management, including for 
activities carried out by service providers and public agencies. 
Procurements and contract management including bulking of all common equipment vehicles 
etc. for procurement in an efficient manner 
Development  of  comprehensive  M&E  Plan  and  conduct  of  monitoring  and  evaluation 
activities including impact assessments. 
Preparation  of  detailed  quarterly  and  annual  physical  and  financial  progress  reports  for 
submission to Government and IFAD as per prescribed timelines 
PMU  staff  and  partner  implementing  agencies  staff  capacity  building  training  in  project 
approach, processes and outputs and outcomes 
Promotion  and  development  of  team  building  among  all  partners  and  ensuring  discipline 
within PMU and among implementing partners 
14 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
Establishing systems for transparent operations, prevention of corruption and achieving value 
for money through efficiencies and competitiveness  
Preparation of the Project’s communication strategy and dissemination of information about 
the  project  rationale,  concept  and  detailed  content  to  the  stakeholders  and  all  interested 
parties. 
Establishment  and  maintenance  of  linkages  with  government  departments  and  agencies, 
donors, private sector partner organizations, social mobilization partners, and the community 
organizations. 
Operation  of  the  management  information/reporting  systems  and  the  results  monitoring 
framework, and regular reporting to the development partners. 
3. 
PMU Structure and Staffing Positions 
25. 
PMU will  be  headed  by  a  Project Director,  selected  from  though  a competitive  process from  within 
Provincial  Management  Service  (PMS)  or  Pakistan  Administrative  Service  (PAS).  The  selection  criteria  shall 
include seniority, qualifications, and relevant experience. Five  (5)  Regional Coordination Units (RCUs) shall also 
be established each headed by suitably qualified and experienced lead selected through a competitive process 
from the PMS or PAS as appropriate. The RCUs shall provide field level coordination and monitoring. Each RCU 
shall have a small complement of management and technical staff. 
26. 
organizational chart and suggestive Job Descriptions/TORs of key positions are provided at Annexure-1.   
The  PMU/RCUs will have  sufficient  technical and  administrative  staff  to  run projects  smoothly.  The 
27. 
and Development Department. 
PMU will report to Project Steering Committee headed by the Additional Chief Secretary of Planning 
28. 
PMU shall have a dedicated FM Section headed by Finance Manager for the management of project 
budgets and finances. A Budget and Finance Coordinator (B&F Coordinator shall also be provided in each RCU 
to support implementing partners i.e., PFOs, FSCs, Private Partners under 4Ps, Service Providers in compliance 
with applicable compliance requirements. 
29. 
Separate Bank accounts will be maintained for IFAD and Government funds as per the corresponding 
regulations and guidelines. Annual Audit of project accounts would be carried out by Auditor General of Pakistan 
within three months of end of Financial Year and Audit report will be furnished to IFAD within six months of 
close of financial year. Detailed guidance on financial management has been provided separately later in this 
document. 
III. 
PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 
A. 
Planning 
30. 
Based  on  Project  PDR  and  PC-I,  and  indicative  phasing  contained  therein,  Annual  Work  Plans  and 
Budgets will be the main instrument for project implementation. PMU will be responsible for leading the AWPB 
formulation process in a participatory, bottom-up manner. The AWPB process will be completed by 31 March 
each year and got approved from Project steering Committee and IFAD by 30 April. For efficient planning and 
monitoring  during  the  year,  the  AWPB  will  be  organized  around  four  quarters  of  the  year  with  targets  and 
budgets reflected for each quarter. 
31. 
The Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B), to be compiled by the Project Management Unit (PMU) 
will be the main tool for planning project activities, monitoring and progress reporting. The logframe will provide 
the direction and overall framework for each year’s work plan and budget. The AWP&B will be approved by PSC 
and cleared (non-objection) IFAD before execution. The AWPB, based on the PDR's indicative phasing and budget 
allocations will adhere to the overall thresholds for various categories agreed under financing agreement. The 
PDR phasing, targets and estimated costs for each activity especially those related to PFOs/4Ps will be treated 
as indicative and actual targets will be determined every year on the basis of ground realities and based on the 
average number of participating producers. 
32. 
The  AWP&B  will  be  organized  around  the  three  project  components  and  sub-components.  IFAD’s 
template for AWP&B will be used which will have both quantitative targets, its phasing by quarter and narrative 
15 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
explaining  the  intervention  approach/strategy.  The  AWP&B  will  also  identify  pertinent  potential  issues  and 
mitigation strategies so that early actions can be planned to avoid under achievements. A biannual review will 
be carried out at least during the first two project years and if necessary, AWP&B may be revised accordingly. 
Preparation of AWP&B will be done in a participatory manner involving the key implementing units of the project 
including regional offices, implementing partners, collaborators and relevant government departments. 
33. 
Each year’s work plan will be finalized in the last quarter and approved by PSC and IFAD at least 60 days 
before the start of implementation period. Technical planning of the project interventions will be based on initial 
value chain prioritization (nutrition-sensitive), job market study and outlook and a series of market appraisal 
linked to business plans Based on Project PDR and PC-I, and indicative phasing contained therein, Annual Work 
Plans and Budgets will be the main instrument for project implementation. PMU will be responsible for leading 
the AWP/B formulation process in a participatory, bottom-up manner. The AWP/B process will be completed by 
31 March each year and go approved from Project steering Committee and IFAD by 30 April. For ease of planning 
and monitoring during the year, the AWP/B will be organized around four quarters of the year with targets and 
budgets reflected for each quarter.  
1. 
Planning Process/AWP/Budgets 
34. 
The  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWP&B)  will  be  the  main  tool  for  planning  project  activities, 
monitoring  and  progress  reporting.  Development  of  AWPBs  will  be  a  participatory  and  consultative  exercise 
involving PMU, implementing agencies, involving the key implementing units of the project including regional 
offices,  implementing  partners,  collaborators,  relevant  government  departments,  agri-business  Mobilisation 
Partners, and technical service providers. The AWP&B will be approved by PSC and cleared (Non-objection) IFAD 
before execution. The AWPB, based on the PDR's indicative phasing and budget allocations will adhere to the 
overall  thresholds  for  various  categories  agreed  under  financing  agreement.  The  PDR  phasing,  targets  and 
estimated costs for each activity especially those related to PFOs/4Ps will be treated as indicative and actual 
targets  will  be  determined  every  year  based  on  ground  realities  and  based  on  the  average  number  of 
participating  producers.  AWP&B  will  have  two  streams  of  contributory  processes.  One  stream  will  relate  to 
Agribusiness  development/organization  of  PFOs  which  will  be  guided  and  coordinated  by  agribusiness 
mobilization  Partners.  The  agribusiness  mobilization  partner  will  be  responsible  for  selection  of  nutrition 
sensitive value chain selections under Agribusiness Promotion Component, and business plan development for 
each PFOs through rigorous community participatory approach for each PFO, endorsed by regional offices. Then 
these plans will be consolidated and submitted to PMU by agribusiness mobilization partners. Second stream 
will be for creation of productive employment and self-employment opportunities for rural women and men in 
the  farm,  off  farm  and  non-farm  sectors  through  competency-based  trainings,  conducted  by  TVET  and  its 
affiliated institutions. The job placement of trainees and unemployed youth will be ensured by technical service 
providers. 
35. 
PMU will organize annual planning and review meetings in March every year to begin the AWPB process 
for next year and review overall progress against the previous year’s AWPB. The flow chart summarizes the work 
flow of AWPB: 
•Preliminary 
meeting at 
PMU
1
2
•Identificati
on of needs
• District 
work plans 
3
4
•PMU 
specific 
workplans
•Consolidati
on of work 
plans
5
6
•Conversion 
of workplans 
into budget
Detailed guidance on AWPB has been provided in FM Manual. 
2. 
Project Baseline 
36. 
At the start of the project, a survey will be commissioned to third party by PMU to establish a baseline 
for  key  results  and  outcome  indicators  (referring  to  the  log  frame)  as  well  as  the  intended  impact  and 
transformation pattern of the rural economy through KP-RETP interventions. Special attention will be given to 
16 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
mainstreaming themes of nutrition and youth while disaggregation will be made based on gender, age, sectors, 
regions and professions (for component 2). Given the unique nature of project interventions (i.e., PFOs and 4Ps), 
the  project  will  develop  and  update  a  rolling  baseline/database  for  beneficiaries  as  they  join  the  project.  A 
control group will be identified during the baseline. 
3. 
Quarterly Plans and Reviews 
37. 
PMU will organize quarterly and annual progress review and planning meetings/workshops, based on 
progress reports furnished by all implementing partners. These review meetings will be held before the end of 
a quarter to review progress, identify challenges and shortfalls warranting attention, and hence action plans will 
be developed for the next quarter, based on agreed solutions. All notified Activity Managers of the departments, 
key agribusiness mobilizations partners and PMU technical staff will participate. At the end of meeting, the PMU 
will formally issue a quarterly work plan containing next quarter targets and financial allocations. 
B. 
Annual Progress Review and Planning Meeting 
38. 
PMU will organize annual planning and review meetings in the last quarter of financial year to review 
progress and pertinent challenges/issues in project implementation during on-going year. Based on consultation 
a plan for the next financial year will be formulated. 
C. 
PSC Meetings 
39. 
PSC will meet once a year. The meetings will be based on agenda prepared by PMU and containing 
issues and proposals on which PSC decisions are sought. Minutes will be prepared and issued following each 
meeting.  
D.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
40. 
The  scope  of  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  in  KP-RETP  will  be  timely  collection  of  reliable  data  and 
information for measuring performance and progress related to physical progress against project development 
objective, outcomes, outputs, and impact in terms of the project’s logframe indicators. M&E will serve as key 
learning tool to provide timely and quality information for critical reflection on project strategies and operations 
to support decision-making.  
41. 
Using the project AWPB and Log Frame as key performance benchmarks, the M&E system will be to 
provide  project  management,  the  Government  and  IFAD  with  reliable  and  timely  information  on  project 
execution  performance  and results, and  to  ensure  efficient  and  effective  project implementation.   The M&E 
system will aim at monitoring: (i) monitoring project execution which essentially means the regular tracking of 
activities and output targets as identified in the AWPB and project logframe, (ii) monitoring outreach i.e. the 
number of people directly benefitting from project interventions disaggregated in terms of gender and age; (iii) 
measuring  and  evaluating  project  results  ;  and,  (iv)  benchmark  risks  and  assumption  against  thosee  critical 
assumptions identified in the Log frame. BISP PSC data will be used as a benchmark to track progress of poverty 
graduation of beneficiariestargeting tool in addition to income and dietary diversity. 
42. 
Standardized templates shall will be developed for data collection and reporting and included in the 
contracts/MOUs with implementing partners. While field progress reporting monitoring will be is largely led by 
IPs, ps, in order to verify, randomly, the data submitted by the various IPs and monitor the quality of delivered 
outputs, the M&E team will conduct random/monthly field visits, alone or jointly with other PMU staff or Project 
Implementers.  Such  field  visits  shall  also  provide  an  opportunity  to  interact  with  beneficiaries,  assess  their 
satisfaction with services received or document stories from the field. 
43. 
The  PSC  and  IFAD’s  supervision  missions  shall  also  periodically  assess  project  implementation—
including the effectiveness of M&E system in tracking and resolving implementing bottlenecks at IPs, PMU, and 
RPMUs RCUs levels. 
44. 
The system will be guided by IFAD's Corporate Results indicators, and mandatory indicators pertaining 
to mainstreaming priorities. M&E data for key indicators will be disaggregated as applicable. A detailed M&E 
plan will be developed during the first six months of project implementation, as part of the updated PIM, which 
would provide the basis for annual M&E plans and activities. Orientation sessions and mandatory trainings will 
be conducted for the regional M&E personnel and staff of partner organisations.  
17 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
45. 
A database developed at the baseline study stage will be updated annually. Using data from project 
M&E, the logframe will be updated on annual basis and shared with IFAD and PSC. The updated logframe will be 
used by PSC for the project review. The overall responsibility for the M&E activities will lie with the PMU with 
support roles at the regional office level. The M&E will integrate the functions of knowledge management and 
communication.  
46. 
An annual M&E plan, as part of project’s overall AWPB, will be prepared by M&E wing of PMU, with 
inputs from all implementing partner on targets, formats, processes and reporting responsibilities and then each 
agency, including PMU, will derive their individual plans to meet the requirements of annual M&E Plan. The M&E 
Plan shall focus on tracking activities vis-à-vis the project’s approved logframe. 
47. 
The implementation monitoring will be done by the implementing partner and M&E at regional office 
and it should form the basis for their regular progress reporting to the PMU. The management and monitoring 
teams of IP will be responsible for implementation of day-to-day project activities, performance of their staff, 
and delivery of inputs and achievement of project outputs/outcomes as per agreed standards.  
48. 
The output monitoring will be carried out by PMU staff and joint activity/output monitoring missions 
to  independently  assess the  physical  and  financial  progress.  The  activity and  output monitoring by  PMU  will 
focus on  spot-checking, verification of output data reported by IP, identification of risks factors and propose 
mitigation measures, status of utilization of funds by IP against the disbursements, ensure compliance to the 
financing agreement, efficiency of funds flow mechanism, evaluation of internal control system etc. During joint 
activity  and  output  monitoring  visits,  the  monitoring  team  will  randomly  interview  the  target  beneficiaries; 
oversee  the  input  delivery  process  and  review  procurement,  disbursement,  training  record,  beneficiaries’ 
acknowledgements record and project database maintained by the IP.  
49. 
The  process  and  outcome  monitoring  shall  be  carried  out  by  PMU  M&E  Specialist  to  ensure 
independence and objectivity of the outcome and process monitoring.  The key activities related to process and 
outcome  monitoring  include;  process  and  outcome  monitoring  visits  to  the  IP,  management  of  annual  PSC 
surveys  for  economic  graduation  tracking  by  IP,  annual  outcome  surveys  in  line  with  IFAD's  requirements 
including third party validation of PSC survey conducted by IP, mid-term and end-term project evaluations and 
value chain studies. 
50. 
It will be  the responsibility of  PMU to  maintain/update data  of key monitoring indicators. The  M&E 
system will use geotagging and web-based interface so that reports are available in real time. The database will 
use design that can easily be aligned with the Government/P&D monitoring and reporting structures. Post MTR, 
the Planning and Development Department will undertake one or several evaluation studies to assess relevance, 
effectiveness,  efficiency,  sustainability  and  exit  strategy  at  the  entire  project  level  as  well  as  the  specific 
interventions. IFAD will undertake annual supervision, implementation support and mid-terms as well as adhoc 
assessments necessary to improve project performance. 
E. 
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PME) 
51. 
Target beneficiaries, implementation partners, participating farmers in PFOs and 4Ps as well as trainees 
under component 2 will be actively involved in monitoring and evaluation of project activities through regular 
project monitoring and review meetings, field visits, surveys/FGDs, spot checking. A systematic plan to ensure 
active involvement of farmers in PFOs and 4Ps and trainees shall be developed in line with the overall M&E plan. 
Furthermore, annual project review consultation and lessons learn workshops at provincial level will be held to 
engage Government institutions, PFOs, IP, POs and other stakeholders in project progress review and monitoring 
process. 
F. 
Economic Graduation Tracking - Methodology and Process 
52. 
As part of process and outcome monitoring, KP-RETP would systematically track economic graduation 
of the target beneficiaries through core and corresponding logframe indicators; increased incomes, profits and 
sales of 4PS/PFOs, increased income of smallholder farmers who are members of 4Ps/PFOs, enhanced incomes 
of employed/self-employed and micro enterprises.  Baseline data compiled through baseline survey will be the 
basis  to  track  the  change  in  economic  status  of  participating  beneficiary  smallholder  farmers,  trainees  of 
different trades,  and  youth  being integrated  into  different  job  sectors. Annual  economic graduation  surveys, 
sample validation of POs’ results by third party as well as revalidation done by POs on biannual basis and through 
third-party mid-term and end of project evaluations managed by PMU. The KP-RETP will use baseline survey 
18 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
data  to  identify  the  target  beneficiaries  eligible  for  different  types  of  activities,  technical  support,  new  jobs 
created  and  trainings  defined  in  KP-RETP’s  economic  graduation  approach  and  improved  nutrition  and  food 
security status among target population. The PMU would explore avenues of collaboration with Impact Atlas to 
build  synergies  between  its  own  tech-based  monitoring  and  reporting  systems  with  that  of  Impact  Atlas  to 
enhance effectiveness and efficiency in economic graduation tracking for REPT. 
53. 
Partner organizations would be actively involved in annual economic graduation updating survey by the 
PMU post MTR. The findings of the annual surveys would be shared with 4Ps, PFOs and Implementing partners 
for  validation  line  with  the  findings.  The  avenues  of  sharing  of  findings  with  local  government  departments 
would  also  be  explored  by  the  SPs/BMPs  that  would  help  the  local  governments  for  pro-poor  development 
planning, nutrition sensitive interventions & policy support and targeted interventions for the ultra-poor and 
the poor in their respective areas. 
G.  M&E Personnel 
54. 
M&E Wing: PMU M&E Wing will consist of following staff (tentative): 
i. 
Lead/ M&E, KM and Communication Specialist  
ii.  M&E Specialist (1) 
iii.  M&E Officers (2) 
iv. 
KM and Communication Officer (1) 
v.  Mainstreaming/Youth and Nutrition Specialist (1) 
vi.  M&E/MIS & KM/COM Assistant (2) 
55. 
The  M&E  Specialist will  supervise the  team and  will  manage  the  surveys, studies,  policy papers and 
impact evaluations conducted through external consulting such as baseline survey, mid-term and end of project 
evaluations,  thematic  studies. The  team  will  work  in  close collaboration  with  all  sector  specialists to  provide 
timely input to the PMU team regarding project progress updates and outcomes. The team will coordinate in 
customization of KP-RETP’s MIS reporting requirements and will provide orientation and technical backstopping 
to the IP for smooth, efficient, timely and maximum optimization of MIS for progress data entry and reporting. 
M&E  Specialist  along  with 
team  will  also  oversee  development/customization  of  mobile 
application/geotagging and provide time-to-time technical backstopping in efficient and effective management 
of the mobile application for real-time monitoring by IP and PMU staff through smart phones and tablets. 
the 
H. 
Youth and Nutrition strategy 
56. 
Youth  and  nutrition  will  be  mainstreamed  into  all  aspects  of  programme  implementation  and 
appropriate strategies will be adopted for areas with more pronounced youth and nutrition challenges. GoKP, 
NGOs, FAO and WFP have initiated,  over the years,  a number of programmes focused on youth and nutrition 
as well as on gender. KP-RETP will have a 50% quota objective for youth and 25% for women beneficiaries in all 
the project activities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child nutrition information. KP-RETP 
will build on the current initiatives through a flexible approach to youth and gender, keeping in view the regional 
propensities and imperatives in each district. Each target group will be engaged with its implementing partners, 
receive  knowledge  on  nutrition  aspects,  trainings  and  will  benefit  from  coordinated  actions  with  other  KP 
development partners and in particular WFP and FAO.  KP-RETP will also recognize the importance of supporting 
value chains with the highest impact on nutrition and dietary diversification. The youth and the women headed 
households and landless and part of the PSC 0-11 (ultra-poor) will be exempted from payment of FSC or PFOs 
share fees and all able-bodied priority groups will be given priority access to wage earning opportunities under 
the employment generation programme (component 2). Finally, and in collaboration with WFP and FAO, KP-
RETP will engage in KP policy analysis and reform to improve the situation of both nutrition and youth conditions 
in  the  province.    Finally,  the  M&E  system  would  monitor  youth,  gender  and  nutrition  dimensions  in  a 
disaggregated manner 
19 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
I. 
M&E Function and the Project’s Theory of Change 
57. 
The project seek to integrate small holder farmers into supply chains of nutritious food products and 
accessing end markets, capacitiate women and youth to earn livelihood, promote healthy nutrition habits among 
households  and  generat  enabling  environment  for  more  investment  in  the  rural  areas  for  economic  growth 
which will—in turn, create sustainable jobs for the youth and women.  
58. 
Transfer of productive asset to the poor combined with vocational and managerial trainings and start-
up capital establish enabling environment for graduating them out of poverty. Similarly, organizing very small 
farmers  into  market-oriented  professional  cooperatives  as  well  as  4Ps  (dairy  transformation  in  particular) 
strengthen the demand side of agriculture inputs/services, thus, enabling smallholders to get a fair price for their 
products. Formalization of these cooperatives, investment in their capacity building, and the linkages that the 
project would create between the FPOs and formal banking system would clear the ground for smallholders to 
get  credit  not  only  from  organized  FSCs  but  also  from  banking  system.  This  would  put  them  on  path  to 
sustainable and—hopefully growing livelilhoods. The project integrates the need to promote an awareness of 
nutrition, climate change, gender equality across all project activities. This makes the project design responsive 
to the crosscutting thems of gender, climate change, and nutrition that are critical to IFAD.  
59. 
The project implementation teams—includng partner organizations and especially M&E staff in those 
teams shall be constantly guided by this theory of change which is based on three mutually reinforcing pathways: 
i. 
ii. 
Agribusiness development pathway- First, the project is based on a fundamental premise that a market-
driven approach is needed to help smallholder farmers sustainably increase their income and improve their 
livelihood and nutrition. This is operationalized by facilitating (i) the emergence of professional profitable 
and sustainable farmers organizations responding to the market and (ii) the brokering of mutually beneficial 
(win-win)  4Ps  between  smallholder  farmers  and  private  companies  in  response  to  clear  market 
opportunities  and  by  strategically  combining  public  and  private  sector  funds  and  advice  to  address 
smallholders’  needs  in  terms  of  access  to  market,  technology,  organization  and  scale,  good  agricultural 
practices, and affordable credit, as well as creating a favourable policy and regulatory environment for the 
agribusiness  and  financial  sectors  to  expand  outreach  towards  rural  clients  and  become  overall  more 
competitive. Farmer Organizations with an average of 400 HHs will facilitate also the joint discussion and 
analysis of the nutrition issue, define agreed objectives and include as part of the capacity building plan of 
the PFO and its members educational and activities directly linked to nutrition for the benefit of the entire 
HHs and in particular for the children and youth. 
Skills  for  employment  and  entrepreneurship  pathway–  Second,  poorer  households  (PSC  0-34),  and 
especially women and youth who do not have access to land, can easily be economically and sustainably 
integrated  in  their  environments  through  an  already  tested  and  successful  combination  of  technical  / 
managerial training and  start-up capital. This combination allows them either (i) to access a decent and 
remunerative employment or (ii) to develop, alone or in association, their own business or (iii) to become 
economically active participants of the agribusiness chains. The youth / women trained will be able to get 
jobs and income generating opportunities created through Component 1 and consequently, to sustain their 
family in a decent way. They will also be in a position to provide additional and often missing services to 
the community as well as to complement / reinforce the local service offers needed by the professional 
farmer organizations  or developed  4Ps.  flowchart  briefly  depicts  this change process  for  guidance  of  all 
stakeholders. 
20 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
KP-RETP Project Theory of Change  
CHALLENGES 
ACTIVITIES 
OUTPUTS 
OUTCOMES 
IMPACTS 
Rural poor lack capacities 
to access market and job 
opportunities 
Smallholders are not 
organized to achieve 
efficiency and meeting 
buyers’ requirements 
Low production volumes, 
low productivity and low 
returns 
Weak access to 
technologies and inputs 
Lack of remunerative skills 
among youth and women 
Risks and uncertainties 
discourage investments 
Lack access to 
finance/capital for FOs and 
start ups 
Weak regulatory 
frameworks – FOs/ food 
safety and nutrtion 
Rural Poverty, Food 
Insecurity and Malnutrition 
n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
P
s
s
e
n
s
u
b
i
r
g
A
i
g
n
d
i
l
i
u
B
y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C
/
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
E
r
o
f
l
t
r
o
p
p
u
S
y
c
i
l
o
P
l
a
n
o
i
t
u
t
i
t
s
n
I
d
n
a
s
b
o
J
s
e
c
i
v
r
e
S
Organizing Professional 
Farmer Organizations 
(PFOs) and leveraging 
investments in Nutrition 
Sensitive value Chains  
Capacity building in 
climate smart technologies 
and practices 
Market access through 
4Ps (Producer-Private-
Public-Promoter) Model 
Vocational and 
entrepreneurship skills 
increased employability of 
women/youth  
Start-up capital (self-
employment) and job 
market integration 
Access to economic 
services and ICT4D 
Policy and KM products on 
FOs/networking for policy 
reforms 
Improved access to 
economic services for 
compliance and business 
development 
PFOs/ small holder 
farmers integrated into 
supply chains of 
nutritious food products 
and accessing end 
markets 
s
r
e
m
r
a
f
r
e
d
o
h
l
l
l
a
t
s
y
b
l
s
e
a
s
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I
Skilled women and youth 
resulting in increased 
employability and self-
employment 
Project supported HHs 
have received economic 
services & have 
enhanced awareness 
about dietary diversity  
Improved environment 
facilitates increased 
investments 
h
t
u
o
y
f
o
s
b
o
j
/
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
l
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I
Increased 
HH Incomes 
contribute to 
food security 
& dietary 
diversity 
Reduced 
poverty 
Increased Food 
Security 
Improved 
nutrition  
ASSUMPTIONS 
Security situation remains unchanged; 
PSC data available for robust targeting 
Market and other external shocks 
21 
remain unchanged and manageable 
Conducive enabling environment for FOs 
and 4Ps are facilitated through reforms 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
J. 
Progress Reporting, Knowledge Management and Communication 
60. 
Timely reporting and communication is important to take timely corrective actions and to learn from 
implementation  experience  to  further  improve  project  management  effectiveness  and  efficiency.  Monthly, 
quarterly  and  annual  reports  including  reports  from  studies  would  be  produced  by  the  project  to  relevant 
stakeholders.  
1. 
Baseline 
61. 
A  baseline  study,  covering  the  mandatory  indicators  (as  per  lograme),  will  be  conducted  in  year-1 
through  a  third  party  service  provider  to  document  the  initial  status  of  target  beneficiaries  prior  to 
commencement of the project interventions. This information will, at mid-term and completion, become the 
reference against which to measure changes, and therefore appreciate project outcomes and impact, or lack 
thereof. 
2. 
Mid Term Review (MTR) 
62. 
KP-RETP and P&DD would undertake a mid-term review in the last quarter of third year of the project 
lifecycle to review the project progress, achievements, and implementation constraints. In particular, it would 
review  the  following:  (i)  achievement  and  improvements  in  the  production  systems,  improvement  in  food 
security, and increase in income; (ii) youth job readiness and market integration (ii) the performance of public 
private  sector  partnerships;  (iii)  performance  of  PFOs,  (iv)  financial  and  procurement  management;  (v)  and 
human resources management. A mutually agreed action plan will be prepared based on the MTR findings. IFAD 
may appoint, in consultation with KP-RETP, an external agency to evaluate the impact of the project, if necessary. 
3. 
Annual Outcome Surveys 
63. 
the results reported in internal M&E assessments. 
PMU shall also start conducting annual outcome surveys through a third party after the MTR to validate 
4. 
Management Information System (MIS) 
64. 
KP-RETP will develop a customized MIS system in the first year of the project to meet data collection 
and  reporting  requirements  of  the  project  coherent  with  its  log-frame.  The  dashboard  for  data  entry  and 
reporting will encompass information on physical and financial progress, impact evaluation analysis and reports, 
IFAD's first and second level core indicator tracking, and other baseline data. This will be automated computer-
based project to generate, monthly, quarterly and annual progress reports on financial and physical progress 
including progress related to outcome indicators and outputs. Additionally, GIS and geotagging will be used to 
update, troubleshoot, and disseminate real time progress. 
5. 
Project Completion Review and Evaluation 
65. 
As the project reaches completion, the PMU would prepare a draft Project Completion Report (PCR). 
IFAD and the Government will then carry out a joint validation of PCR based on the information in the Project 
Completion Report and other data. An impact evaluation will also be carried out. The  PCR will be developed 
based on the guidelines of IFAD. 
6. 
Learning and Knowledge Management 
66. 
Knowledge  management  and  learning  will  be  an  integral  element  of  project  implementation, 
particularly  in  view  of  the  scaling  up  agenda  by  Government  and  the  project  policy  influence  objectives.    A 
comprehensive knowledge management strategy for the project in line with the newly released IFAD Knowledge 
Management Strategy (2019) will be developed in the first year of the project. The strategy will focus on the 
processes that will be involved in building a robust KM system in the project.  
67. 
The strategy shall clearly identify knowledge products, events, uses and forums to collect, collate and 
share the knowledge generated through project interventions. The KM strategy has four pillars i.e. (i) use the 
project intervention as action research; (ii) systematic assessment and analysis using experimental designs which 
are  statistically  valid  and  robust;  (iii)  deriving  inferences/conclusions  have  strong  evidence  base;  (iv)  devise 
1 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
knowledge products; and, (v) disseminating knowledge products using various channels/media. The KM function 
will  particularly  focus  on  success  factors  pertaining  to  integration  of  small  farmers  to  market  chains  and 
diversification into high value producrs and through investment in skills and entrepreneurship foster women's 
and  youth’s  economic  empowerment,  while  at  the  same  time  mainstreaming  nutrition.  Formal  consultative 
sessions  will  be  a  regular  feature  for  relevant  government  functionaries,  and  other  stakeholders—including 
beneficiaries’ groups to review progress, share lessons learned, improve processes, and make project visible. 
68. 
A dedicated M&E, KM, and Communication Section with suitably qualified and experienced staff is part 
of the organizational arrangements at the PMU and RCUs. The KM system will enable the project to generate, 
capture, share and disseminate relevant information and knowledge to various stakeholders in a timely manner. 
The project updates will be disseminated at broader level through using web-sources including social media such 
as Facebook used as a knowledge sharing tool, and also linked to IFAD Asia website. The team will extensively 
document and share knowledge generated in the project. The QRM forums will be used as potential KS venues 
for capturing lessons learned and best practices leading to development of related knowledge products.  
69. 
IFAD M&E, visibility, KM, and communication guidelines. PMU, implementing partners and technical 
support team will follow IFAD’s guidelines on KM and COM to achieve visibility and implement the KM related 
activities  to  be  conducted  coherently.  This  will  help  ensure  smooth  implementation  of  project  activities  and 
facilitate to achieve project development goals and objectives. 
K. 
Implementation Partners’ M&E Responsibilities 
70. 
All IPs shall organize a three-day project planning/inception/orientation workshop in Peshawar to give 
their staff  orientation  training on business  mobilization  through  training workshops. The  orientation  training 
workshops  duration  will  be  three  days  and  will  be  conducted  at  Peshawar  for  KP-RETP  district  staff.  The 
orientation training will be important to ensure an equal level of understanding amongst all PMU staff regarding 
project  objectives,  implementation  strategy,  work  plans,  role/responsibilities  of  each  cadre  of  staff  and  how 
project interventions are integrated with each other. 
71. 
IPs shall be responsible for  monitoring the quality of technology/material procured, inspections and 
monitoring and evaluation of training sessions will be conducted by regional PMU staff. Both IPs shall provide 
monthly calendar of training events so that regional M&E and PMU undertake visits and do evaluation of such 
events. 
72. 
IPs shall  maintain/comply  with nutrition sensitization and equitable criteria  for both genders will be 
mainstreamed  in  all  training  sessions.  The  orientation  training  will  be  a  combination  of  interactive  lectures, 
group  work,  possible  half  day  field  activity  around  specific  subjects  related  to  monitoring  and  reporting, 
presentation of group work by the trainees and practicing the development plans and budget. 
L. 
Donor and Development Partners’ Coordination 
73. 
 Other  pre-start  up  activities  will  include  creating  a  coordination  platform  that  allows  KP-RETP  to 
develop  effective  coordination  and  experience  sharing  mechanisms  with  other  IFAD,  donor  and  government 
funded projects that are working on similar themes in the identified areas. Annual coordination meeting under 
the lead of the KP Government will be organized with the on-going development programme intervening in the 
province  to capture synergies and reduce any duplication of project activities as well as support reinforcement 
of mutual goals and objectives.  Partnerships with FAO and WFP will be formally established once KP-RETP is 
approved by GoKP and IFAD. Co-financing options are also open and the financing gap would be plugged in—in 
consultation with PMU,  if co-financing arrangements are materialized.   Specifically, IFAD will support KP-RETP 
Project to create a platform with BISP to develop a data clearing house that allows BISP data to be utilized for 
the purpose of the project and provides information to BISP as to its beneficiaries that are graduate from their 
current poverty scale. PMU will also be enhancing its MIS to develop robust data tracking system for individual 
and household beneficiaries of the project. 
74. 
Agri-business  Development  Partners.  PMU  will  select  agribusiness  development  partner  through  a 
competitive  process  for  the  implementation  of  Project’s  Component  1  and  for  component  2  PMU  will 
collaborate with TVET to conduct market demand based competency trainings through TVET’s existing setup 
and its regional partners. It will be the responsibility of agribusiness development partner to ensure youth job 
market integration.   
2 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
75. 
The  Agri-business  development  partner  will  provide  database  of  farmers  (including  their  CNIC, 
phone/mobile numbers and addresses) as well as the geo locations of all participating farmers for tracking the 
farmers.  This  will  facilitate  to  develop  a  network  of  all  participating  farmers  resulting  in  developing  better 
connections and will pave the path for adoption of smart technologies in future. The agribusiness development 
partner  will  provide  progress  reports,  data,  case  studies,  complete  profile  of  PFOs  and  4PS  and  will  actively 
cooperate  and  facilitate  monitoring  done  by  KP-RETP  regional  M&E  teams  and  PMU  as  well  as  third  party 
monitoring and evaluation. 
3 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
IV. 
TECHNICAL AND OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES FOR IMPLEMENATION OF COMPONENTS 
A. 
Component 1 – Agribusiness Development  
76. 
This  Component  consists  of  three  mutually  reinforcing  sub-components  including:  (i)  Professional 
Farmer  Organizations  Development,  (ii)  Public-Private  Partnership/4Ps  Development;  and,  (iii)  Strengthening 
Institutional Services. 
1.  Sub-component 1.1 –Professional farmer organizations (PFOs) 
Development 
77. 
One of the reasons the agriculture sector’s output is far below its potential is that small farmers—which 
are  the  backbone  of  the  sector,  are  not  organized  as  formal  groups.  In  order  to  consolidate  and  aggregate 
production base and to promote agribusiness activities in rural areas, the project will develop assist smallholder 
farmers in  formation and incorporation of PFOs. Key activities under the sub-component include (i) business 
mobilisation  of  farmers;  (ii)  registration  of  PFOs;  (iii)  business  development  planning;  and,  (iv)  leveraging 
investment in PFO business proposal. 
78. 
A total of 550 PFOs will have been established and made functional by year 6 of KP-RETP interventions. 
A typical PFOs will have an average of 400 farmers as members/shareholders. The PFOs scope of business will 
be multi-purpose / multi-product aligned with the current local farming systems. In general, one village/valley 
(between 1000 to 2000 families) will have one PFO. The PFO will be open to growth/membership expansion and 
investment by farmers and non-farmers in the village. 
79. 
A PFO to be eligible  for project support will be;  (i) a legally registered entity consisting  of practicing 
farmers  (at  least  70%  small  farmers);  (ii)  actual  or  potential  producers  of  a  commodity/  commodities  falling 
under the nutrient-rich sources of food, such as animal source foods, fruits, vegetables, beans and pulses; (iii) 
willing and legally associate under the PFO; (iv) agree on leveraging investment and be individually and jointly 
liable under contract signed with project; (v) agree to professionally staff the PFO; (vi) participate in the training 
and other relevant activities as and when required. 
80. 
The  two  most  widely  used  registration  options  include  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act,  1925  and  the 
Companies Act, 2017. Other  option currently under legal review process is the Farm Services Act. PFOs have 
generally  been  recognized  as  the  most  appropriate  institutional  form  around  which  farmers  can  build  their 
capacity to collectively leverage their production and marketing strength. These organizations would be created 
at the village level depending upon the needs of the producers considering the demand potential to adopt value 
chain approach to enhance farmers’/producers’ economic and social benefits.  
a) 
Objective of the PFOs 
81. 
The major objectives of engagement with farmer organisations are:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
The PFOs will successfully deal with challenges and constraints that confront farmers by leveraging 
collective strength and bargaining power to access financial and non-financial means including but 
not limited to inputs, services and appropriate technologies, thereby reduce transaction costs, tap 
high value markets and enter into partnerships with private entities on more equitable terms.  
The  PFOs  will  offer  forms  of  aggregation  and  investments  in  value  chain  functions  including 
production,  handling  and  storage,  processing,  aggregation/packing,  labeling  and  marketing  etc. 
leaving land titles  with individual producers and will use the strength of  collective planning and 
bargaining for production, procurement and marketing, so that considerable value is added to the 
members’ produce.  
The PFOs will strive for the mutual benefit of farmers as well as industry including improvement in 
production, establishing more direct linkages, and concluding more profitable  engagement with 
end buyers and offer easy and cost-effective access to specific quantum and quality of raw material 
required by the industry.  
The PFOs will help create direct and indirect employment opportunities through establishment of 
aggregation/packing 
(sorting  and  grading  yards),  warehouses  and  cold  storage,  and 
primary/secondary processing operations as appropriate. 
4 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
v. 
The PFOs may also assist in accessing financial services or act as intermediary (such as revolving 
funds) etc.  
b) 
Principles  
82. 
FPO principles are the guidelines by which PFOs will put their values into practice. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Voluntary and Open Membership: PFOs are voluntary organizations, open to all persons able to 
use their services and willing to accept the responsibilities of membership, without discrimination.  
Democratic  Farmer  Member  Control:  PFOs  are  democratic  organizations  controlled  by  their 
farmer-members who actively participate in setting their policies and making decisions. Men and 
women serving as elected representatives are accountable to the collective body of members. In 
primary PFOs farmer-members have equal voting rights (one member, one vote) and PFOs at other 
levels are also organized in a democratic manner.  
Farmer-Member  Economic  Participation:  Farmer-members  contribute  equitably  to,  and 
democratically control, the capital of their FPO.   
Autonomy and Independence: PFOs are autonomous, self-help organizations controlled by their 
farmer-members.   
Education,  Training  and  Information:  PFOs  operatives  provide  education  and  training  for  their 
farmer-members, elected representatives, managers, and employees so that they can contribute 
effectively to the development of their PFOs.   
Co-operation  among  PFOs:  serve  their  members  most  effectively  and  strengthen  the  FPO 
movement by working together through local, national, regional and international structures.  
c) 
Selection of Agribusiness Mobilization Partner(s) 
83. 
The  process  of  selection  of  partner  organisation(s)  shall  be  driven  by  Business  Mobilization 
Partners/Service Providers that shall be selected based on Quality and Cost Based Section (QCBS) method which 
has been detailed in Procurement Section of this manual.  
d) 
PFOs Promotion & Development Process 
84. 
Based  on  the  demand  and  the  assessed  potential  in  each  cluster,  a  call  for  expression  of  interest 
(solicited)  describing  the  objectives,  approach,  roles,  responsibilities  and  contribution  levels  assessed  will  be 
disseminated  by  the  PMU  and/  BMPs/SPs  at  district  level.  The  following  steps  will  be  carried  out  by  the 
Implementing Partner (IP) at district level. 
(1) 
Cluster Identification 
85. 
 Cluster areas are to be selected by the IP based on the demand and potential assessment. It should be 
ensured  that  PFO  consisting  on  average  of  400  farmers  or  more  could  be  organised,  within  multiple 
villages/valleys. 
(2)  Mobilization of Farmers 
86. 
 Once an expression of interest is received there is a strong case for the BMPs/SPs to start business 
mobilization.  The  mobilization  process  will  involve  the  farmers  from  the  start  including  the  business 
development  planning.  Mobilization  of  farmers  should  be  done  with  a  variety  of  communication  aids  like  – 
pamphlets, posters,  regular village-level meetings, proper  vision development of promoter farmer-members. 
The process will include the following; 
87. 
Diagnostic  Study.    A  Diagnostic  Study  is  to  be  conducted  by  the  IP  in  the  selected  cluster  area.  The 
Diagnostic Study is conducted to assess the preliminary situation of the farmers and level of agriculture related 
activities in the area. The study will also help in identifying the potential interventions required and understand 
the specific project implementation context. A detailed list of factors to be covered in the study is mentioned in 
Annexure 2.  
88. 
Market Assessment. A market appraisal, to be carried out by BMPs/SPs , will help in generating data 
related to the prevailing situation of farming and small, marginal and tenant farmers. Baseline assessment will 
cover a variety of factors to identify the potential interventions, to plan development and business plans and to 
5 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
establish the base figures based on future outcome indicators that can be measured to understand the change 
contribution. The assessment shall be conducted using random sampling through structured household-level 
interviews and open-ended focus group discussions with a variety of stakeholders. Refer to Annexure 3 for a 
detailed checklist of factors to be studied in baseline surveys. The diagnostics study and market assessment can 
be coupled if required.    
89. 
Business Planning. Business Planning will be carried out by BMPs/SPs with the help of selected farmers’ 
representatives. Business planning is a process through which the strategic and operational orientation of an 
emerging  FPO is shaped. While  baseline  assessment  figures  will  be important inputs  to understand  the level 
from  which  products  and  services  for  farmers’  members  should  be  developed,  more  important  will  be  the 
collective visualization of the future of the FPO. Using a variety of tools and systematic collective reflections, a 
business plan with proper FIVE (5) year projections on various aspects with clear breakeven point (expected with 
3 years ideally), skill identification and cost of the professional management needs (farmers will be shareholders 
of the PFOs but management will be done by professionals, recruited on test / experience). The final FPO BP 
proposal will be reviewed by the PMU before being contracted with the same BMPs/SPs which formulated the 
BP and mobilized the Farmers. A detailed list of content is provided in Annexure 4.  
(3) 
Profitability 
90. 
 The PFOs net profit will be limited to the operational cost recovery and some amortization / secure 
funds in  order  to  transfer most of  the profit  at farmer level.  The average  estimated  net incremental income 
generated  per  farmer  will  be  in  the  range  of  USD  1000  –  2,000  per  year.  The  project  will  channel  project 
assistance to FPOs through formal banking sector, thus building credit history for both FPOs and their members. 
This  will enable  FPOs/smallholders  to  access  credit through  formal banking system  to  avail  opportunities for 
business expansion in the future. 
91. 
All sub-sectors will be eligible (livestock, crops, vegetables, fruits, flowers, etc.) subject to the condition 
that the business plan demonstrates; strong market demand, viability in terms of profitability at individual and 
organizational levels and sustainability/continuity of business model as well as have obvious nutritional benefits 
to consumers. Based on the need assessed, line department(s) may provide technical support to the PFOs. In 
line with the diagnostic/ Market assessment undertaken by Government of KP, typical elements of intervention 
under  a  business  plan  may  include  (i)  climate  smart  production  technologies,  (ii)  Precision  planting  and 
harvesting, (iii) vertical farming; (iv) harvest and post-harvest  handling; (v) processing, preservation and value 
addition; (vi) packing, packaging and marking/labelling (with nutritional value information) et. Capacity building 
will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  business  development  plans  which  shall  be  linked  to  the  business  model, 
technology package involved and assessed needs of the members as well transversal themes related to nutrition, 
climate  change,  gender  and  youth.  This  sub-component  will  directly  reach  and  provide  decent  revenue  and 
employment for 385,000 HHs and allow around 3.3 million people to benefit from the additional significant net-
income  generated.  More  specifically,  the  sub-component  shall  integrate  grading,  processing,  storage  and 
consolidation thus creating additional job opportunities especially for youth. 
(4) 
Organization & Formalization 
92. 
 PFOs will be assisted to register under the Companies or Cooperative act. The final form which the FPO 
assumes  (i.e.  cooperative,  company,  multi  cooperative  etc.)  must  be  a  decision  taken  by  PFOs  members 
collectively. 
(5) 
Resource Mobilization 
93. 
 Based  on the business plan, the  IPs will  liaise  with  various financing  agencies  and  PMU  to  mobilize 
resources for hiring/purchasing and developing various resources. Normally, the overall investment per PFO will 
be  ranging  between  USD  70,000  and  USD  100 0001  depending  on  the  number  of  members  in  PFO,  with  a 
contribution  of  around  30%  by  producers/shareholders  in  cash  or  in  kind,  immediate  or  progressive.  The 
contribution could either be in lump sum or aligned to milestones. The terms of contribution would be agreed 
in the terms of partnership for establishment of PFO. The project will finance the PFOs (investment in fixed cost 
items and working capital) and the PFOs will provide on in-kind loan basis to the members (as most don’t have 
possibility to access to formal banking or micro-finance loan) for the necessary input / services supply in order 
for  them  to be  able  to produce the  expected  quality  and quantity  of  produce. The PFOs  will  be in  charge  to 
1 The average investment per farmer is US$150. 
6 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
aggregate  the  products,  to grade,  process,  and package  and  to ensure  the  sale as  per business plan  and the 
establishment  of  contract  between  buyers  or  as  appropriate.  In  addition,  PFOs  will  facilitate  obtaining 
certification  for  the  farmer  produce  where  needed  to  guarantee  the  best  added  value  for  the  selected 
commodities. 
(6)  Management System Development 
94. 
 BMPs/SPs  should  facilitate  the  development  of  management  systems  in  the  FPO.  Guidelines  for 
management systems should be able to address all requirements related to financial services, input and output 
management  services.  Systems  related  to  management  of  finance,  human  resources,  stock  and  inventory, 
procurement  and  quality  management,  marketing,  internal  audit,  internal  conflict  resolution  and  other 
important functional areas should be developed. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the same should be 
established.  
(7) 
Business Operations 
95. 
Business  operations  is  the  commencement  of  procurement,  production,  processing,  marketing  and 
financial service activities of a FPO. IPs should carefully train both the governing and operational structures of 
the FPO in order to ensure smooth functioning of business operations. The entire value-chain related to various 
agriculture and allied products and commodities needs to be managed. 
(8) 
Assessment & Audit 
96. 
 BMPs/SPs  should facilitate constant assessment of performance of  various stakeholders like farmer 
members,  governing  board  of  directors  and  service  providers.  They  should  also  help  PFOs  to  reflect  using 
Institutional Maturity Index to understand areas of improvement. Internal process and accounting audits will 
help maintain both transparency and accountability (Annexure-4). These are key institutional systems for FPO 
evolution.  
97. 
followed in series and can be followed in parallel as appropriate.  
Note:  The  order  in  which  the  FO  promotion  and  development  is  mentioned  is  not  necessary  to  be 
(9) 
FPO Service Model  
98. 
 The FPO will offer a variety of services to its members as illustrated below. Such entities will provide 
end-to-end services to its members, covering almost all aspects of cultivation (from inputs, technical services to 
processing and marketing). The FPO will facilitate linkages between farmers, processors, traders, and retailers 
to coordinate supply and demand and to access key business development services such as market information, 
input  supplies,  and  transport  services  etc.  Based  on  the  emerging  needs,  the  FPO  will  keep  on  adding  new 
services  periodically  to  provide  enriched  services  to  their  members.  The  set  of  services  include  Financial, 
Business and Welfare services. An indicative list of services includes;  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Financial  Services:  The  FPO  will  provide  loans  for  working  capital/seasonal  and  machinery  and 
equipment.   
Input Supply Services: The FPO will provide quality inputs at a subsidized price to member farmers 
including seeds, fertilizer, agro-chemicals etc. 
Procurement and Packaging Services: The FPO will procure agriculture produce from its member 
farmers; will do the storage, value addition and subsequent packaging.  
iv.  Marketing  Services:  The  FPO  will  do  the  direct  marketing  after  procurement  of  agricultural 
produce.  This will enable  members  to  save in  terms of  time,  transaction  costs,  weighing losses, 
distress sales, price fluctuations, transportation, quality maintenance etc.  
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Insurance  Services:  The  FPO  will  provide  various  insurance  like  Crop  Insurance,  Electric  Motors 
Insurance and Life Insurance.  
Technical Services:  FPO will promote  best practices of  farming, maintain marketing  information 
system, diversifying and raising levels of knowledge and skills in agricultural production and post-
harvest processing that add value to farmer produce.  
Networking Services: Making  channels of information (e.g.  about product specifications, market 
prices) and  
7 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
viii. 
other business services accessible to rural producers; facilitating linkages with financial institutions, 
building  linkages  of  producers,  processors,  traders  and  consumers,  facilitating  linkages  with 
government Programmes etc. 
99. 
Sub-Component 1.2 Public Private Producers  Partnerships (4Ps) .     The objective of the subcomponent 
is  to  promote  value  chain  development  particularly  for  high  value  crops,  and  livestock.  Based  on  (i)  the 
experience  developed  in  Pakistan  (ETI-GB)  and  Sri-Lanka  (NADEP)  as  well  as  the  evident  interest  of  some 
investors to partner for satisfying the market, the project will develop 20 “4Ps”, with a minimum of 2000 (on 
average)  producers per 4P. The project will make a call for proposals, open to local, national and multinational 
private  firms/companies  already  in  the  business  and  with  financial  capacity  as  well  as  demonstrated  market 
share.  
a) 
Introduction to 4Ps & Rationale 1 
100. 
 Producer-Public-Private  Partnerships  (4Ps)  involve  cooperation  between  a  government,  business,  
agents and small-scale producers, who agree to work together to reach a common goal or carry out a specific 
task while jointly assuming risks and responsibilities, and sharing benefits, resources and competencies. It is a 
holistic win-win platform where multiple partners could leverage their investment in selected value chains led 
by  private  companies  facilitating  access  to  markets,  knowledge,  technology  and  capital  for  smallholder  rural 
poor farmers. In addition, such platforms could strengthen create employment opportunities in rural areas as 
such jobs would perform as value chain actors within the same business eco-system. A classic 4P is based on; 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Private-sector  involvement  is  planned  early  on  so  that  it  becomes  part  of  project  design  and 
implementation, and partnership results are systematically monitored and evaluated as part of the 
project’s results framework. 
To the extent possible and relevant, the private-sector partner is selected through a competitive 
or rigorous selection process that ensures transparency and objectivity, and meets the project’s 
social, economic and environmental objectives. 
Producers play an active role in the negotiations and partnership arrangements (both formal and 
informal), governance and monitoring. 
A 4P is a true partnership in which each partner has clear roles and responsibilities, and shares risks 
and benefits. Private-sector partners are expected to allocate matching financial resources. 
Linking with the private sector through a 4P ensures that interventions are sustained beyond the 
project lifetime because they follow business logic and all involved parties’ benefit. A 4P should be 
seen as an entry point to scaling up project results through private-sector investment.2 
b) 
4Ps under KP-RETP 
101. 
The project will encourage; Private Agribusiness companies/SMEs who are already established in the 
province with prior experience of working with individual farmers/FOs/PFOs or with indirect/direct presence in 
the province through other means by sourcing, value addition and creating market linkages. These entities would 
be considered as “promoters” under 4Ps. Underlining principle of these partnerships should be to increase the 
incremental income of farmers and integrating them in the selected value chains. 
2 How to do, Public-Private-Producer Partnerships (4Ps) in Agricultural Value Chains, (IFAD, 2016) 
8 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table 1. Key actors/entities directly involved in establishment and implementation of 4Ps 
Actor/Entity 
Farmer/Producers 
Level of 
Establishment 
Village Level 
FO/PFO 
Village/Valley 
(2000 farmers 
on average 
per PFO) 
Farmer Service 
Centers (FSC) 
District Level 
(1 FSC per 
District, 35 in 
total) 
4P Promoters 
(SMEs & Large 
Scale Private 
Agribusiness 
Companies) 
Village, 
District, 
Provincial and 
National Level 
Key Role/Engagement 
1.  Responsible  of  forming  the  PFOs  3on  common  commodity 
lines/Selected value chains. 
2.  Equity contribution to PFOs. 
3.  Pay back the cost of inputs provided by PFOs after harvest at a 
fair interest rate.  
In kind contribution in the form of Labor   
4. 
5.  Commitment to not side sell in case of forward sales agreement 
is reached between other 4P actors. 
6.  Participate  and  undertake  technology  transfer  to  enhance 
production quality and quantity.  
7.  Horizontally collaborate with producers in their vicinity to gain 
mutual benefits.  
8.  Participate in AGM and FPO activities (Leadership roles).   
1.  Arrange  input  supply  on  credit  from  Farmer  Service  Centers 
(FSCs) established in District level.  
2.  Production planning based on demand and supply advice from 
the respective FSC.  
3.  Aggregate  farmers  produce  and  engage  in  primary  processing 
activities (cleaning, sorting, weighing & packaging etc.) 
4.  Realization of scale and brokering with wholesalers/SMEs/Large 
agribusiness entities (local & multinational).  
5.  Collection of cash after the harvest from producers and paying 
back to the district FSC on an agreed interest rate  
6.  Conduct AGM having elected seven (7) Board of Directors (BODs) 
from Producers. 
7.  Management of PFO with recruited staff.  
1.  Act  as  an  APEX  body  of  the  related  PFOs  in  the  respective 
District. 
2.  Provide  farm inputs based  on  the  demand from  each  PFOs  on 
credit basis at a reasonable interest rate.   
3.  Provide  inputs  to  other  medium/large  scale  farmers  in  the 
district on commercial basis. 
4.  Provide  services  to  PFOs/Medium  & 
large-scale  farmers 
including  certification,  rental  of  essential  machinery  and 
equipment etc. 
5.  Establishment of a Business Development Unit (BDU) to broker 
4P  partnerships  on  behalf  of  PFOs  with  SMEs/large  scale 
agribusiness companies.    
6.  Management  to  be  done  by  professional  staff  recruited 
externally. 
7.  Direct  linkage  and  coordination  with  regional  PMU  in  the 
respective districts 
1.  Secure the market for farmer/FPO aggregated produce through 
forward sales contracts with PFOs. 
2.  Support PFOs to disseminate technology related to productivity 
&  quality  enhancement  of  farmer  produce  through  training  & 
development (extension support). 
3.  Establishment  necessary  infrastructure  to  facilitate  market 
access and value addition of farmer produce. 
4.  Assist  PFOs/FSCs  to  obtain  related  quality  certifications  as  per 
the market standards. 
3 These PFOs will be in addition to the ones established under sub-component 1. 
9 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Actor/Entity 
Financial Institutes 
(FIs) 
Level of 
Establishment 
District & 
Provincial 
Level 
Public Sector 
Services  
District and 
Provincial and 
National level  
Key Role/Engagement 
1.  Facilitate fund/credit delivery to PFOs/FSCs and make member 
farmers bankable. 
2.  Develop partnerships with 4P promoters and route payments for 
farmer produce through bank accounts. 
3.  Provide training support for PFOs and their members on financial 
literacy and household budget management. 
4.  Facilitate  payments  for  procurement  related  activities  through 
FPO bank accounts. 
1.  Facilitate infrastructure for proposed new/re-structured FSCs. 
2.  Training & development, extension support through Ministry of 
Agriculture and related line agencies. 
3.  Certification support. 
4.  Favourable Policy and Conflict resolution  
102. 
The project will establish 20 Producer Public Private Partnerships (4Ps)—each covering an estimated 
2,000 producers. For this purpose, well-qualified and experienced private partner shall be selected through a 
competitive process for value chain development. PMU would act as the initiator to invite expressions of interest 
(Call  for  proposals)  to  engage  Private  Agribusiness  companies/SMEs  in  4Ps,  who  are  then  short  listed  and 
selected based on a set of criteria and commitment and interest in pro-poor development. These partners are 
subsequently requested to submit proposals in the form of Business Development Plans (BDP) which include an 
investment plan and an implementation plan.  
103. 
In  this  early  stage,  the  Business  Development  Unit  (BDU)  established  under  BMPs/SPs  will  be 
responsible  for  promoting, sensitizing and  brokering  match  making/engagement  and a  first contact  with  the 
partners. As the process progresses, the AMP continues its brokerage role and facilitates the negotiations and 
fine-tuning the proposals  
104. 
Upon  BDP  submission,  the  PMU  will  conduct  feasibility  study  confirming  marketing,  technical, 
management  and  financial  viability.    The  BMPs/SPs  will  be  responsible  for  BDP  closely  working  with  the 
company/SME and farmers/PFOs (reassuring financial and economic benefits to farmers). The PFOs are also pre-
identified  by  the  FSC/IP).  The  BP  then  undergoes  a  final  appraisal  by  the  BDU  under  FSC/IP  team,  and  is 
forwarded  to  the  Business  Proposal  Evaluation  Committee  (BPEC)  of  which  three  permanent  members  are 
appointed by the Project Management Unit (PMU) who undertakes further field visits, if necessary to validate 
the  appraisal  and  comments  on  proposes  further  adjustment.  And  final  plan  is  submitted  to  IFAD  for  NO 
objection. At this stage, economic, social and environmental feasibility and pro-poor strategy of the proposal is 
validated and approved by the committee. During BPEC evaluation, all finalized and duly approved specifications 
endorsed by respective experts/line agencies for agreed machinery/equipment, and also drawings and BOQs of 
infrastructure  etc.  should  be  submitted  by  the  company/IP  for  technical  evaluation  and  recommendations. 
Procurement will be carried out by the PFOs and facilitated by the AMP.   
105. 
Legal  documents  would  be  finalized  at  that  time  and  signing  of  tri-party  Agreements  between  the 
promoter,  Farmer  organizations  (different  PFOs  than  the  comp  1.1)  and  the  project  shall  be  commenced. 
Subsequently, a baseline survey/orientation meeting and targeting survey is undertaken by the PMU/RCUs via 
BMPs/SPs,    as  well,  the  promoter  undertakes  the  mobilization,  organization  and  sensitization  of  the  pre-
identified PFOs in collaboration with the  or as FSC as the case may be. In general, the 4P promoter provides 
technical  assistance  and  extension  services  to  improve  farm  productivity,  coordinates  and  facilitates  the 
input/equipment  supply,  and  agrees  to  procure  farmer  produce  or  output  through  collection  or  processing 
centres established under PFOs. If the established partnership requires further  support, RCU  would facilitate 
and assist the provision of technical assistant & the extension services through IP/FSC or related agencies. 
106. 
Capacity development of PFOs, 4P mobilization support and monitoring & evaluation (M&E) activities 
of  the  established  partnership  would  be  undertaken  by  PMU  with  the  assistance  of  BMPs/SPs    through  the 
coordination of RCUs & district field offices (DFOs) where applicable. Number of field officers to be appointed 
for  each  4P  will  be  negotiated  at  an  early  stage  of  BDP.  Training  on  agri-business,  including  business  ethics, 
financial  management,  quality  standards,  technical  know-how,  social  enterprise  development  principles  and 
practices and Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) are part of the overall package to be based on need assessed 
linked to business model. This will be provided by IPs and coordination would be done by the partners with the 
10 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
assistance  of  the  PMU/RCUs.  However,  the  4P  business  plan  should  clearly  identify  the  need  for  additional 
support  that  could  be provided  by  provincial  or  district level public  agencies,  and  how this support could be 
mobilized; it is however expected that the PMU/RCUs would play an important mediator and coordination role, 
ensuring the multiple and relevant public institutions are mobilized and connected to the project interventions, 
providing  support  where  necessary.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  and  the  4P  implementation  is  a  shared 
responsibility by PFOs and the companies, with guidance and oversight provided by the PMU/RCUs via FSCs. 
Entire process of partnership development and implementation is explained in details below. 
c) 
Identification & Selection of Promoters  
107. 
Expression of Interests (EOIs)/Call for Proposals from Private Agri-business companies/SMEs intended 
to  participate  in  the  component  activities  would  be  invited.  Such  entities  would  be  selected  on  the  basis  of 
parameters and criteria acceptable to the GOKP and IFAD as mentioned below; 
i. 
Be  incorporated  in  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  or  should  be  a  multinational  having  registered 
operations in Pakistan and willing to work with FOs/PFOs. 
ii.  Minimum of five (5) years of direct involvement in Agri-business ventures specialize in agriculture, 
processing of agricultural commodities and/or deal in agricultural products or services. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Sound  financial  position  as  evidenced  by  its’  balance  sheets  with  unqualified  audit  opinion  for 
minimum of 2 (two) previous financial years.  
Capacity to provide significant co-financing and technical expertise and demonstrated long term 
marketing  capability.  In  the  case  SMEs,  Volume  of  produce  to  be  brought  should  be  secured 
through a bank guarantee to avoid last minute default in terms of not being able to buy or payment 
delay.     
Reputation  of  fair  dealing  and  empathy  with  farming  communities  and  the  poor,  sound 
management and corporate governance systems. 
 Comply with the relevant environmental regulations and agricultural practices. 
d) 
Identification and selection of FOs/farmers 
108. 
Identified FOs/farmers should undergo a capacity development Programme through BMPs/SPs prior to 
4P  commitment  with  Private  Agribusiness  Companies  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  partnership.  Such 
entities  should  be  registered  under  Registrar  of  Cooperative  Societies,  GOKP  or  with  any  other  acceptable 
Government  organization  and  would  be  assessed  and  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  criteria  given  below;  In 
addition  to  the  selection  criteria  mentioned  in  the  above  paragraph  maturity  assessment  would  need  to  be 
conducted to select the prior to 4P commitment with the project. 
e) 
Present Status of the PFOs 
109.  Major  issues identified  with  regards to  FSC include;  (i) Legal  status; (ii) Membership;  (iii) Scope;  (vi) 
Vision and mission; (v) Date created; and, (vi) Financial status. Other issues are summarized below; 
110. 
Governance 
i.  Selection of executive committee 
ii.  Arrangements of meetings and AGM 
iii.  Decision making process 
iv.  Record keeping 
v.  Membership participation in meetings 
111. 
Involvement in Economic activities 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Activities related to agriculture development carried out in the recent past 
Relationship with other Government and private sector organization in promoting 
agribusiness activities 
Services provided to membership in relation to Agri-development 
11 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iv. 
No. of members benefitted 
112. 
Involvement in Social activities 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Services provided to membership 
Benefits for the membership 
Activities carried out during recent past 
113.  Management of accounts 
i.  Membership fee 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Fund accumulation 
Fund utilization 
Auditing / availability of audit reports 
114. 
Feasibility of the proposed project intervention 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Number of members benefitted 
Scale of operation 
Investment capacity of the FO/PO/COOP Society/Producer group 
Proposed arrangement for establishing market linkages 
f) 
Partnership Development 
(1) 
Step 1 - Inviting Expression of Interest 
115. 
Invite EOIs in the form of “Concept Paper” through an advertisement in all the two languages (Urdu 
and  English)  languages  in  mostly  circulated  (among  business  community)  newspapers.  In  addition,  the 
advertisement will be posted in online portals including KP-RETP official website, social media sites. Promotion 
through official forums would also be entertained.  All the EOIs, as per the prescribed format (Annexure 5), in 
response to advertisement would be required to be submitted, together with the supporting documents, directly 
to the PMU/RCUs  within the prescribed time period mentioned in the advertisement. EOI acknowledgement 
letter should be sent to respective parties within a week. 
116. 
The advertisement should provide the following basic information. 
i.  Brief description about overall Programme and objectives. 
ii.  Components and scope 
iii.  Eligibility criteria 
iv.  Desired outcome 
v.  Reference to the concept note template (Detailed template for the concept note will be available 
to download in programs’ official online portals or/and can be obtained upon prior request through 
an email or via post.) 
vi.  Required supporting documents. 
117. 
Concept note should highlight following key areas; 
i.  Description  of  proposed  4P  project:  Selection  of  the commodity,  potential  for  value addition  at 
producer  level  and  for  premium  product  differentiation  (trademarks,  labelling,  certification, 
organic).    Importance  in  buyers’  overall  activities,  prospects  in  final  or  retail  market.  Export 
potential etc. 
ii.  Target group description: Farmers with at-least 80% of land holdings below 12.5 Ac of extent with 
priority needs to be aligned with targeting strategy.  
iii.  Geographical  coverage:  Agro-ecological,  commercial  and/or  social  reasons  for  choice  of  area 
highlighting the importance to the area as well as to the country as a whole due to intervention. 
12 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iv.  Present production and market situation in the selected area: Key statistics of national & regional 
production  of  selected  commodities,  current  market situation  with  import and export data  and 
relevance for import substitution and national economy. 
v.  Proposed 4P project activities: Establishment/expanding of partnerships with PFOs, promotion of 
primary  processing  at  the  PFOs  level,  Development  of  infrastructure  to  facilitate  post-harvest 
handling and collection or equity sharing with FOs/PFOs through process modernization and value 
addition at factory/Processing level etc. 
vi.  The farmer selection criteria;  
1.  80% of the rural farmers having land parcels less than 12.5 Acres. 
2.  Willingness to share experiences with other farmers 
3.  Willingness to work with private Agribusiness companies. 
4.  Trustworthiness 
5.  Past experience in Agribusiness would be an added advantage 
6.  Existing Member or willingness to work in groups/join PFOs 
vii. 
Implementation  plan:  Clear  timeline  for  partnership  implementation  including  time  frame  for 
proposal  development  &  relevant  approvals,  farmer  selection,  group  formation,  creating  bank 
linkages, supplier  selection and  procurement  for  goods  and services,  field  level implementation 
according to crop seasons and patterns etc. 
viii.  Cost  of  the  project  and  financing  plan:  Proposed  investment  for  the  partnership  including 
contributions from each partner (companies, farmers and KP-RETP and financing plan aligned with 
proposed activity/implementation plan. 
ix.  Benefits of the project: Desired outcome of the partnership in terms of economical (incremental 
income of farmers), social and environmental aspects due to proposed intervention.  
x. 
Impact of the partnership: Overall impact of the partnership in long run aligning with Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) highlighting the effect on economic, social and environmental aspects 
and the attainment of KP-RETP objectives.  
xi.  Sustainability of the partnership: Propose long term sustainability mechanism of the partnership 
with a clear exit strategy from KP-RETP. 
g) 
Step 2 - Seek detailed proposals  
118. 
Selected private Agribusiness companies/SMEs based on their EOIs are requested to develop detailed 
proposal with the support of BMPs/SPs  according to the proposal development template (Annexure 6) provided. 
The template can be obtained from BDU or can be downloaded from programs’ official online portals. At the 
same  time,  shortlisted  companies/SMEs  would  be  invited  to  present  their  concept  to  PMU/RCUs  while  an 
awareness session would be conducted by the BDU experts. The awareness session would comprise of; 
i.  Overall awareness and guidelines about the proposal development 
ii.  Guidance for implementation of the 4P projects. 
iii.  Guidance for selection of works, goods & services including endorsement requirements by relevant 
parties, after sales service, disbursement procedure ownership of utensils, equipment, machinery 
and infrastructure facilities etc. 
iv.  Circulation of guidelines, templates for PFOs registration. 
v.  Guidelines for fund disbursement mechanism and legal requirements 
vi. 
Implementation  guidelines/M&E/Audit  including  ownership/  responsibilities  of  each  partner 
would be explicitly shared during the session. 
119. 
The awareness session would be conducted as an interactive session with practical scenarios for better 
understanding for promoters as well as for PFOs leaders. Promoters need to be given 4 (four) weeks to prepare 
and submit finalized BPs and in meantime, respective BDU under FSC/RCUs and IPS who are assigned for specific 
13 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
partnerships  by  the  project  would  assist  promoters  to  develop  the  BPs  according  to  the  standard  which  is 
prescribed by IFAD/ KP-RETP as mentioned below; 
i.  Focus should be to increase farmers income by at least USD 600 – 1,000 per year by “on farm” 
productivity  development  of  farmers,  engagement  of  PFOs  in  primary  processing  and  value 
addition. Infrastructure development for collection, post-harvest handling, process modernization 
and  value  addition  at  factory  level  is  considered  under  company  contribution  under  4P  model. 
However, project will consider such developments under matching grant facility for regional SMEs. 
ii.  Approximately average of 150 USD per beneficiary could be allocated through the investment plan. 
Based on the value addition capacity this allocation can be varied. Rest will be from farmer/PFOs 
and promoter contribution accordingly. Nevertheless, special consideration would be given for the 
innovative projects which have the potential to be implemented at large scale. 
iii.  The matching grant by IFAD would not exceed 50% of investment in a 4P—the remaining 50% shall 
be provided by the private sector. The average investment per 4P is estimated at US $500,000 per 
4P with each farmer/beneficiary getting around USD 500.    
iv.  The matching grant would be provided as a complimentary to own contribution of the farmers & 
private sector investment and strictly targeting farmers. 
v.  Proposal  should  encourage  and  incorporate  climate  resilience  approaches,  nutrition  sensitive 
interventions, GAP, GMP with special focus to gender and youth accordingly. 
120. 
In the event of the promoter is not competent to develop the proposal, PMU would provide technical 
assistance in BP development through the BDU/IP. Moreover, BDU established at IP/RCU/FSC would act as a 
broker  for  the  development  of  the  proposed  intervention,  with  key  roles  embedded  in  different  stages  of 
partnership development and implementation and closure. 
h) 
Step 3 - Evaluated detailed proposals against criteria 
121. 
Once the proposal is developed and submitted to PMU/RCU via BMP/SP/FSC—as the case maybe, the 
initial evaluation and appraisal would be conducted following a feasibility study by the in-house team (BPET) 
which will be part of the PMU. The BPET team can be comprise of; 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Value chain/business development expert/specialist 
Finance expert/specialist 
Gender, youth and nutrition, environment expert/specialist 
Agronomist/Agro Economist 
122. 
However, the composition of the team will vary depending on the project profile. The team would be 
led  by  value  chain/business  development  expert/specialist,  and  the  final  report  would  be  a  compilation  of 
individual assessments by above mentioned team and should be submitted to Programme management within 
14 (fourteen) days after submission of proposal. 
123. 
Depending  on  the  feasibility  assessment, program  management  would  decide  to  go  ahead  with  the 
proposed  partnership,  however,  if  it  does  not  meet  the  required  ratings,  PMU  would  communicate  to  the 
promoter/IP  highlighting  the  concerned  areas  accordingly.  Further,  PMU/RCUs  would  allow  the  promoter  to 
rectify the concerned areas and resubmit the proposal within 21 (Twenty-one) days.  
124. 
Once  the  approval  is  obtained  for  the  Initial  Appraisal  Report  (IAR),  the  value  chain/business 
development  expert/specialist  is  responsible  to  produce  a  final  appraisal  report  to  PMU/RCUs  management 
within 10 (ten) days from the approval date. The appraisal report should comprise of;  
a.  Promoter  company  due-diligence:  Background  and  experience  in  the  industry,  reputation, 
profitability,  infrastructure  availability  to  support  the  proposed  intervention  and  previous 
experience of working with rural farmer/smallholder communities/donor funded agencies. 
b.  Farmer  beneficiary  analysis:  Geographical  locations  of  beneficiaries,  classification  according  to 
their  income  level,  production,  gender,  youth  etc.,  existing  income  activities,  accessibility  to 
banking and credit facilities, previous involvement in any donor funded projects etc. 
14 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
c.  Product  analysis:  General  description  of  the  product/products  (Outputs)  through  proposed 
intervention, cost of production breakdown, availability of raw materials, future trends  towards 
the output/product etc. 
d.  Financial Inclusion Analysis: Analysis with regard to equity and credit inclusion would be carried 
out.  Proposal  should  include  how  the  company  and  the  farmers  anticipate  to  use  affordable 
financial  products  and  services  (grants  &  credit)  to  meet  their  needs  –  transactions,  payments, 
savings, credit and insurance – delivered in a responsible and sustainable way. 
e.  Risk  analysis:  Risk  factors  involve  in  the  proposed  intervention  according  to  probability  of 
occurrence and the severity (Impact). 
f. 
Investment  plan  analysis:  Financial  plans  will  be  appraised  on  case-by-case  basis.    BPs  will  be 
appraised against Programme objectives and using an economic and multi-criteria analysis such as;   
i.  Overall profitability of the company, FPO and farmers under with and without project scenarios. 
ii.  Overall  evaluation  on  proposed  equipment,  machinery,  other  infrastructure  facilities,  their 
requirement and comparison of proposed cost based on the market rates. 
iii.  Poverty reduction potential: proportion of poor (small) farmers participating: incremental net 
margin, incremental benefit/cost ratio by producer, rate of return at farm level if applicable, 
return per labor, return per acre, incremental household income. 
g.  Comments of appraiser: Overall summary of the report highlighting the pluses and minuses of 
the proposed intervention.  
i) 
Step 4 - Seek IFAD’s No Objection for selection 
125. 
endorsed specifications for necessary capital assets to IFAD for NO objection.   
Once  the  internal  evaluation  is  completed,  PMU/RCUs  would  forward  the  proposal  together  with 
126. 
Duly completed final appraisal report including comments of BPEC & PMC would need to be forwarded 
to IFAD for NO objection. Once the BPEC recommendation, evaluation and approval given, PMC will send the 
proposal for IFAD No Objection Clearance (NOC), the preparation of the necessary legal documents should start 
as soon IFAD’s NO objection is obtained. The draft agreement should be shared with the legal department/ legal 
retainer for their comments before finalizing it. 
127. 
IFAD would provide No Objection after review based on the information and holds the right to seek 
clarification and even alternation of the developed proposal. In such event, PMU would need to communicate 
promoter/BMP/FSC and alter the proposal accordingly.   
128. 
PMU/RCUs shall ascertain whether or not the proposed expenses are ineligible for financing. 
However,  based  on  the  Financing  Agreement,  Letter  to  Borrower  (LOB)  and  general  conditions, 
j) 
Step 5 – Inception of Implementation 
129. 
Once the IFAD’s approval is given implementation work will be initiated, including orientation, targeting 
strategy,  organization  and  strengthening  of  farmers  including  farmer  mobilization  and  formation  of  PFOs, 
registration, opening of bank accounts, tax registration etc. Since the equipment, machineries and infrastructure 
facilities to be given and implemented is finalized, and approved, purchasing process can be initiated following 
the standard operating procedures (SoPs) approved by project. 
k) 
Step 6 – Contract/Agreement 
130. 
Following IFAD’s approval, finalization of the legal documents should be done within a weeks’ time and 
signing of agreements between the stakeholders need to be arranged. Agreements are supposed to add legal 
framework to partnerships where stakeholder are obliged for their roles and responsibilities. Agreement defines 
the  budget  and  financing  arrangements:  KP-RETP  matching  grant,  private  company  co-financing,  FO/FPO 
contribution etc. together with specific legal obligations enforced by the GOKP. 
131. 
agreement which needs to be reviewed for the final consent. 
PMU could seek the assistance of an external legal consultancy firm for the development of the legal 
15 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
132. 
Agreements could be mostly tripartite agreement between private Agribusiness companies/SMEs, KP-
RETP and the selected PFOs especially for the 4P model. However, there could be exceptions for different models 
such as hybrid model, where more than 3 (three) parties are involved under equity sharing concept. (Ex: KP-
RETP /LPA, Other donors, PFOs, Private Agri-business companies, Provincial line departments/institutions etc.). 
l) 
Partnership Implementation  
133. 
Project Agreement would be signed subject to IFAD’ No Objection. Within 14 days, PMU/RCUs should 
conduct an orientation programme for representatives of private Agribusiness company/SME, PFOs & related 
Government Institutes (Extension etc.) who are directly involved in partnership implementation including the 
BMPSP—if  involved,  followed  by  several  beneficiary  mobilizations  sessions  depending  on  the  number  of 
beneficiaries under the partnership on terms and conditions of the Agreement for smooth implementation of 
the partnership. 
134. 
In  addition  to  the  formal  training  and  development  in  relation  to  operational/agronomic  practices 
which  are  proposed  in  the  proposal,  special  consideration  should  be  given  to  preparatory  training  sessions 
aligned  with  mobilizations  sessions  in  relation  to  financial  literacy,  household  budget  management  and 
entrepreneurial development etc. The BMP is responsible for conduct Training of Trainers (TOT) to train field 
officers and supportive staff on these aspects. 
135. 
The  farmer  list  cleared  by  FO/FPO  with  the  support  of  IPs  should  be  submitted  to  PMU/RCUs  for 
registration. After obtaining the PMU approval, the related BDU at IP/RCUs/FSCs would register the farmers in 
its MIS and the lists will be shared with field officers for detailed data collection and registration. 
136. 
If promoter engage directly with beneficiaries, all the beneficiaries/or if the promoter works directly 
with PFOs, both respective eligible entities and individual farmers should open a bank account in selected bank 
where all the transaction would be carried out through the account including fund transfer. 
m) 
Audit & Inspection 
137. 
 Based on the arrangement 4P, if private sector is managing the fund the accounts should be audited 
by  the  reputable  charted  accounting  firm  acceptable  to  the  Fund  or  in  case  of  PFOs,  the  audited  report  of 
cooperative department would be required. 
2. 
Sub Component 1.3 –Farms Service Companies  
138. 
 Building on GoKP investments in the development of the Farm Service Centres (FSC), the KP-RETP will 
invest  in    making  these  institutions  more  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  farmers  in  terms  of  input  supply 
(fertilizers, seeds, pesticides etc.) and services (mechanized labor, technical advises, certification and marketing 
etc.) in order to complement and make fully operationalize the sub component 1 (PFOs) and 2 (4Ps). The KP-
RETP  objective  will  be  transform  these  FSCs  into  functional,  autonomous  and  sustainable  New  Farm  Service 
Companies  (FSC)  per  district,  with  PFOs  and  individual  farmers  as  shareholders.  The  reorganised  FSC  will  be 
registered  under  the  companies  act  and  managed  as  a  private  company. The  companies  are  envisaged  to 
enhance agricultural productivity of PFOs and other farmers 
139. 
Farm  Services  Companies  (FSCs)  would  act  as  a  hub  for  knowledge  diffusion  and  technology 
dissemination  as  well  as  marketing  of  the  agricultural  and  livestock  commodities  in  order  to  facilitate  the 
members. The  companies are envisaged to boost up agricultural productivity of PFOs and having the mandate 
to create opportunities of cooperative farming and cooperative marketing or contract farming. Moreover, farm 
services  centres  would  be  able  to  resolve  issues  of  common  interest  particularly  in  agriculture  through 
developing collective linkages with government line agencies.  
140. 
The  existing  FSCs  will  be  strategically  identified  to  cover  all  the  geographical  zones/regions  of  the 
project.  In  total  35  FSC  will  be  supported  to  have  on  average  1000  –  2000  shareholders  with  an  expected 
outreach 20 000 members per FSC. In addition to converting the existing FSCs into companies, the project shall 
consider establishing new companies or branches/franchisee/agents network to expand the outreach of these 
companies. . 
141. 
The companies would be registered under the Companies Act, 2017 having PFOs and farmers as their 
members/shareholders.  All  members  will  constitute  the  general  Body.  The  companies  will  have  9  Board  of 
directors, 7 of them elected from the shareholders, 2 independent board of director (one charted accountant 
16 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
and one lawyer). The Board will recruit professional management staff to handle the operation of the companies  
and it would be run as a professional business entity.  
142. 
The network of companies  will meet at least twice every year to share experience and exchange their 
respective needs. Furthermore, the companies would explore possibility of leveraging collective economies of 
scale in terms of procuring or negotiating with large seed companies. At the mid-term the MPU will undertake 
feasibility and market study to explore the possibility of creation of Apex of NFSC.         
143. 
The key activities of the companies will be as follows: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
The  Companies  will  assess  the  demand  before  each  agricultural  season,  the  needs  of  their 
members, in terms of improved seeds, fertilizers and pesticides as well as in terms of mechanized 
works. The management unit of the NFSC will procure directly or through the companies network 
(composed  of  the  35  companies)  their  seasonal  inputs.  The  NFSC  facilitated  through  the  Nodal 
agency  would  procure  the  goods  and  sales  to  PFOs/  individual  farmers  through  their  outlets/ 
stores.  
The companies members may provide inputs on credit to the PFOs. Otherwise, farmers will have 
to provide a collateral acceptable to the companies. The delivery of the inputs will be done at FPO 
level. The distribution will be done by the FPO. The reimbursement of the in-kind loan will be done 
by the farmer to the companies through the FPO.  
The companies will select through a call for interest, some young local men / women interested to 
develop their own agricultural mechanized company. They will provide training, list of the PFOs / 
farmers  interested,  working  capital  and  one  equipment  on  long  term  lease.  The  young 
entrepreneurs  will  have  to  follow  a  training  (component  2)  in  order  to  master  the  use  and 
maintenance  of  the  equipment. Payment  will  be done by FPO  to  NFSC for  farmers  members of 
PFOs.  The  companies  will  deduct  all  the  leasing  and  working  capital  expenditures  before 
transferring the due amount to the young entrepreneur.  
The companies may market / process some staple or cash crops if requested by members and if 
business opportunities calculation demonstrates significant interest both at farmer and NFSC level 
as well as acceptable risks.  
The companies will enter into long term contract farming / support with Research Center and seed 
producers / nurseries in order to guarantee the diversity, the quality and the quantity of the seeds 
deliver by companies to the farmers.  A dedicated credit line will be allocated under KP-RETP in 
order  to  pre-finance  some  seed  production  /  plants  and/or  to  import  some  new  germplasms  / 
varieties. Policy paper and/or waiver in terms of the current KP / GoP regulations related to the 
current seeds / germplasm importation will also be financed / requested before the start of this 
activities.    
a) 
Business Planning 
144. 
 Business Planning will be carried out by each companies for a period of 5 years.  Using a variety of tools 
and systematic collective reflections, a business plan with proper FIVE (5) year projections on various aspects 
with clear breakeven point (expected with 3 years maximum), skill identification and cost of the professional 
management  needs  (farmers/PFOs  will  be  shareholders  but  management  will  be  done  by  professionals, 
recruited on test / experience). The final company BP proposal will be reviewed by the PMU and subsequently 
endorsed by IFAD. A detailed list of content is provided in Annexure 8.  
b) 
Profitability 
145. 
 The NFSC is expected to become financial self-sufficient in fourth year of operation and operational 
self-sufficiency  by  third  year.    Based  onbusiness  plan,  each  Farm  Services  Center  (that  will  convert  into 
companies as stated earlier) will have an estimated investment of PKR 156 million (USD 1.0 million) with 50% 
contribution by the project of which not more than 5% could be utilised for the administrative and operational 
cost, whereas 95% will be used for procurement of inputs and other goods to be provided on credit basis to 
membersas  a  working  capital.  Of  the  initial  investment  50%  will  be  contributed  by  shareholders/member 
farmers. It is anticipated that based on the first year of operations, the FSC would be able to leverage commercial 
sources of financing from the second year of its operation. The FSCs are expected to become financially self-
sufficient in the fourth year of operation and operational self-sufficiency by the third year. It is expected that 
17 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
based on the first year of operations, the NFSC could able to leverage commercial sources of financing from the 
second year of its operation 
c) 
Brokering role 
146. 
NFCS could play a major role in brokering 4Ps between PFOs and prospected private sector Agribusiness 
Companies/SMEs.  Such  activity  should  be  coordinated  with  PMU  or  respective  RCUs  through  official 
communication.  
d) 
Management System Development 
147. 
 BMP/SP/PMU/RCUs  should  facilitate  the  development  of  management  systems  in  the  existing  Farr 
Services  Centers  to  gradually  transform  them  into  commercially  viable  enterprisesFSCs  .  Guidelines  for 
management systems should be able to address all requirements related to financial services, input and output 
management  services.  Systems  related  to  management  of  finance,  human  resources,  stock  and  inventory, 
procurement  and  quality  management,  marketing,  internal  audit,  internal  conflict  resolution  and  other 
important functional areas should be developed. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the same should be 
established.  
e) 
Assessment & Audit 
148. 
 The  BoD  should  appoint  one internal auditor  and  should undertake  an  external audit annually.  The 
internal auditor should report the chairman of the BoD and should share all its findings to the external auditor. 
The external audit report should be presented to the general assembly and should be made available to IFAD/ 
PMU and other government stakeholders. 
3. 
Sub-Component 1.4: Institutional Support Services  
149. 
The    main  objective  of  the  sub-component  is  to  provide  demand  driven  institutional  services  to 
PFOs/4Ps/FSCs, to meet the market demand and buyers requirements. The PMU will enter into multiple results 
based  MoUs  with  the  relevant  public/Government  departments  (academic, research  and extension  services) 
for different  activities  with  clear  responsibilities  and  deliverables.  The  scope  of  work  will  emerge  from  the 
aggregated  needs  of  PFOs/4Ps/FSCs  and  will  be  translated  into  work  plan,  timeline  and  cost  estimates.  The 
engagement plan will be developed by PMU and approved by PSC as and when the need arise on a rolling out 
basis. Performance assessment will be done on an annual basis and presented for review to PSC. Below is not 
an exhaustive list of potential institutional services but are typical needs assessed during project design; 
a)  Directorate of Agriculture Extension: (DAE): Based on the need assessed, PMU will engage for provision 
of support regarding training and advisory services (using existing App),   
b)  Directorate of Agriculture Research (DAR): The project will engage Additional collaboration will be in 
the  areas  of  reforms  related  to  seed/planting  material  import  and  multiplication  and  other  related 
policy domains. 
c)  Training  Providers:  Based  on  the  training  type  and  need,  several  performance  based  MoUs  may  be 
signed with training providers such as Agriculture Training Institute (ATI), Agriculture and Engineering 
to 
TEVTA 
Universities, 
agriculture/agribusiness. The assessed need for workforce in agribusiness component is 25,000 which 
will be trained, tested and certified through these partnerships.  
Institution  under 
specialised 
facilities 
Training 
related 
and 
d)  Additional/Other Partnerships: Several other MoUs may be executed as per the need with different 
institutions. The terms of partnership will include investment in capacities of the institutions, delivery 
of the services and overheads. 
B. 
Component-2 – Skills Development and EmploymentPromotion 
1. 
Purpose, Objective, Outcome and Output 
150. 
The  project design  recognizes that in  order  to  effectively  engage young rural  people,  an  innovative, 
dynamic  and  integrated  investment  approach  is  required  to  create  the  right  incentives  for  productive 
engagement of youth, to address their growth challenges. In view of the current state of agriculture regarding 
productive  employment  and  TVET  challenges  and  barriers  to  rural  youth  employment  and  business 
18 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
development,  the  project  adopts  a  multi-  dimensional,  coordinated  and  integrated  approach  of  generating 
employment  and  services  opportunities  through  Agribusiness  component  of  the  project  and  take  into 
consideration  the  supply  gap  for  emerging  sectors of  the  provincial  economy. to  address  diverse  supply  and 
demand constraints and keeping in view the diverse regional level market demands for labour.  One of the key 
constraints of the existing TVET in addition to the stereotypical and traditional trainings methods, is that it does 
not prepare the trainees for productive employment and entrepreneurship. The project approach, therefore, 
focuses  on  competency-based  trainings  including  opportunities  for  business  development  skills,  managerial 
capacity  building  and  promoting  non-cognitive  skill  building;  apprenticeship  for  on-the-job  training;  and 
mechanism for public private partnership for job placement. 
151. 
The  objective  of  the  component  is  creation  of  productive  employment  and  self-employment 
opportunities for 110,000 rural women and men in the farm, off farm and non-farm sectors. The component 
approach will focus on employability for employment and self-employment/entrepreneurship in agriculture and 
other  emerging  sectors  in  the  province  through  a  range  of  activities  tailored  to  the  needs  and  interests  of 
different  target  groups.  The  project  design  recognizes  that  in  order  to  effectively  engage  rural  people,  an 
innovative, dynamic and integrated investment approach is required to create the right incentives for productive 
engagement of rural people, to address their growth challenges. The project approach provides for competency-
based  training  including  opportunities  for  business  development  skills,  managerial  capacity  building  and 
promoting  non-cognitive  skill  building;  apprenticeship  for  on-the-job  training;  mechanism  for  public  private 
partnership for job placement; and linkage for access to financial services for start-up for self-employment. 
152. 
The Skills Development and Employment Promotion Component consists of three mutually supporting 
sub-components the scope and technical parameters for each subcomponents are described below for guidance 
and compliance: 
2. 
Sub-component 2.1: Vocation and entrepreneurship skill training  
153. 
This subcomponent will focus on the technical, financial, managerial, or business skills needed to ensure 
the management, development, success, profitability, and sustainability. A total of 60,000 trainees will benefit 
from the reorganised approach of TEVTA. The number includes more than 25,000 beneficiaries belonging to  (i) 
the  550  Professional  Farmers  Organizations,  (ii)  the  20  Public-private-producer  partnerships  (iii)  the  35  New 
Farm Service Centres and (vi) and some others who would be working for the service providers to be used under 
this component as depicted below: 
Table-2: Estimated Number of Potential Workforce 
Type 
PFOs 
4Ps 
FSCs 
Service Providers 
Total 
Staffing Need 
   2 750 
   400 
Workforce Need 
  19 250 
 1 200 
Total 
  22 000 
  1 600 
   280 
   875 
155 
   3 430 
260 
  21 585 
260 
25,015 
154. 
Thean overall objective will be to improve or to develop the skills of individuals (approx. 5,000 per year 
– 145 per districts per year), staff or members, based on the active and effective roles of the individuals in the 
institutions supported and the personal needs expressed / assessed (backed by the business plan and capacity 
building plan of the institutions supported). Special focus will be given to the youth and women with a minimum 
quota of 30% each. The training need will emerge from the business plans of PFOs/4Ps/FSCs and the capacity 
building investment will be incorporated in the same. 
155. 
The overall implementation of Component 1 and consequently subcomponent 2.1 will be progressive 
(phasing approach). Each implementing partner in charge of Component 1 (agri-business development) will also 
be responsible for the implementation of subcomponent 2.1 (skill development for agribusiness entities). The 
implementing partner will either directly train the beneficiaries or (for very specific areas) will engage service 
providers  at  provincial  or  national  level.  The  implementing  partner  will  be  responsible  for  the  quality  and 
efficiency of the training and will consequently manage the contractual relationship with the ‘skill development’ 
service providers subject to No Objection from the PMU. 
19 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
156. 
The IPs will census the individual skills needed based on (i) the requests of the institutions (when already 
operational), (ii) the IPs’ own needs assessment for PFOs, 4Ps or NFSCs to reach optimum performance and (iii) 
the  guidance  of  the  approved  BP.    Based  on  am  approximate  target  of  25  000  trainees,  the  maximum  (all-
inclusive) cost of training per individual will be USD 160 for the duration of the project.  The IP(s) Component 1 
IPs will be also responsible for ensuring the first level of progress reporting of component 1 and sub-component 
related  to  agribusiness  skills  development  under  component  2.  Mmonitoring  and  evaluation  will  be  the 
reponsiblity of  of this  subcomponent 2.1,  which  will be  complemented  by  the  KP-RETP  M&E staff  as  well  as 
complemented through periodic external evaluations.  At least 30% of the trainees shall be youth and women 
to  ensure  availability  of  staff  and  workforce  for  achieving  the  targets  of  agribusiness  development  under 
Component 1. The implementation of the Subcomponent  will  follow the business development and capacity 
building plans for each FPO and FSCs in progressive and phased manner under component I. Training curricula 
will include a general orientation on nutrition, social, environmental and climate change in addition to technical 
theme. 
157. 
Implementation Arrangement/Training Providers: KP-TEVTA will be responsible for implementation of 
the subcomponent either in its own public sector institutions or in case of non-availability of courses, through 
outsourcing to public sector institutions like Animal Husbandry In-Service Training Institute (AHITI), Agriculture 
Training Institute (ATI), Universities (Agriculture/Engineering/Livestock) or by hiring relevant training providers 
(firms or qualified individuals as appropriate).  Based on the training type and need, several performance based 
MoUs  may  be  signed  with  training  providers.  The  trainees  will  be  tested  and  certified  through  these 
partnerships. The BMPs will be responsible for skills need assessments and selection of trainees as part of the 
business development  planning  process  and  will ensure  that  assessment  is  based  on  (i) needs identified  and 
requested by PFOs, participants of 4Ps and FSCs after their establishment; (ii) the BMP own needs assessment 
for  PFOs,  4Ps  or  FSCs;  (iii)  the  guidance  and  needs  identified  for  capacity  enhancement  of  small 
farmers/members of PFOs/4Ps by participating private business partners/companies; and, (iv) need for skilled 
service providers.  The maximum (all-inclusive) cost of training per individual is estimated at PKR 15,000 (USD 
100).  Following is the summary of the workforce to be trained under this sub-component. 
3. 
Sub-Component 2.2: Start-up capital for employment promotion  
158. 
The overall objective of this subcomponent 2.2 will be (i) to create jobs (including self-employment) for 
the  ultra-poor  and  poor  households  having  limited  access  to  land,  with  a  specific  focus  on  youth  (50%)  and 
women  (25%),  and  (ii)  to  facilitate  the  employability  and  the  active  integration  in  the  economy  of  newly 
graduated  students.  Pakistan  produces  around  450 000  new  graduates  each  year  –  70 000  annually  in  KP 
province.  The  project  will  provide  start  up  grants  to  enable  graduates  to  initiate  self-employment  and 
entrepreneurship.  Service  provider(s)  will  be  selected  to  implement  this  subcomponent  as  provided  in  this 
manual.  
159. 
The implementation will be delegated to five several Vocational/Entrepreneurial Training Organizations 
(VOETO)  astraining/  service  providers  (SPs)  in  charge  of  the  social  mobilization,  selection  of  the  candidates, 
organization  of  pre-training,  training  as  well  as  post-training  support  including;  ,  coaching,  mentoring,  and 
guidance in support of the beneficiaries to ensure that the income and employment objective is reached. 
160. 
The five VOETOsservice provider(s) will be recruited on a competitive basis (one service provider per 
sub-office (4)  and  regional office  (1)). Each  VOETO  service  provider(s) will have  a 3-year  framework  contract 
renewable based on performance and will be assessed / confirmed every year. The VOETOs service provider(s) 
will handle aspects related to both employment / self-employment and post-graduate economic integration. In 
areas where the service providers will not be able to obtain the GoP NOC to intervene, the PMU through its 
regional office will directly intervene using its own staff field consultant and GoKP line departments. as GoKP 
public services are permanently authorized to intervene in these areas. 
161. 
This  subcomponent  2.2  will  be  developed  based  on  the  SPPAP  effective  and  successful  model  / 
methodology of rural employment and self-employment. The VOETOs service provider(s) will develop the skills 
of  the target group  to  become  employable or to  create  their own  employment /  business  and consequently 
improve their livelihoods in a significant and sustainable manner (the objective being a minimum monthly net 
income of 15 000 PKR). Based on the SPPAP experience, around 70% of the beneficiaries of this subcomponent 
would develop their own self-employment / business. 
162. 
The beneficiaries will be pre-identified through the updated BISP Poverty Score Card (data available) 
after  the  necessary  social  initial  mobilizationscreening  /  consultation  organized  by  through  the  village/Tehsil 
20 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
councils  or  functional  existing  community  organisationse  VOETOs.  The  applications  of  beneficiaries  will  be 
validated by the PMU after due diligence related to the poverty score card and endorsement by the village/tehsil 
council.  Based  on  the  SPs’  assessment  of  the  employment  market  and  the  demand  expressed  locally  by  the 
potential beneficiaries, the SPs will organize various consultations in order to match the market offer and the 
beneficiaries’ demand. 
163. 
The type of skills to be acquired will vary and could cover different sectors depending on the gender, 
the location of the district and its business / labour comparative advantage / demand. Gender and youth will be 
identified  as  per  SPPAP  methodology.  Vocational  and  Entrepreneurial  trainings  will  aim  at  developing 
sustainable and profitable businesses (mechanics, tailoring, shoe or handicraft production, beauty shop, mobile 
or  solar  panel  repair,  brewery,  masonry,  hostelry,  cloth  design,  heavy  machinery  operation,  electricity,  steel 
fixing, plumbing, etc.) – see list of the 49 activities proposed in PIM. 
164. 
The duration and location of the training will be adapted based on the target group (particularly for 
women) and the topic. Generally, the duration envisaged is 2 / 3 months per training, sanctioned by an official 
and  recognized  diploma  or  certificate.  The  overall  cost  (training  +  stipend  +  support  for  CV  and  search  of 
employment) would be around USD 300 per trainee and would allow her or him to exceed to average earnings 
of USD 125 per month (which corresponds to the estimated amount needed in rural areas to sustain a family). 
165. 
The service providers in charge of this subcomponent will be responsible for the quality of the training 
provided  and the  results  obtained  (in  terms  of  sustainable employment  ratio  and level  of  income).  A special 
partnership will be developed with TEVTA to handle most of the technical training. TEVTA will be supported to 
assess and adapt their trainings (if necessary) to the most recent market requirements and / or to add some 
training modules to their existing curricula. TEVTA will also be supported to develop partnerships with a network 
of entrepreneurs willing to offer internships or to participate in vocational cooperative education programmes 
(with trainees alternating between theory and practice).   
166. 
The trainees will be progressively identified and supported based on the phasing approach of KP-RETP. 
Around 30% of the trainees  will respond to the local, provincial, national, or even international employment 
market (e.g. GCC countries). The other 70% who have demonstrated interest, willingness and capacity will be 
supported  to  become  self-entrepreneurs  with  an  additional  package  (start-up  capital  and  management 
coaching/mentoring) averaging USD 300 per person, expected to yield an average income of USD 180 to 200 per 
month.  The  start-up  capital  may  be  provided  in  kind  (necessary  equipment  /  tools)  and/or  in  cash  (working 
capital).  Each  beneficiary  will  be  requested  to  open  a  bank  account  using  either  of  the  commercial/MFI  or 
branchless  banking  option.  KP-RETP  will  link  with  the  provincial  banks  to  facilitate  /  negotiate  the  financial 
inclusion of these poor households (with PSC scores of 0 – 34) who are not normally eligible for loans, through 
(i)  brokering  attractive  loan  conditions  with  support  from  GoKP  and  (ii)  valorising  the  KP-RETP  support  as 
collateral. 
167. 
Implementation Arrangements. A special partnership will be developed with KP-TEVTA, and support 
provided to ensure implementation of vocational training within the parameters of project design.  TEVTA will 
be supported to assess and adapt to the most recent market requirements in terms of training and / or to add 
additional  demand-based  trainings  to  their  existing  trainings.  TEVTA  will  also  be  supported  to  develop 
partnerships with local industry/entrepreneurs/businesses for assessing demand and developing apprenticeship 
for job placement. In addition, KP TEVTA shall be supported in establishing partnership with public and private 
service providers to design and deliver the trainings currently not available at TEVTA. 
168.  Within  the  framework  of  the  project  design  and  under  the  overall  supervision  of  PMU,  the 
implementation arrangements will include:  
i. 
ii. 
Training of  youth men and women and provision of apprenticeship support to  trainees will be the 
responsibility  of  KP-TEVTA  through  on-going  ADP  schemes.  The  PSC  will  provide  necessary 
modifications  and  flexibility,  if  required,  to  align  the  existing  ADP  programmes  with  the  project 
framework and approach. 
In case of non-availability of the market demanded courses and training identified at KP-TEVTA own 
institutions, KP-TEVTA will organise such courses through outsourcing to  public or private  service 
providers or qualified individuals.  
21 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iii. 
iv. 
KP-TEVTA  will  also  ensure  organising  training  for  women  at  local  level  where  the  women  could 
conveniently commute on daily basis, either through its own institutions or by engaging suitable 
public and/or private service providers.   
Based on institutional assessment, availability of necessary facilities and outreach, the Directorate 
of Social Welfare Merged Areas could be one such pre-identified public sector service provider for 
vocational training of young women and men for employment and self-employment in the Merged 
Districts. The Directorate of Social Welfare Merged Areas will be engaged by KP-TEVTA through a 
MOU. KP-TEVTA will provide financing for training of women through the leveraged ADP funding, 
while financing of start-up capital will be provided by PMU through service provider. The trainees 
shall be awarded certificates by KP-TEVTA. The number of beneficiaries and financial requirements 
will  be  determined  mutually  by  the  Directorate  of  Social  Welfare  Merged  Areas,  KP-TEVTA  and 
PMU. 
v. 
KP-TEVTA shall direct funds from out of its ADP for outsourcing specialized trainings currently not 
offered by KP-TEVTA and local level trainings for women where KP-TEVTA has no outreach.  
4. 
Sub-Component 2.3 Job placement of graduated students 
169. 
Pakistan  produces  around  450 000  new  graduates  each  year  including  70 000  annually  in  Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa  and  yet  the  market  cannot  productively  absorb  this  supply.  This  has  led  to  graduate’s 
unemployment  and  the  graduate  unemployment  rate  is  estimated  at  16.5%4  -  7.3%  for  male  and  41.1  for 
female.  
170. 
The project will support about 25,000 graduates of universities through a public private partnership to 
enhance their employability skills and potential. The graduates will be engaged for up to one year as interns in 
both private and public sector and within the project for different functions based on the demand. Priority will 
be  given  to  those  coming  from  the  poorest  family.  Women  graduates  will  constitute  50%  of  the  target.  The 
initiative will provide opportunities for young fresh graduates to get experience as well as develop their skills in 
the  respective  domain  which  will  improve  their  employment  opportunity  within  the  agriculture  and  rural 
development sector. The initiative will also provide exposure to the graduates to understand the requirements 
of the receiving organisations.  
171. 
Amongst  the  numerous  tasks  that  will  be  allocated  to  the  young  graduates,  could  include  assisting 
government line departments and Service Providers in the implementation of their respective activities and/or 
could strengthen the M&E capacities of the PMU.  
172. 
Each graduate will have the possibility to do 2 internships of 6 months each. The recruiting public sector 
institution and enterprise will be allowed to keep the same student for a second period of 6 months only if it 
provides a formal offer of employment to the student. In case of non-compliance, the enterprise will no longer 
be eligible to participate in the programme. Each enterprise will have a maximum of 2 students at the same 
time. Around 145 interns per district and per year will be eligible to this programme. Annual assessments of this 
activity will be conducted and the approach will be adjusted if needed. It is expected that 30% of the interns will 
remain  employed  in  the  enterprises  after  completing  their  internship  period,  50%  will  find  a  job  after  their 
second internship (in a different enterprise) based on the experience acquired and 20% will set up their own 
business or still be looking for a job after 6 months. 
173. 
Service provider(s) through call for proposal (twice a year), will identify interested public and private 
institutions in consultation with PMU, for placement of induction of skilled youth for a period of 6 months. At 
the  same  time,  the  SPs  will  regularly  take  a  census  of  the  district  youth,  male  and  female,  interested  in 
participating in this post-graduate economic integration programme. A web site will be created under the KP-
RETP  to  match  the  demand  and  the  offer  (on  line  permanent  enrolment,  negotiation,  and  contract).  Every 
quarter and in each operational district, one-to-two-day workshops will be organized by the PMU / SPs to (i) 
facilitate an in-situ selection process through meetings between the post-graduate candidates and the public or 
private enterprises and (ii) promote exchanges on the various experiences and needs of both students and public 
or private entities (thematic / debates). 
4   Employment Trends, 2018, Ministry of Statistics, Government of Pakistan 
22 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
174. 
After due diligence done by the SP, an internship contract will be signed between all the parties. The 
remuneration during the induction period is estimated to be PKR  15 000 PKR per month of which PKR 12,000 
will be provided by the programme and PKR 3,000 by the institutions/enterprise. On the 25th of each month, 
the enterprise will transfer its share to KP-RETP (this will also serve as proof of attendance by the intern) and on 
the  30th  of  each  month,  KP-RETP  will  transfer  the  total  salary  of  15 000  PKR  to  the  intern.  The  SPs  will  be 
responsible for the progress reporting to the PMU. It is expected that 30% of the interns will remain employed 
in the enterprises after completing their internship period, 50% will find a job after their second internship (in a 
different enterprise) based on the experience acquired and 20% will set up their own business or still be looking 
for a job after 6 months. A joint assessment but objective assessment will be done of the incumbents at the end 
of the induction period for confirmation of successful completion of the induction/probation period. 
5. 
Institutional Strengthening Support under Component 2 
175. 
The project support will be extended to Department of Industries, Commerce and Technical Education 
and Department Zakar-Usher, Social Welfare, Special Education and Women Empowerment and TEVTA through 
several service providers, training institutions, universities and individual as technical assistance for improving 
curricula, training delivery, training facilities, testing and certification aspects. The support will also strengthen 
the facilities for emerging sectors and putting in place state of the art skills development facilities around key 
economic  zones.  The  policy  support  will  particularly  focus,  during  the  initial  project  years,  on  developing  an 
extended competency based testing framework covering agribusiness and women empowerment; developing 
framework for skills development fund to cover start up capital for self-employment, and developing capacity 
for job market assessments and development of job market outlook on a continual basis. The project will also 
provide technical assistance to facilitate curricula, testing and certification of skills training by TEVTA under the 
overall umbrella of the National Vocational and Technical Education Commission (NAVTEC). 
176. 
Some  other  areas  where  institutional  support  may  be  extended  include  i)  market  assessment  and 
release of job market outlook on a continual basis to enable adoption of training programme, (ii) establishing 
training hubs (3 hubs linked to economic zones, product clusters and emerging sectors); and, (iii) policy reforms 
related to testing and certification. The technical support needs will be assessed once the job market assessment 
is completed. The PMU will develop scope of work and will engage one or several technical service providers for 
training  mainly  for  thematic  and  geographical  areas  which  are  not  currently  covered  by  TEVTA.  Selection  of 
service  providers  will  be  undertaken  following  competitive  process  while  public  sector  institutions  may  be 
engaged through a performance-based MoU. 
177. 
As stated earlier, component 2 shall be largely implemented by KP TEVTA and the Business Mobilization 
Partner/Service  Provider  engaged  under  Component-1  shall  also  be  involved  in  implementation  under 
Component 2. KP TEVTA may engage more Service Providers (SPs) to meet capacity gaps within its institution.  
C. 
Eligibility and Other Parameters for Trainings 
178. 
The identification of trainees will have three approaches; (i) demand driven regular intake by TEVTA; 
(ii) intake through the Social Welfare Department - women empowerment linked to women centres in merged 
districts; (iii) needs identified by service providers in areas not covered by TEVETA to enhance outreach. The 
service provider(s) will particularly assist KP-TEVTA in implementation of training of women at local level who 
have cultural constraints of mobility. The overall coordination and oversight will be provided by PMU. The PMU 
will also facilitate the linkages between the service provider and private banks for provision of interest free and 
low-cost financial services of the federal and provincial government. In this regard formal MOUs will be signed 
between the PMU/service provider and private banks. 
179. 
The service provider will work closely with Village/Tehsil Council to facilitate identification of trainees 
using BISP-PSC (band of 0-34 on priority). The service providers will also develop partnership (with public, private 
and civil society organisations) for the job induction programme. 
180. 
Each  service  provider  and  MoU  partners  will  have  a  3-year  framework  contract/result-based  MoU 
renewable  based  on  performance  assessment  undertaken  every  year.  The  service  provider(s)/partner(s)will 
handle aspects related to both employment / self-employment and job induction. In areas where the service 
providers will not be able to obtain the GoP NOC to intervene, the PMU through its regional office will directly 
intervene using its own staff and line departments. 
23 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
181. 
will be validated by Village/Tehsil Councils and PMU after necessary due diligence. 
The beneficiaries pre-identified (using PSC data obtained from BISP) by the service provider(s)/partners 
182. 
The KP-RETP M&E staff as well as periodic external evaluations will inform adjustment in the approach.  
183. 
support either in kind or capital whichever is deemed essential for the trade 
Successful candidates with demonstrated interest, willingness and capacity will be provided start up 
184. 
requirements to be complied with in project implementation under this component: 
The  table  exhibits  component-wise  major  activities,  project  targets,  and  eligibility  and  technical 
Table-3:  Eligiblity and Technical Parameters for Training Interventions 
#  Major Activities 
1 
Skills  Development 
for  Job  Market  and 
Self-Employment 
Target 
60,000 
Eligibility and Technical Parameters 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Ultra-poor and poor households with limited to no access to land with 
poverty score within the band of 0-34. 
TEVTA will be supported to assess and adapt to the most recent market 
requirements in terms of training and / or to add additional demand-
based trainings to their existing trainings. 
TEVTA will also be supported to develop partnerships with local 
industry/entrepreneurs/businesses for assessing demand; 
KP TEVTA shall be supported in establishing partnership with public and 
private service providers to design and deliver the trainings currently 
not available at TEVTA at the recommendation of the Business 
Mobilization Partners (BMPs) 
For women, KP-TEVTA will also ensure organising training at local level 
where the women could conveniently commute on daily basis, either 
through its own institutions or by engaging suitable public and/or 
private service providers. The network of Directorate of Social Welfare 
(Merged Districts) could be used for reaching out to the women in 
these districts subject to a MOU between the project and the SWD. 
vi.  Where KP-TEVTA outsources trainings to public/private institutions, it 
will pay for the cost of trainings from out of its ADP programs, while the 
start-up capital shall be provided by PMU.  KP-TEVTA shall give 
certificate to the trainees. 
25,000 
2 
Skills Development 
linked to 
Agribusiness  
Development 
Component 
i. 
ii. 
Business Mobilization Partner (BMP) engaged under Component-1 shall 
lead this activity; 
Ultra-poor and poor households with limited to no access to land with 
poverty score within the band of 0-34. 
iii.  Minimum 30% of trainees should be youth and women from rural 
3 
Employment 
Promotion   
18,000 of 
the 
60,000 
mentione
d against 
# 1 
areas.  Most of those trained shall be recruited as the staff of technical 
service providers, and skilled workforce of PFOs/4Ps/FSCs; 
Training curricula will include a general orientation on nutrition, social, 
environment, and climate change in addition to technical/functional 
aspects; 
Ultra-poor and poor households with limited to no access to land with a 
poverty score within the band of 0-34. 
iv. 
i. 
ii.  Minimum 30% youth, and minimum 30% women; 
iii. 
KP TEVTA establish a system to continuously  engage with Chamber of 
Commerce and Trade, enterprises, and others to assess their demands 
and respond through CBTs; 
Competency Based Training (CBT) shall be delivered; 
KP TEVTA shall be supported to in-house institutional capacity to design 
and deliver CBTs; 
Apprenticeship/on-job training shall be integral part of this approach—
funded through KP TEVTA’s ongoing apprenticeship initiatives. Each 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
24 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
#  Major Activities 
Target 
Eligibility and Technical Parameters 
vii. 
viii. 
42 000  
i. 
apprentice shall be paid PKR 10,000 (USD 64) per month for three to six 
months.  
Trade selection subject to gender, demand for skills in district 
(Annexure—xx has list of eligible trades); 
VOETOs will also be supported for job placement initiatives at local 
rural areas 
Ultra-poor and poor households with limited to no access to land with a 
poverty score within the band of 0-34 
4 
Self-
employment/Enterp
rise Development 
vii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
ii.  Minimum 30% youth, and minimum 30% women; 
iii. 
Start-up capital (USD 300) per beneficiary to be provided; Linkages to 
be established with ongoing microfinancing initiatives like Kamyab 
Jawan Program etc. for the trainees to augment start-up capital;  
Trade selection subject to gender, demand for skills in district 
(Annexure—xx has list of eligible trades); 
TEVTA shall leverage ongoing programmes under ADP for this purpose; 
Trainees shall also be given coaching in business planning & 
development, financial education, financial management, market 
access and access to existing financial services and business incubation 
in the form of hand holding during the initial period of 
enterprise/business establishment. 
In the first 2-3 years, IFAD will pay for the start-up capital, generate the 
evidence of effectiveness self-employment/enterprise development 
model it is testing in this project. KP TEVTA shall develop a PC-1 for 
wider replication of this self-employment approach 3-4 years based on 
its successful piloting from IFAD funds.   
Ultra-poor and poor households with limited to no access to land with a 
poverty score within the band of 0-34. 
ii. 
Around 145 interns per district per year; 
iii.  Minimum 50% of beneficiaries should be women; 
iv. 
Each intern can get up to two (2) internships each for six (6) months. 
The second internship shall be provided if the employing entity offers a 
firm offer for appointment to the intern requesting the second 
internship term; 
Each intern shall get PKR 15 000 PKR per month of which PKR 12,000 
will be provided by PMU and PKR 3,000 by institutions/enterprise. 
Annual assessments to fine tune the approach 
v. 
vi. 
i. 
5 
Job 
placement/Inductio
n 
25,000 
graduates 
for  up to 
one year 
1. 
Indicative Type of Trainings 
185. 
Appropriate type of training courses will be offered to meet the demand created by the Agribusiness 
Development component for farm and off farm employment, businesses and services and to fill the labour and 
services supply gap for the emerging sectors of the province like manufacturing, hospitality, construction, mining 
and services. About 50% of the trainees will be women.  Trainings for women will carried out at local level by 
service providers.  The training for self-employment/enterprise development will be accompanied by star up 
capital either in kind or in money form through the project resources and through linkage with bank for accessing 
the government soft loan for youth entrepreneurship. Typically, the duration of trainings will be between 3 to 6 
months. 
186. 
Based on available analysis of skills gap in the province, the trainings could include : 
a)  Crop and livestock agribusiness (under component 1) including skills and knowledge to engage in 
high value commercial agriculture production, value addition and off-farm activities and services 
aim  at  delivering  agriculture  support  services  to  farmers  and  at  adding  value  to  agricultural 
products through processing, food manufacturing, logistics and trading including animal health and 
reproduction, nurseries, pruning and pesticide application etc.; 
25 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
b)  Agriculture  and  rural  development  professional  skills  for  graduates  for  employment  or  self-
employment; and, 
c)  For  bridging  labour  supply  gap  for  emerging  sectors,  an  indicative  list  of  sector-wise  training  is 
being proposed to be covered under this component. The list is provided at Annexure 11 to this 
manual.  
2. 
Target Group and Geographic Focus 
187. 
The main target group of the component will be the poor household in BISP-PSC band of 0-34. BISP-PSC 
criteria will be the main instrument for selection of beneficiaries. However, since the updated BSIP-PSC data is 
not  yet  available,  the  selection  of  beneficiaries  will  be  validated  by  existing  community  organisation  and 
allowance  and  flexibility  for  any  errors  and  omissions  will  be  made.  Additionally,  unemployed  and  fresh 
graduates from poor families will be provided internship opportunities for enhancing their employability skills. 
188. 
The component will cover all the 35 districts of the province with focus on regions/divisions with high 
poverty rates like the NMDs, agribusiness clusters and region/ districts with specific labour supply gaps such as:  
manufacturing mainly in Peshawar, Marda Kohat and Swat Divisions; construction in Peshawar, Hazara, Swat, 
Mardan,  Kohat  and  D.I  Khan  Division;  hospitality  in  Hazara  and  Swat  Division,  and  services  sector  in  all 
divisions/districts. 
189.  Within the main poverty target groups, the youth supported by the project will broadly fall into the 
following main categories: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Farmers and young women and men aspiring to take advantage of the enumerative employment 
opportunities  created  by  the  Agribusiness  Development  Component  of  the  project  and  the 
emerging sectors of the province through employment in agriculture and non-agriculture sectors.  
Famers young women and men looking for opportunities for remunerative livelihoods through self-
employment/micro  and  small  enterprises  and  services  opportunities  available  as  a  result  of 
Agribusiness Development and the emerging sectors. The trainings for this group will be backed up 
by start-up capital from project resources and through linkages with private banks for accessing 
the government soft loans for youth enterprise development. 
Young women and men graduate from local faculties who require further capacity building through 
on the job training/internship in their education qualification related trades particularly related to 
agriculture and food sector to improve their employability. 
190. 
A  combination  of  vocational  training,  access  to  low  interest  loans,  apprenticeship  and  internship 
packages will be offered for different sub target groups based on assessment of potential of beneficiaries carried 
out by service provider. Since certain type of trainings are contingent on education levels, an education level 
based criteria are also applied. The Kamyab Jawan soft interest loans will be leveraged (where possible) across 
bands  for  Poverty  Scores  0-23  based  on  demonstrated  interest,  willingness  and  capacity  of  successful 
beneficiaries of vocational trainings and internships. 
26 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table 4. Eligible Households (per PSC) and Interventions 
PSC range 
Sub-PSC Range  Education 
0-34 but 
Preference for 
0-16.7 (BISP 
Beneficiary) 
0-34 
0-34 
0-34 
Level 
Less than 8 
years (primary) 
More than 8 
years (middle) 
and upto 12 
years 
(intermediate) 
Graduates and 
above 
Intervention Type 
Vocational Training mainly for self-
employment 
Link to Kamyab Jawan low interest 
loan 
Vocational Training for employment. 
Could also include self-employment. 
Apprenticeship 
Like to Kamyab Jawan low interest 
loan 
Internship for employability. Could 
also include self-employment for 
services like processing, food 
manufacturing, logistics, trading, 
animal health and reproduction, 
nurseries, pruning and pesticide 
application etc.  
Like to Kamyab Jawan low interest 
loan 
Institution 
VOETO. Mostly 
district/location-
based trainings 
for women. 
KP-TEVTA 
vocational 
institutes. 
PMU/partner 
government line 
departments 
and private 
sector partners. 
3. 
Implementation Arrangement 
191. 
Implementation of the  component will be the responsibility of the provincial  TEVTA in  public sector 
intuitions  and  five  regional  Vocational/Entrepreneurial  Training  Organization  (VOETO)  specializing  in  social 
mobilisation and technical and vocational skills within house capacity and ability to organize training at local 
level particularly for women who have cultural constraints of mobility. The overall coordination and oversight 
will  be  provided  by PMU. The  PMU will  also  facilitate  the linkages between  the  service  provider and  private 
banks for provision of interest free and low-cost financial services of the federal and provincial government. In 
this regard formal MOUs will be signed between the PMU/service provider and private banks.  
192. 
The  VOETO  will  be  selected  on  competitive  basis  by  PMU  for  implementation  of  Employment 
Promotion  subcomponent  including  the  graduate  internship  programme.  The  selected  VOTETO  will  be  a 
specialised organization and the criteria for its selection given herein will be strictly followed. 
193. 
The VOETO will work closely with existing community-based organisation like CO/VO/LSO to facilitate 
identification  of  trainees  from  BISP-PSC  band  of  0-34.  The  VOETO  will  also  facilitate  the  provincial  TEVTA  in 
selection of candidates for training in public sector institutions based on their eligibility criteria.  Once identified, 
the  VOETO  will  assess  the  capacity  and  suitability  of  the  women  and  men  selected  to  utilize  the  training 
particularly identifying potential entrepreneurs from among those who receive vocational training and finalise 
the list of participants for each type of training after screening.  The VOETO will design training courses that are 
tailored to the needs of the target group identified in terms of timings, content and delivery methodology. The 
VOETO  in  collaboration  with  KP-TEVTA  will  provide  those  who  complete  their  training  course  with 
apprenticeship support in seeking employment.  
194. 
support either in kind or capital whichever is deemed essential for the trade.  
Successful candidates with demonstrated interest, willingness and capacity will be provided start up 
4. 
Summary of Eligibility Criteria for Participants  
195. 
The eligibility criteria for the candidates selected for vocational training will be the following;  
i. 
All participants from households with a score of between 0-34 on the BISP-PSC will be eligible. 
However,  preference  will  be  given  to  candidates  from  PSC-PSC  band  of  0-16.7  (BISP 
beneficiaries) for training conducted by VOETO.   
27 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ii. 
iii. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Unemployed and fresh graduates for poor households. 
Final selection of participants validated by the COs will be made by the VOETO for all training 
(VOETO and KP-TEVTA) based on assessment of willingness, qualifications, ability and potential 
for productive utilization of the training for employment or self-employment.  
5. 
Type of Support of Participants 
Orientation  of  existing  Community  Organization and selection of  beneficiaries:   The  VOETO 
team will brief the communities on purpose and selection criteria, select beneficiaries based 
on BISP-PSC criteria and carry out validation by CO. Pending the availability of updated BISP-
PSC data, allowance for errors and omissions in the exiting data could be made in consultation 
and validation of CO.   
Potential  candidates  will  be assessed  and assisted  by VOETO  in  selection  of  training course 
based on willingness, qualifications and potential. 
All participants will be provided training of a duration which is adjudged by specialists to be 
sufficient to enhance the level of skill and knowledge of the trainee and can enhance his/her 
employability or productivity. Generally, the training courses will comprise of 3 to 6 months 
durations. 
Candidates  will  receive  Support  for  transport  and  all  out  of  pocket  expenses  incurred  in 
attending the training course. 
Support for broad and lodging for all overnight training programmes. 
vi.  Women will be provided trainings locally by VOETO. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
Candidates for graduate internship programme will be provided monthly stipend.  
Eligible  candidates  for  self-employment/enterprise  development  will  be  provided  start  up 
support either in kind or in the form of capital according to the type of trade.  
The self-employed candidates will be provided business incubation in the form of hand holding 
during the initial period of enterprise/business establishment.  
Apprenticeship assistance including stipend (through a fund created under TEVTA with 20% 
contributions from participating private entities, in collaboration with KP-TEVTA for those who 
candidates who wish to pursue remunerative employment. 
6. 
Eligibility Criteria for VOETO 
196. 
The eligibility criteria for the VOETO will be as follows;  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Social  mobilisation  and  technical  and  vocational  skills  development  as  core  business  and 
experience  in  implementing  gender  and  youth  sensitive  participatory  rural  development 
programmes. 
Should have a minimum of five years’ experience of delivering vocational training and in house 
capacity for providing services in the project area/region.   
Previous experience of working with the government and/or on donor funded projects and 
programme.   
Shall have women staff on its team in order to gain the confidence of women trainees and 
ensure the provision of training at local level in an environment which are appropriate, safe 
and secure for women trainees. 
Previous experience and presence in the programme area and existing social capital 
Registration under relevant laws of the country. 
Previous three-year corporate audit reports  
28 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
Availability of appropriate number of permanent management and technical staff at HQ and 
in the field. 
Should have the capacity to develop an MIS for monitoring and evaluation of the Vocational 
Training Programme.   
Should have the ability to critically evaluate its training and provide regular progress reports 
and information on both output and outcome indicators.  
Should be able to institute a system which provides feedback from graduates on the overall 
impact of the training on employability, productivity and increase in incomes.  
7. 
Contracting and Reporting 
197. 
The  PMU  will  work  out  modalities  with  KP-TEVTA  for  training  to  the  selected  candidates  by  the 
project/VOETO through the committed leverage fund of the government on-going programmes and placement 
of successful candidates for apprenticeships. In this regards all role responsibilities and agreed actions will be 
documented in the form of a MOU. Similarly, PMU will also enter into agreement with private banks for provision 
of low-cost loan from the federal government youth enterprise development programme.  
198. 
PMU  will  follow  for  competitive  process  following  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  for  engagement  of 
services of 5 regional VOETOs with competency and capacity in providing vocational skills training. Initially a 3 
year Performance based contracts will be offered which could be renewed based on performance and assessed 
/confirmed every year. An indicative Terms of Reference for VOETO implementing the vocational Employment 
Promotion subcomponent is given in Annexure 12. 
199. 
effectiveness and economic and social benefits of the vocational skill development programme. 
The  PMU  will  also  contract  a  third-party  random  survey  in  mid-project  to  assess  the  relevance, 
D. 
Exist and Sustainability Strategy 
1. 
Component-1 Agri-business Development 
200. 
The specific strategy for successful exit under component 1 revolves around 3 main elements namely 
1) establishment/restructure of autonomous new farming service centers (NFCS) 2) establishment of self-sustain 
4P partnerships and 3) gradual transformation of newly established/restructured FPOs. All three (3) elements 
are interlinked and the success of the exit strategy depends on the coherence and interdependence between 
each element during subsequent implementation. 
201. 
Under first element, the establishment/restructure of autonomous NFSCs, it’s a pre-requisite that the 
established NFSCs would run as independent entities with a professional management. Ideally, the NFSCs should 
run as private sector entities and the role of PMU is to empower the established entities as much as possible to 
develop  a  self-functional  structure  (Administration,  finance  and  operation)  to  build  greater  autonomy. 
Therefore, the recruitment of professional staff is key for the development of such autonomous structure as 
NFSC  will  play  an 
inputs/services  and  market 
linkages/coordination etc. It’s expected that NFSCs to handle all transactions with respective FPOs through bank 
accounts which would develop a healthy credit history with banks/financial institutes. Such mechanism would 
enable them to obtain financial services through banks even after the project period which highlights the gradual 
transformation  in  to  formal  banking  sector.  Further,  PMU  would  encourage  those  individuals  whom  have 
completed the training under component 2 (Skill development & employment promotion) to take up specific 
roles under NFSCs & FPOs to create more ownership and loyalty towards such roles.  
in  procurement  &  delivery  of  quality 
integral  role 
202. 
Similarly,  FPOs  would  be  strengthened  through  a  capacity  development  program  to  ensure  those 
entities would possess greater bargaining power and to perform better under business related partnerships or 
even  4Ps.  As  in  the  case  of  NFSCs,  the  established  FPOs  will  develop  a  strong  credit  history  with  financial 
institutes as they continue to conduct transactions with NFSCs and prospected buyers which would enable them 
to access formal lending facilities upon completion of the project. In addition, the FPOs will be able to develop 
a substantial revolving fund within the entity itself by expanding their member base and to continue the lending 
operation  as  multi-purpose  cooperatives.  Moreover,  PMU  would  assist  FPOs  to  develop  their  own 
identity/brand  through  the  proposed  training  support  by  service  providers  which  would  create  strong 
presence/demand in respective markets.  
29 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
203. 
Finally, the establishment of 4Ps will promote establishment of rural infrastructure (Collection centers, 
dryers  etc.)  in  villages  as  private  sector  may  invest  in  such  facilities  to  streamline  their  supply/value  chain 
activities.  PMU  would  encourage  FPOs  or  even  NFSCs  to  involve  in  management  of  such  facilities  with  the 
support  of  private  sector  promoters  on  a  commission/equity  based  sustainable  models.  This  would  enable 
technology transfer from private sector to grass root levels in a healthy manner. In addition, it’s expected that 
farmers, FPOs and NFSCs would develop greater understanding during the implementation of those 4Ps which 
would  develop  loyalty  and  trust  among  respective  partners  to  continue  the  partnership  even  after  project 
period.  Further,  the  strategy  promotes  continuous  engagement  in  provincial  government  support  through 
extension/R&D  activities  where  partners  will  be  able  to  access  laboratory  facilities,  new  germplasms  on  a 
continuous basis through memorandum of understanding (MOU) between NFSCs/4P promoters which would 
run even after the project period.  
2. 
Skills Development and Employment Promotion 
204. 
The project seeks to transform KP TEVTA into a dyanimc technical and vocational education providers 
that  reads  market  trends  and  has  capacity  to  design  and  deliver  such  courses  effectively.  The  project  will 
enhance Institutional capacity at KP TEVTA to conduct labour market assessment and design and deliver such 
courses promptly.  The project would train about 25,000 people for new jobs at new entities i.e. PFOs, 4Ps, and 
FSCs that would continue requiring these people beyond the project’s life. 
205. 
All  technical  and  vocational  trainings  shall  be  based  on  labour  supply  gaps  and  where  viable—
complemented with start-up capital to enable trainees to have sustainable self-employment. Further, trainees 
shall be linked with government’s low-cost microcredit programs i.e. Kamyab Jawan Program to facilitate further 
business  development/expansion  as  appropriate.  Fresh  graduates  shall  be  facilitated  to  get  internships  with 
potential employers under contracts which would require the latter to offer regular jobs upon the completion 
of the internships. Most fresh graduates don’t get jobs because their degrees don’t prepare them for the job 
market.  The internship opportunity would address this gap. The government is  committed to replicating this 
internships-led-sustainable-job-creation model once it shows impact.    
206. 
All  MOUs/contracts  with  partner  organizations  shall  establish  requirements  for  service  providers  to 
facilitate  trainees  in  finding  jobs  after  training.  Co-financing  requirement  under  contract  with  potential 
employers would ensure that most internees continue working for the employers where they are placed.   
3. 
Project Management and Policy Support 
207. 
The  project  design  elaborates  on  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  various  stakeholders;  focuses  on 
institutional reforms and strengthening; and enhancing partner government department’s capacity. The policy 
and  institutional  development 
initiatives  of  the  project  are  not  only  aimed  at  ensuring  successful 
implementation  and  exit  strategy  of  the  project  but  also  to  mainstream  and  institutionalise  the  project 
approaches and models in the functioning of public sector institutions for  scaling up and to adapt to market 
realities for taking take advantage of the 3 unique and diverse agro-climatic conditions of the province which 
provides great potential for agriculture development and the youth bulge, on long term sustainable basis. 
i. 
Farm Services Centres: The existing and new Farm Services Centres (established under the project) currently 
under the Department of Agriculture will be reformed to become private companies with FPO or individual 
farmers as shareholders and managed by professionally recruited staff instead of the field staff of the DOA. 
The reform will help the FSCs to increase outreach and become more responsive to the needs of the farmers 
in  terms  of  goods  and  services  like  input  supply,  farm  machinery,  technical  services  and  support  and 
marketing etc. 
ii.  Agriculture  Extension:  To  enable the  Extension  Directorate of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  to  support 
project implantation and reorientation for demand-based service delivery in an efficient manner, support 
will be provided to strengthen its capacitates through provision of equipment, training and mobility of staff. 
A special programme of internship will also be developed to beef up the field level capacity of the MOA and 
provided a first experience to young graduated. 
iii.  Agriculture  Research:  The  agriculture  research  and  development  system  has  not  kept  pace  with  the 
changing  market  scenarios  and  climate  change  and  require  developing  capability  and  capacity.  The 
Department  of  Agriculture  Research  will  be  assisted  to  improve  production  of  quality  seed  and  plant 
material  and  strengthen  the  capacity  for  seed  certification  and  production  certification  particularly  for 
30 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iv. 
v. 
export.  Assistance  will  also  be  provided  for  rehabilitation  and  privatisation  of  tissue  culture  labs, 
importation of new germplasm and review of the 2014 seeds act and production of all necessary papers to 
make more operational and amend this act. 
Integration of ICT4D: The project will provide assistance in integrating ICT4D specifically on digital business 
plan development for PFOs (AgriPlan - developed by IFAD to formulate, edit, evaluate, approve and monitor 
business plans for producers’ organisations), e-commerce, digital money and e-advisory. Digital systems 
may also be used to develop a credit history/ scoring of farmers under the PFOs. Institutional support will 
be provided in these respects on cost-recovery and sustainable manner. 
Technical and Vocational Training: The Skills development and Employment Promotion component builds 
mainly on the existing public and non-government organizations’ capacities of TVET and consolidate them 
where  required,  rather  than  creating  new,  programme-driven  structures.  This  is  aimed  at  supporting 
sustainability and ensuring that project innovations will be mainstreamed into the province institutional 
framework,  replicated  and  scaled  up.  Additionally,  since  the  Skills  development  and  Employment 
Promotion component will be financed through the government contributions in the form of leveraging 
existing TVET programmes, annual development programmes and implemented mostly by KP-TEVTA, the 
hand  on  experience  of  developing  and  implementation  of  innovative  models  addressing  challenges 
experienced by young people in the rural economy, will also contribute to the present and future youth 
skills development programme effectiveness,  institutional efficiencies, and scaling up, and will influence 
policies and strategies for youth development. 
vi.  Nutrition.  Special  attention  will  be  made  to  supporting  the  provincial  government  in  developing  a 
comprehensive nutrition and food security policy and action plan. Among other things, the policy and action 
plans  shall  set  out  guidelines  related  to  selection  of  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains,  creating  nutrition 
related awareness, and promoting nutrition sensitive labelling and packing thus impacting both producers 
and consumers. At the start-up phase, the districts will be formally mapped and consequently, based on 
FAO and WFP existing programme, KP-RETP will adjust and complement these activities in order to reach 
the objective described in the log-frame. This exercise will be repeated annually and assessed at MTR and 
before completion date.   
vii.  Agriculture Marketing System: The Provincial government also requested assistance for the review of the 
Agriculture Marketing System and the formulation of the regulatory and operational framework, necessary 
to  provide  for  dynamic,  growth-oriented  and  efficient  agriculture  markets  that  incentivize  growers  and 
ensure a better deal for consumers.  
viii.  Cooperative Societies Ordinance: Assistance will be provided for the review and necessary amendments in 
the  existing  Cooperative  Societies  Ordinance  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  PFOs  as  per  the  project 
approach and their long term institutional sustainability and profitability.  
E. 
SECAP Compliance 
208. 
KP-RETP  focuses  on  agribusiness  development  involving  550  PFOs,  20  Producer  Private  Public 
Partnerships (4Ps) and 35 FSCs under Component-1 to be implemented with support from provincial Agriculture 
(Research and Extension) Department. Component 2 on economic graduation and skill development will create 
about 60,000 employment opportunities in the province. These skills will include technical, financial, managerial 
or  business  skills  for  25 000  trainees  as  per  market  requirements  for  the  sustainability  of  Component  1. 
Component 3 will look after project management, policy and institutional support. 
209. 
The project does not include activities of size or scale that would have significant negative social and 
environmental impacts rather, there will be positive impacts on the livelihoods and economic wellbeing of the 
community.  PFOs  members  will  also  include  poor  and  women  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  are  shared  and 
livelihoods are improved. Moreover, the interventions do not involve any infrastructure or civil works to warrant 
any economic displacement or resettlement of the communities. No diverse impact is foreseen on the flora and 
fauna and biodiversity and, therefore, the social and environmental risk assessment suggests the project to be 
of Category B. 
210. 
The  BMPs/SPs  will  be  developing  business  plans  for  PFOs  in  consultation  with  selected  farmers’ 
representatives after a thorough diagnostic study for identifying potential interventions, market assessment and 
skills requirement. These business plans will be developed with proper projections on various aspects for five 
31 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
years and will be implemented and managed by professional managers recruited on competitive basis. Technical 
viability, skills and technology requirements of hardcore activities (e.g. processing plants, drying and packaging 
facilities) proposed under the business plan will be assessed for SECAP assessment and compliance. Mitigation 
measures as provided in ESMP will be implemented to avoid or minimize any social and environmental impacts. 
211. 
Climate  risk.  The  project  areas  exposure  to  climate  change  is  high  to  substantial  but  the  nature  of 
interventions is such that its impact on beneficiaries, targeted areas, ecosystem and community resilience will 
not be very significant and, therefore, the Climate Risk Category is assessed as Moderate. Any proposed future 
interventions by PFOs and 4Ps will be subject to screening and will be implemented under appropriate guidelines 
and SOPs.  
212. 
To  guide  the  project  teams—at  PMU/RCUs  as  well  in  BMPs/SPs  levels,  this  document  includes  an 
Environment  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP).    The  ESMP  indicates  main  themes  (i.e.  mobilization  of 
farmers  into  PFOs),  social/environment/climate  risks,  and  mitigation  actions  that  could  be  taken.  The 
Environmental  and  Climate  Change  Specialist  in  PMU  will  look  after  and  monitor  SECAP  related  compliance 
under the project. The Specialist will check and assess every relevant activity in the business plan and prepare a 
report recommending or rejecting the proposed intervention with proper justification and reasoning. Regular 
monitoring of activities with physical visits and feedback from regional offices should be carried out with proper 
record and report to be summarized in the project progress reports including compliance status, challenges and 
issues. Detailed guidance for PMU/RCUs/BMPs/SPs etc. is  provided in Annexure-13. 
32 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
V. 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
A. 
General 
213. 
The project shall develop standard employment contract for each category of personnel so as to ensure 
that all personnel are recruited on identical terms and that employment conditions are adequate to meet the 
requirements of the project. The project will hire the below categories of personnel: 
 
 
 
 
Project personnel who are core members of the PMU team; this includes: professional, operations and 
support staff. 
Temporary  professionals  and  support  staff  hired  locally  to  replace  an  absent  staff,  to  cater  for  a 
temporary increase in workload, or to fill a vacant post temporarily. 
Individual consultants hired nationally or internationally to carry out a specific short-term assignment. 
Internship  contract  offered  to  university  graduates  or  entry  level  job  seekers  for  initially  3  months 
extendable  for  3-6  months  with  stipend.  Unpaid  internship  also  offered  to  students  coming  from  an 
academic setting who serve as intern for 6-8 weeks as part of their degree Programme.  
214. 
The  recruitment  of  senior  staff  within  the  project  will  be  carried  out  with  technical  assistance  (as 
needed) and oversight of IFAD. At the start of the project, P&DD shall handle the recruitment of the core project 
staff.  Once the senior personnel recruited, the PMU is in charge of staff recruitment and contract administration. 
Generally, the recruitment of senior staff within the project personnel is carried out with technical assistance 
(as needed) and oversight by IFAD. 
215. 
The recruitment and personnel administration differ according to the category of personnel and the 
type of contract used. However, all personnel of the same category benefit from the same treatment. Project 
staff are normally subject to the Pakistan labor laws. However, wherever rules or procedures contained in the 
financing agreement and/or in the present manual are in contradiction or incompatible with the national labor 
laws, the financing agreement and/or labor laws of the land shall prevail. 
B. 
Preparation for recruitment 
216. 
The  identification  and  selection  of  candidates  must  be  carried  out  in  an  objective  and  transparent 
manner,  using  a  competitive  process  so  as  to  identify  and  select  the  candidate  best  qualified  to  fulfill  the 
function. It is therefore critical that the personnel selection and recruitment process be fully documented. 
217. 
Terms of reference, (ToR) or job descriptions are required prior to advertising any vacancy for the KP-
RETP Project. The supervisor/section head at PMU is responsible for preparing the ToR or job descriptions for 
the  personnel  required.    These  documents  are  used  for  describing  the  work  that  will  be  performed  by  the 
individual hired; they also provide the basis for the identification of potential candidates as well as the necessary 
information for determining the level of the functions and the appropriate remuneration. Once the position is 
filled, the ToR or job description also provides the basis for supervising and evaluating the performance of the 
incumbent’s work.  
218. 
The Job Description (JD) for key positions shall include following information: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Functional title of the position 
Title of the supervisor(s) 
Duty station(s) 
Classified level of the post; 
A detailed description of the tasks/functions/work to be accomplished; 
Indication of staff to be supervised by the incumbent (if any). 
33 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
C. 
Advertisement & Selection  
219. 
together by the DFA and the MAHR from the TOR/job description and containing: 
The second step in the selection process is the publication of the vacancy announcement (VA), prepared 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The reference number of the vacancy announcement (sequential numbering);  
A short description of the Programme, including information on the IFAD and the GoP;  
The title of the post, duty station, type and duration of contract. 
A summary of the duties and responsibilities of the function; 
The minimum experience and qualifications (both academic and professional) required for the post 
A clear distinction shall be made between “minimum requirements”, the absence of which would lead 
to automatic disqualification of the applicant,  
The list of documents to submit as part of the application (CV, cover letter, copies of diplomas 
A contact person and address for the submission of application closing date for applications; 
220. 
Job notice should be widely advertised in the print media and on the website of the project/provincial 
government. A committee should be constituted for review of application, short-listing and recommending best 
candidate for recruitment against the available position. The process should be properly documented. IFAD’s No 
Objection should be sought invariably for all key positions before initiating recruitment and issuing offer letters. 
D. 
Recruitment of individual consultant/consulting firms 
221. 
The recruitment of individual consultants/consulting firms shall be subject to the procedures and prior 
review of IFAD as spelled out in the financing agreement and the Letter to the Borrower. Details are provided in 
the  project  Procurement  Manual  for  recruitment  of  project  staff  and  consultants/consulting  firms  and 
procurement of goods and services under the project.  
E. 
Remuneration Package 
222. 
The level of a function is determined on the basis of an evaluation of the complexity of the tasks, the 
level of responsibility, and the degree of expertise required to perform the job. The level of remuneration of the 
incumbent is determined based on the level of the function and the relevant experience and qualification of the 
individual.  
223. 
The remuneration in the salary scales are given in the cost tabs (expressed as gross salaries that are 
inclusive  of  income  taxes  and  Employee’s  Old-age  Benefits  Institute-EOBI  withholdings).  All  adjustments  or 
increases in salary on annual basis shall be proposed by PMU for IFAD no objection, afterwards to be submitted 
for  PSC  approval.  In  case  of  difference  in  proposed  salary  increment,  decision  of  PSC  shall  prevail.  Salary 
increment is separate from performance bonus based on appraisal. If IFAD and PSC approve increment, it should 
be across-the-board due to inflation. The salary of project staff/consultants shall be subject to annual review as 
part of annual performance evaluation of staff/consultants. During Mid-Term Review, salaries of all staff would 
be subject to revision. All salaries are payable in Pakistani rupees.   
224. 
According  to  national  legislation,  salaries  in  Pakistan  are  subject  to  deductions  for  EOBI  (employee 
contribution) and income tax. The Programme makes these deductions at source. The employer contribution on 
EOBI is paid from Programme funds. All full time Programme staff below the age of sixty must be registered with 
the EOBI institute.  
225. 
Project staff are entitled to 24 working days of annual leave per year, not convertible in cash (except 
upon contract termination). On contract termination a maximum of thirty 30 days annual leave only shall be 
paid in cash; any leave balance above 30 days is lost. 
226. 
All Programme Personnel are entitled to life insurance coverage and Health Insurance (covering also 
their spouse (s) and children below age of 18 years) upon entry on duty and until contract termination. Health 
insurance only provides coverage for hospitalization costs. 
34 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
F. 
Performance Evaluation  
227. 
Performance  evaluation  of  project  staff/consultants  should  be  based  on  the  job  descriptions.  The 
process  must  also  serve  to  appreciate  the  staff’s  professional  qualities,  competence,  and  productivity,  work 
attitude (team spirit, relationship with colleagues and partners, etc.) and leadership skills (creativity, sense of 
initiative, supervisory skills, etc.). The evaluation should consider the following six (6) parameters:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Evaluation by the direct supervisor based on the objectives set at the beginning of the year, and the 
main  duties  and  responsibilities  mentioned  in  the  TOR,  as  well  as  complementary  evaluation  if 
applicable;   
Self-evaluation  based  on  the  objectives,  with  an  indication  of  constraints  and  difficulties  faced 
during the year, and areas to be improved;  
Overall score and recommendations by the direct supervisor (and complementary evaluator, if any) 
on the renewal of the staff’s contract. This section may include comments from the staff, if any;  
Objectives  for  the coming  year (based  on  the  AWPB and staff  TORs) in  order  of  priority,  with a 
summary of tasks to carry out, expected results and timing for implementation;   
Training & development plan based on results of the evaluation (if needed);  
Final comments and recommendation by the evaluator for contract renewal, salary increase, etc.   
228. 
The  evaluation  is  discussed  during  a  meeting  between  the  staff  and  his/her  direct  supervisor.  The 
performance evaluation form must then be signed by the staff member, the supervisor and,  if  applicable,  the 
complementary evaluator. In case of disagreement, the staff member may write down his/her comments on the 
form before signing it.  
G. 
Renewal of Contracts  
229. 
Employment contracts of project staff shall be subject to annual performance evaluation and renewal.  
All decisions  of  renewal/changes in  terms of  contracts  shall require  subject to  IFAD’s No  Objection  after  the 
approval of the PSC.  
H. 
Leave Policy 
230. 
The project staff is entitled to up to 12 days of casual leave subject to prior notice and approval by his 
or her supervisor. The casual leave shall be admissible only in extra-ordinary circumstances such as death and/or 
serious  medical  condition of the employee’s spouse, child and parent. PMU shall follow the normal rules and 
procedures of leave applicable to provincial government employees. 
I. 
Procurement Management  
231. 
The  main  purpose  of  this  procurement  manual  is  to  enable  Rural  Employment  and  Agribusiness 
PromotionKhyber Pakhtunkhwa KP-RETP implement procurement activities in accordance with the guidelines of 
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (KP-PPRA)5 Rules and Regulations 2014/KP-
PPRA and 6IFAD Procurement Guidelines and IFAD “Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption7 in activities and 
operations”. 
232. 
 The  module describes  the  rules  and procedures  applicable to the  procurement of goods, works and 
services  for  KP-RETP.  Procurement  financed  from  IFAD  funds  shall  only  be  carried  out  during  the  Project 
implementation  period,  i.e.  from  project  effectiveness  to  project  completion.  The  applicable  procurement 
modalities will be defined in the Financing Agreement and Letter to the Borrower. This manual describes the 
modalities and procedures to be used for implementation of the Project. It also provides a comprehensive set 
of  guidelines,  tools  and  templates/formats,  to  facilitate  project  implementation  and  management  from 
inception through to closing. It covers all procurement aspects i.e. procurement planning to contract awards, 
5 http://www.kppra.gov.pk/kppra/legal_docs?docid=rules  
6 https://www.ifad.org/en/project-procurement 
7 www.ifad.org/anticorruption_policy 
35 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
contract management & monitoring, selection of project staffing and their responsibilities. Therefore, it requires 
compliance on the part of project management and staff.  
233. 
The  project  provides  for  a  qualified  and  experienced  team  of  Procurement  Specialist,  and  Contract 
Management Officer to lead the procurement function. In addition to these permanent positions, the project 
design envisages that partners/service providers—that will be engaged to support implementation shall have a 
strong tehnical capacity for procurement and financial management.  This is critical since these partners will use 
IFAD’s funds and therefore they must comply with the applicable fiduciary requirements. PMU and RCUs  will 
ensure effective facilitation, oversight and monitoring of these partner organizations.  
J. 
Principles of Procurement 
234. 
The PMU must comply with the following principles:  
1. 
Ethics 
235. 
The guiding principles of ethical behavior are impartiality, independence and integrity. No person or 
entity  shall use  his/her/  its  authority,  position  or  office  for  personal  gain,  which  will  be  defined  as  soliciting, 
accepting or otherwise benefiting from anything of material value, in any form, either in person or indirectly 
through close relatives or associates, as a result of procurement financed by IFAD. 
236. 
The Project Management Unit (PMU) staff have a duty to: 
1.  Maintain the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all relationships; 
2.  Develop the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
3.  Maximize the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are responsible for the purposes for 
which these funds and resources were provided to the Project;  
4.  Comply  with  both  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Financing  Agreement,  the  laws  and  regulations  of 
Government of Pakistan/Balochistan, accepted professional ethics and contractual obligations; 
5.  Declare  any  personal  interest  that  may  affect,  or  might  reasonably  be  deemed  by  others  to  affect, 
impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of interest). In a situation of this nature, the 
official concerned will not participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and  
6.  Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not uses such information for 
personal  gain  or  for  the  unfair  benefit  of  any  bidder,  supplier  or  contractor.  Information  given  in  the 
course of their duties shall be true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
7.  Accountability.  PMU  is  accountable  to  IFAD  for  all  actions  and  decisions  in  relation  to  Project-funded 
procurement. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring that: 
a)  The funds are used solely for the purpose for which they were provided; and 
b)  Procurement is undertaken in accordance with this Module. 
2. 
Competition 
237. 
Full, fair and legitimate competition among eligible suppliers and contractors is the foundation on which 
project-funded  procurement  activities  will  be  based.  The  most  common  method  of  seeking  competition  is 
through a competitive bidding process, and, in this regard, KP-RETP specifies that all goods, works and services 
will  be  obtained  through  an  agreed  procurement  process  involving  at  least  three  separate  suppliers  or 
contractors whose business is directly related to the procurement being undertaken. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The  project  will  therefore  promote  genuine  competition  at  every  opportunity  and  will  provide 
evidence of: 
fair and genuine competition in the compilation of shortlists and in the solicitation of bids; and 
the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process 
36 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iv. 
Single sourcing and direct contracting do not provide the elements of competition required by IFAD. 
Only in exceptional circumstances will these approaches be considered and approved in procurement 
plans agreed with IFAD. 
v.  Notwithstanding  the  above,  PMU  recognizes  that  it  is  neither  practical  nor  efficient  to  advertise 
internationally  for  low-value  contracts  for  goods,  works  or  services,  and  the  degree  to  which  the 
principle of competition is required for each procurement activity will be outlined in the procurement 
method approved by IFAD within the approved procurement plan for each year. 
3. 
Fairness 
238. 
PMU  expectation  is  that  Project-funded  procurement  will  be  open  to  as  many  eligible  bidders  as  is 
practicable in order to meet the requirements of competition. KP-RETP will ensure that all prospective bidders 
are: 
i.  Managed  with  a  consistent  approach  and  application  of  laws,  regulations  and  requirements  in 
respect of the procurement process; 
ii.  Offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete offered a level playing field on which to 
genuinely compete; and 
iii. 
iv. 
Treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality and equal opportunity 
can be demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, the Project will: 
v.  Not tolerate exclusion of, discrimination, bias or prejudice against, or favoritism or inequality towards 
any potential supplier or contractor, either directly or indirectly through manipulation of any part of 
the procurement process, including, but not limited to, the preparation of technical specifications, 
evaluation  criteria  or  bidding  requirements;  where  any  such  activity  is  suspected  or  proven,  PMU 
reserves the right to take any preventative, corrective or punitive action it considers appropriate;  
vi. 
Seek to address, any impositions that may deter or impinge on the attainment of fairness within the 
procurement process. 
4. 
Transparency 
239. 
Because a lack of transparency can be perceived as an attempt to withhold information, which in turn 
may make the fairness and integrity of the procurement process suspect, the Project will ensure the highest 
degree  of  transparency  and  openness  within  the  procurement  processes  it  undertakes.  Transparency  within 
procurement  relates  to  disclosing,  in  the  public  domain,  information  for  parties  involved,  interested  in  or 
affected by the process, including but not limited to information on: 
i. 
the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
ii.  where to access relevant data; 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
contract award data; and 
appeal procedures 
vii.  Modes of communication/publication of such information will vary depending on the nature of the 
data but will generally be through existing means of public information (e.g. government websites, 
public  notice  boards  or  media)  or  in  the  procurement  documentation  relevant  to  an  individual 
procurement activity (e.g. bid notices and bidding documents). The Project will act openly, predictably 
and in accordance with the information provided. 
240. 
Efficiency,  Effectiveness  and  Economy.  KP-RETP  will  demonstrate  efficiency  and  economy  in 
undertaking  Project-related  procurement,  to  avoid  undue  implementation  delays  and  to  achieve  value  for 
money. Procurement will be well organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, quality and timeliness, 
and at the optimum price, in accordance with the appropriate guidelines, principles and regulations. Processes 
37 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
will  be  proportionate  to  the  procurement  activity,  so  that  the  overall  cost  of  conducting  the  procurement 
process is minimized and tailored to the size of the budget for the activity being undertaken, while upholding 
the guiding principles. Efficiencies may be obtained through a combination of methods. For example, a strategic 
approach can be taken to planning, combining and conducting procurement activities so as to minimize loss of 
time and resources. 
241. 
procurement activities through the optimum combination of several factors, including: 
Value for Money: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for money for all Project 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for the task and are not 
over specified; 
ensuring  that  the  goods,  works  or  services  are  contracted  on  the  best  possible  terms,  taking  into 
account their expected life cycle; and 
ensuring  that  the  provider/supplier  of  the  goods,  works  or  services  is  qualified,  legally  entitled  and 
competent to execute the contract.  
Best  value  does not necessarily  mean  the  lowest initial  price option, but rather  represents  the  best 
return  on  investment,  taking  into  consideration:  the  unique  and  specific  circumstances  of  each 
procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome 
of the contract in meeting its original objectives. 
242. 
Good  Governance  and  Accountability  Policies.  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Anti-Corruption 
Policy, will be adapted to this Project through the Financing Agreement, require zero tolerance to corrupt and 
fraudulent practices. Therefore, the procurement process also requires a strict adherence to KP-PPRA/PPRA and 
IFAD Guidelines and Policy. 
243. 
Prohibited Practices. The Borrower (including the all-implementation parties, and oversight agencies), 
as well as bidders, potential bidders, suppliers, contractors and consultants financed through the proceeds of 
this project, shall observe the highest standard of ethics during the selection and execution of such contracts.  
244. 
implementation: 
Pursuant  to  this  policy,  the  following  provisions  shall  be  applied  throughout  the  project 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
The Borrower and IFAD will reject a proposal for award if it determines that the bidder or consultant 
recommended for award, or any of its personnel. Or its agents, or its sub-consultants, subcontractors, 
service  providers,  suppliers  and/or  their  employees  has  directly  or  indirectly  engaged  in  corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question; 
IFAD  will  declare  misprocurement  and  cancel  the  portion  of  the  loan  allocated  to  the  contract  if  it 
determines  at  any  time  that  representatives  of  the  borrower  or  of  a  recipient  of  any  part  of  the 
proceeds of the loan engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive practices during 
the procurement  or  implementation  of  the contract in  question without  the borrower  having taken 
timely  and  appropriate  action  satisfactory  to  the  DP  to  address  such  practices  when  they  occur, 
including failing to inform the DP in a timely manner at the time they knew of the practices. 
IFAD will declare a consultant or firm ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, to be 
awarded  a  future  IFAD  financed  contract  if  it  at  any  time  determines  that  the  bidder,  supplier, 
contractor,  service  provider  or  consultant  has  engaged  in  corrupt,  fraudulent,  coercive,  collusive  or 
obstructive practices in competing for, or in executing, an IFAD-financed contract; and 
All contracts financed out of the proceeds of KP-RETP will have a provision requiring supplier, contractor 
or consultants to permit both the Borrower and IFAD to jointly or separately inspect their accounts and 
records relating to the performance of the contract and to have them audited by auditors appointed 
by the Borrower and/or IFAD. 
All staff involved in the procurement process has a duty to report to the Project Director and IFAD (i.e. 
through  its  Country  Director/  Country  Program  Manager)  for  any  suspected  instances  of  fraud, 
corruption and collusive or coercive practices when identified.  
In the case of collusive behavior, if the evidence suggests that all or some of the bidders or consultants 
are involved, the evidence should be jointly reviewed by the Project Director and the representative of 
38 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
P&DD, GoKP, and if necessary, the procurement process is cancelled, and all of the involved firms or 
individuals are sanctioned which could be up to the debarment. If the procurement is still in process, 
then the procurement must be cancelled and reinitiated only after the matters have been addressed 
properly.  
245. 
Conflicts-of-Interest. A firm/entity/individual participating in a procurement process under the KP-RETP 
shall  not  have  a  conflict-of-interest.  Any  firm/entity/individuals  found  to  have  a  conflict-of-interest  shall  be 
ineligible for award of a contract. 
246. 
A conflict-of-interest is a situation in which a party has interests that could improperly influence that 
party’s performance of official duties or responsibilities, contractual obligations, or compliance with applicable 
laws and regulations, and that such conflict of interest is not acceptable under the KP-RETP. The Borrower will 
take appropriate actions to manage such conflicts-of-interest which may include rejecting a proposal for award 
if it determines that a conflicts-of-interest has flawed the integrity of any procurement process. A firm shall be 
considered to have a conflicts-of-interest in a procurement process if:  
(a)  such firm is providing goods, works, or non-consulting services resulting from or directly related to 
consulting  services  for  the  preparation  or  implementation  of  a  project  that  it  provided  or  were 
provided by any affiliate that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common 
control with that firm.; or 
(b)  such firm submits more than one bid, either individually or as a joint venture partner in another 
bid, except for permitted alternative bids. This will result in the disqualification of all bids in which 
the Bidder is involved; or  
(c)  such firm (including its personnel) has a close business or family relationship with a professional 
staff of the Borrower (or of the project implementing agency, or of a recipient of a part of the loan) 
who:  (i)  are  directly  or  indirectly  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  bidding  documents  or 
specifications of the contract, and/or the bid evaluation process of such contract; or (ii) would be 
involved in the implementation or supervision of such contract unless the conflict stemming from 
such relationship has been resolved acceptable to IFAD throughout the procurement process and 
execution of the contract; or 
(d)  such firm does not comply with any other conflicts-of-interest situation as specified in the Bidding 
Documents relevant to the specific procurement process. 
247. 
It is the duty of all project staff and any other public employee directly or indirectly involved with the 
procurement  process  and  particularly  the  preparation  of  bidding  documents,  bid  evaluation,  contract 
negotiations,  contract  management  and  payments  to  avoid  any  potential  conflicts-of-interest.  A  conflicts-of-
interest arises  when  the  individual has a  direct or  indirect relationship  with  a  bidder, consultant,  contractor, 
service provider or supplier.  
In the event that a project staff or a member of the procurement committee or an employee who 
is directly involved with the procurement process feels that there is the potential for a conflicts-of-
interest  they  shall  declare  it  to  the  procurement  committee  and  remove  themselves  from  the 
procurement process. 
  Audit Arrangements. The audits (both internal and external) under this Project will be performed 
by the Auditor General of Pakistan or separate audit firms, which will be hired by PMU. In addition, 
IFAD will conduct its regular annual supervisions to review the implementation progress, including 
reviewing  the  procurement  aspect.  Accordingly,  it  is  important  that  PMU  maintains  contract 
registers as well as the documentation pertaining to procurement in the project files. 
  Standard-of-Business  Ethics.  All  project  staff  and  consultants  involved  in  procurement  activities 
covered by this Manual shall observe the Code-of-Business Ethics as outlined below: 
a)  No  individual  shall  use  his/her  authority  or  office  for  personal  gain.  Personal  gain  includes 
accepting  or  requesting  anything  of  material  value  from  bidders,  prospective  bidders  or 
suppliers for the individual, his or her spouse, parents, children or other close relatives, or for 
other persons from whom the individual might gain direct or indirect benefit of the gift. 
b)  An individual shall seek to maintain and enhance the reputation of the Government by: 
39 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
c)  Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all relationships both inside and 
outside the Entity in which he works; 
d)  Developing the highest standards of professional competence; and 
e)  Using  funds  and  other  resources  for  which  he/she  is  responsible  to  provide  the  maximum 
benefit to the Government 
  Declare  Conflict-of-Interest.  An  individual  shall  declare  any  personal  interest  that  may  affect  or 
might reasonably be deemed by others to affect impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties. 
  Disclosure  of  personal  relationships.  an  individual  shall  declare  any  relationship  with  a  bidder, 
supplier,  contractor,  service provider  or  consultant and shall  take  no  part  in either  the  decision-
making process or the implementation of any contract where such a relationship exists. A personal 
relationship is defined as consanguinity or affinity up to the third civil degree. 
  Confidentiality  and  Accuracy  of  Information.  An  individual  shall  respect  the  confidentiality  of 
information gained in the course of duty and shall not use such information for personal gain or for 
the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier, contractor, or consultant. 
Information given by an individual in the course of their duty shall be true, fair and not designed to 
mislead. 
  Competition. All bidders, suppliers, contractors, and consultants shall be treated with fairness and 
impartiality and avoid any business arrangement that might prevent the effective operation of fair 
competition. 
  Business Gifts. No business gifts will be accepted from current or potential Government suppliers 
unless such gifts are of very small intrinsic value (normally below USD 100 equivalent). 
  Hospitality.  An individual shall avoid any business hospitality would be viewed by others as having 
an influence in making a government business decision as a result of accepting that hospitality. 
  Reporting. All individuals have a moral and ethical responsibility to report any unethical conduct by 
a colleague, a bidder or a supplier to their superiors, oversight agencies, IFAD or to the auditors.  
Examples of Unethical Conduct. The following are examples of the type of conduct prohibited by 
this Code of Ethics: 
(a)  Revealing confidential  or  “inside  information”  either  directly or  indirectly to  any  bidder  or 
prospective bidder; 
(b)  Discussing a procurement with any bidder or prospective bidder outside the official rules and 
procedures for conducting procurements; 
(c) 
Favouring  or  discriminating  against  any  bidder,  prospective  bidder  or  consultant  in  the 
Preparing of technical specifications, terms of reference or standards or the evaluation of bids 
and proposals; 
(d)  Destroying,  damaging,  hiding,  removing,  or  improperly  changing  any  formal  procurement 
document; 
(e)  Accepting  or  requesting  money,  travel,  meals,  entertainment,  gifts,  favours,  discounts  or 
anything  of  material  value  from  bidders  or  prospective  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors  or 
consultants; 
(f)  Discussing  or  accepting future  employment  with  a  bidder or  prospective bidder, suppliers, 
contractors or consultants; 
(g)  Requesting any other person to violate the public procurement rules or procedures; 
(h) 
Ignoring evidence that the Code of Ethics has been violated; and 
(i) 
Ignoring illegal or unethical activity by bidders or prospective bidders, suppliers, contractors, 
service providers or consultants, including any offer of personal inducements or rewards or 
otherwise. 
40 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
  Mis-procurement.  Any  procurement  of  goods,  works  or  services  that  is  at  variance  with  the 
provisions of the KP-PPRA/PPRA Regulations, and IFAD Procurement Handbook and Guidelines, will 
be construed as mis-procurement. Proceeds of the IFAD financing will not be used to finance such 
procurement. In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, take other remedial action under the financing 
agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the loan and/or grant account 
by  declaring  it  ineligible.  Even  if  the  contract  was  awarded  following  IFAD’s  “No  Objection” 
statement, the Fund may still declare misprocurement if it concludes that this statement was issued 
on  the  basis  of 
furnished  by  the 
inaccurate  or  misleading 
borrower/recipient, or that the terms and conditions of the contract had been modified without 
IFAD’s approval. 
incomplete, 
information 
  Fraud  and Corruption. It  is government’s policy  to  require that procuring entities (including  any 
beneficiaries of the funds), as well as bidders, suppliers, and contractors and their agents (whether 
declared or not), personnel, subcontractors, sub-consultants, service providers and suppliers under 
government-financed  contracts,  observe  the  highest  standard  of  ethics  during  the  procurement 
and execution of such contracts.  in pursuance of this policy, government: 
(a)  defines, for the purposes of this provision, the terms set forth below as follows: 
(i) 
“corrupt practice” means the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, 
of anything of value to influence the action of a public official in the procurement process 
or in contract execution; 
(ii)   “fraudulent practice” is any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that knowingly 
or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial or other benefit 
or to avoid an obligation; 
(iii)  “collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party; 
(iv)  “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a 
party; 
(v) 
“Obstructive Practices” mean: deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering, or concealing of 
evidence material to the investigation or making false statements to investigators in order 
to  materially  impede  an  IFAD  investigation  into  allegations  of  a  corrupt,  fraudulent, 
coercive, or collusive practice; and/or threatening, harassing, or intimidating any party to 
prevent it from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from 
pursuing the investigation; or acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the IFAD’s 
inspection and audit rights. 
(b) will reject a proposal for award if it determines that the bidder recommended for award has, 
directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive 
practices in competing for the contract in question; 
(c)  will  cancel  the  portion  of  the  loan  allocated  to  a  contract  if  it  determines  at  any  time  that 
representatives  of  the  Government  or  of  a  beneficiary  of  the  loan  engaged  in  corrupt, 
fraudulent,  collusive,  or  coercive  practices  during  the  procurement  or  the  execution  of  that 
contract, without the Government having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to 
IFAD to address such practices when they occur; and 
(d) will sanction a firm or an individual, at any time, in accordance with prevailing IFAD’s sanctions 
procedures, including by publicly declaring such firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely 
or  for  a  stated  period  of  time:(i)  to  be  awarded  a  IFAD-financed  contract;  and  (ii)  to  be  a 
nominated  subcontractor,  consultant,  manufacturer  or  supplier,  or  service  provider  of  an 
otherwise eligible firm being awarded a IFAD-financed contract;  
In further pursuance of this policy, Bidders shall permit the IFAD to inspect any accounts and records 
and other documents relating to the Bid submission and contract performance, and to have them 
audited by auditors appointed by the IFAD. 
41 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
  Dispute Resolution. Where there is a dispute between the KP-RETP and a bidder or contractor, the 
process for dealing with this dispute will be as outlined in the bidding documents, contract and/or 
national legislation, as applicable. In these circumstances IFAD will not be appointed as an arbitrator 
or be asked to appoint an arbitrator. 
IFAD  Monitoring  and  Review.  To  ensure  that  the  procurement  processes  are  carried  out  in 
conformity  with  KP-PPRA/PPRA  and  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  with  the  agreed 
procurement plan, IFAD will review arrangements for procurement of goods, works and services 
proposed by the PMU including: 
a.  Contract packaging; 
b.  Applicable procedures and procurement methods; 
c.  Bidding documentation; 
d.  Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
e.  Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
f.  Draft contracts and contract amendments 
g.  The extent to which these review procedures will be applied to the Project is contained in the 
letter to the Borrower/Recipient. 
Legal Framework. The  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  by  KP-RETP  follows  KP-PPRA 
Rules and Regulations as well as the modalities set out in the Letter to the Borrower and this PIM and 
specified each year in  the  procurement  plans  for  each  individual  procurement.  The below table 
summarizes the procurement modalities and prior review thresholds applicable to the project. 
Table 5: procurement methods allowed for KP-RETP 
GOODS & WORKS 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
SERVICES (FIRMS AND INDIVIDUALS) 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB)  
International Shopping (IS) 
National Shopping (NS) 
Direct Contracting or Direct Procurement 
Procurement from UN/ GoP Agencies 
Procurement with community participation/farmers 
organizations/ 4Ps 
Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) 
Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
Selection based on Consultants’ Qualification (CQQ) 
Selection of Farmer Organizations (SFO) 
Selection of individual consultants (ICS) 
Single-source selection (SSS) 
  Types of Goods, Works and Services. It is anticipated that the following goods, works and services 
will be procured for KP-RETP: 
  Goods  –  Vehicles,  motorcycles,  office  and  IT  equipment,  software,  furniture,  generators, 
supplies, etc. 
  Works – Irrigation infrastructure, Land Development and Farm to Market roads. 
 
Services  -  Audits,  Studies  and  Surveys,  Consultancies  (from  specialized  consulting  firms  or 
individuals), Seminars and Workshops, Technical Assistance, Training and other services. 
  Distribution of Roles: Except for certain small value, the PMU is responsible  for carrying out the 
Project’s  procurement  process.  As  a  procuring  entity  for  KP-RETP,  the  PMU  has  established  a 
procurement unit in charge of, inter alia, procurement planning, handling of the bidding process, 
conducting bid openings and evaluations of bids, and procurement/contract monitoring. 
IFAD-Funded  PMU/RCUs  Staff  Selection:  The  procedure  to  recruit  IFAD-funded  staff  to  join  the 
Project Management Unit/Regional Coordination Units will be the Individual Consultant Selection 
procedure (ICS) described in IFAD Procurement Handbook. This does not apply to staff seconded 
by government. The selection of PMU/RCUs staff or changes to staff shall be coordinated in advance 
with IFAD. All staff selection shall be subject to the No Objection by IFAD. The PMU shall estimate 
the  cost  covering  the  remuneration  for  the  full  remaining  duration  of  the  project  as  per  the 
42 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Financing Agreement and Letter to the Borrower. All staff recruitment shall feature in the relevant 
Procurement Plan.  
  The selection process shall follow the ICS procedure with the following highlights adapted for the 
particular case of selecting PMU/RCUs staff: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Preparation of ToR using IFAD SPD Template – ToR; 
Preparation  of  REOI  using  IFAD  SPD  Template  –  Request  for  Expressions  of  Interest  (REOI) 
Advertisement; 
If interviews with the shortlisted applicants are foreseen to help identify the most qualified 
applicant,  
o 
o 
o 
o 
the interview as well as the related criteria should be explicitly specified in the REOI 
and ToR; this means that the interview requirement must be known in advance and 
announced to the public as well; 
the interview competencies required should be assigned a weight in addition to the 
weights for other qualification criteria;  
competency criteria should be formulated in a clear and objective manner;  
interviews should be based on the same set of competency questions used with all 
candidates; 
o  all  applicants  passing  the  minimum  score  (for  CV  evaluation)  shall  be  invited  for 
o 
o 
o 
interview; 
interviewees should be given sufficient time in advance; 
interviews should be held online in case of obstacles to physical meeting are present; 
In  addition to  competency  questions,  PMU  may  test  interviewees  to  validate  their 
knowledge  and  experience  through  one  or  more  “technical  questions”  which  also 
shall be standardized and common to all interviewees;  
o  PMU  shall  consult  with  IFAD  in  advance  for  setting  up  the  competency-based 
interview questions as well as the technical questions for each position; apart from 
such a consultation, the questions shall remain strictly confidential;  
o 
the interviews shall be fully documented as well as the resulting scoring within the 
evaluation report;  
for  the  recruitment  of  long-term  PMU/RCUs  staff  funded  by  IFAD,  competency-based 
interviews [shall consistently be required OR are recommended]; 
The flowchart below depicts the main steps in the ICS procedure. 
In exceptional and duly justified cases identified in the Handbook, Individual Consultants may be 
selected on a sole-source basis:  
- 
- 
- 
tasks that are a continuation of previous work that the consultant has done and for which the 
consultant was competitively selected;  
certain assignments expected to last less than three months;  
emergencies arising from natural disasters;  
-  when the individual is the only consultant qualified for the assignment; and 
-  when the individual consultant assignment budget is below the predefined low value threshold 
for SSS. 
In such cases, the PMU will launch a SSS through NOTUS including detailed justifications. 
  Recruitment of Civil Servants is subject to IFAD’s Policies. Whenever Operational Policy and Results 
Division (OPR) issues a new update, the PIM will need to be updated accordingly. 
43 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Flowchart procedure for selection of IFAD-funded Project Staff 
248. 
especially those entrusted with one or more functions of the procurement cycle.  
Roles  &  Responsibilities.    The  below  table  clarify  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  all  stakeholders 
44 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table6 : responsibility of task with different steps in the procurement process at PMU level 
Tasks 
Procurement planning  
Preparation of advertisements 
Review of advertisements 
Approval of advertisements 
Preparation of bidding documents 
Review of bidding documents 
Approval of bidding documents 
Bid opening 
Bid opening minutes and attendance sheet 
Rejection, cancellation, extension of bids 
Bid evaluation  
Preparation of evaluation report 
Approval of evaluation report 
Contract’s award (based on approved evaluation 
report) 
Signature of contracts  
Contract monitoring  
Record Keeping/Filing  
Responsible staff/unit 
Procurement Team/Procurement Specialist & 
Contract Management Officer 
Procurement Team/Procurement Specialist & 
Contract Management Officer 
Manager Finance and Administration 
Project Director 
Procurement Team/Procurement Specialist & 
Contract Management Officer 
Manager Finance & Administration/relevant Sector 
Specialist 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
PMU bid opening committee 
Procurement Team/Procurement Specialist & 
Contract Management Officer 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
PMU bid evaluation committee 
Procurement Specialist (as secretary of the 
evaluation committee) 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
Project Director 
Project Director 
Contract Management Officer 
Procurement Team/Procurement Specialist & 
Contract Management Officer 
249. 
The PMU is allowed to conduct procurement for goods, works and non-consulting services when the 
value is below USD 1,000. The Contract Management Officer will prepare the requests for quotations, under the 
supervision  of  the  Procurement  Specialist.  A  small  evaluation  committee  is  set  up  to  evaluate  quotations 
received from bidders. The PS prepares the evaluation reports (as secretary of the evaluation committee), which 
are approved by the PD, who delegates his/her powers to the purchase committee for the award and signature 
of  the  purchase  orders.  With  regard  to  implementing  partners,  PMU  representation  will  be  at  all  stages  of 
procurement, from planning, advertisement, short-listing to Purchase Order/Award of the Contract. In addition 
to  ensuring  adherence  to  applicable  procurement  rules,  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  Project  Director  are 
responsible for reporting procurement activities and submitting related data to IFAD and the P&DD Government 
of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 
250. 
IFAD  plays  an  important  role  in  the  support,  monitoring  and  control  of  the  Project’s  procurement. 
IFAD’s No Objection must consequently be obtained at certain stages of the procurement process, on the basis 
of prior review thresholds specified in the LTB. In the case of a query or rejection of a No Objection/approval 
request by IFAD or by the Project Director, the procurement unit is required to (i) suspend the procurement 
process, (ii) address the issue raised (by answering the query or correcting the faulty documents), (iii) re-submit 
the request and obtain the No Objection/approval and (iv) resume the procurement process. The above table 
summarizes the responsibilities of each of the parties involved in the procurement of goods, works and services 
for KP-RETP. 
K. 
Procurement Monitoring System 
251. 
The PMU uses a database system developed on Excel to monitor the project procurement actions and 
status on  a continuous  basis  for  each  individual  procurement  case.  This Procurement  Tracking  System  (PTS), 
which includes the procurement plan, also records the following data (in addition to planned amounts): 
45 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
a.  Requisition date and number (sequential number generated automatically to identify each 
procurement case) and name of requesting staff 
b.  Component, sub-component Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) activity, expense category, district 
and financier 
c.  Full description of goods, works or services and estimated cost 
d.  Shortlists (names and country of suppliers) 
e.  Date of issuance and number of bidding documents (ITB, RFP, RFQ, etc.) or date of IFAD’s No 
Objection in the case of a waiver of competitive bidding 
f.  Date of evaluation and name of selected supplier 
g.  Date of IFAD’s No Objection for contract award 
h.  PO or contract amount, date and number (and subsequent amendments, if any) 
i.  Amount of advance paid, if any 
j.  Date of delivery and Receiving and Inspection Report date and number 
k. 
l. 
Invoice amount, number and receipt date 
Payment date(s). 
m.  Any relevant comments may also be included in a special column. 
252. 
This  system  also  allows  procurement  data  to  be  sorted  by  project  component/subcomponent,  by 
expense category, by contract number or date, by country of origin of the selected suppliers, by financier, by 
district,  etc.  Reports  and  statistics  can  then  be  issued  according  to  any  of  those  criteria  and  for  any  period 
requested. The Procurement Specialist is required to input each procurement action into the PTS on a real time 
basis. The information inserted into the database enables to generate monitoring reports for the PMU, P&DD-
GoKP, and IFAD as needed. 
L. 
Procurement Cycle 
253. 
services. The procurement cycle includes the following steps: 
Procurement  includes  the  planning,  purchasing,  delivery  and  final  hand-over  of  goods,  works  and 
a. Procurement planning 
b. Requisitioning 
c. Identification of suppliers by advertising and short-listing (where applicable) 
d. Competition process (via ITB, RFP, RFQ, Quotation etc., or waiver of competition 
in exceptional circumstances) 
e. Selection of supplier (following an evaluation process) 
f. Award of contract (including the issuance of the purchase order or contract) 
g. Contract administration and monitoring 
h. Delivery of goods, works or services 
i. Reporting. 
254. 
The  procurement  cycle  is  described  in  detail  in  the  following  sections.  Throughout  this  cycle,  the 
Procurement Team and Project Director are responsible for ensuring that the Rules and Procedures of the GoKP 
and IFAD (where applicable) are fully complied with, in conformity with the project basic documents and the KP-
PPRA Rules.  
Procurement Planning8. As soon as possible after project commencement, the Project team shall be 
255. 
prepared using IFAD’s template, shall be fully aligned with AWP&B, and submitted to IFAD for No Objection. The 
8 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421018/proc_handbook_e.pdf/2febc53a-4244-4447-a788-d06a632fd3b5  
46 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
procurement plan shall be prepared annually and submitted to IFAD for review and expression of No Objection. 
No procurement activity shall  start unless  it is present  in  a PP  that  received  a  No  Objection. The  PP  shall be 
updated with actual dates/figures and shall be upgraded for any changes in the procurement methods, addition 
of activities, elimination of others, increases in the budget, etc. Any upgrade to the PP shall also be submitted 
for No Objection. Procurement activities and their respective methods and timelines shall be strictly adhered to. 
All procurement plans and their updates or modifications  shall be subject to the IFAD’s Prior Review and No 
Objection before implementation. When preparing the procurement plan, an accurate and realistic planning and 
prioritization of needs is an essential prerequisite to effective procurement and a key tool for monitoring project 
implementation.  The  plan  will  be  agreed  between  the  borrower  and  the  IFAD  during  negotiations.  The 
procurement plan will be updated annually or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs 
and improvements in institutional capacity. Items procured outside the procurement plan and the related AWPB 
will  be  declared  mis-procurement  and  the  related  expenditure  will  be  deemed  ineligible.  For each  individual 
procurement item, the PP shows separate planned vs. actual dates lines and contains the following information: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Project component and AWPB activity code 
Expense category 
Procurement case number (from the PTS) 
d)  Nature of procurement, description and quantity of goods/works/services 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
Procurement method and IFAD review requirement 
Pre-qualification or post-qualification requirement (for goods, works or non-consulting services) 
Estimated cost, including transport and insurance, if applicable 
Planned  dates  for  the  entire  procurement  process,  i.e.  expression  of  interest  or  pre-qualification  (if 
applicable), bidding document preparation,publication, bid opening, bid evaluation, post-qualification 
(if applicable), contract signature, including IFAD No Objection (for each step where applicable) 
M. 
Planned Completion or Delivery Date 
256. 
Once it is completed, the procurement plan is submitted to the Finance and the PD by the end of April 
each  year  for  review.  While  reviewing  the  procurement  plan,  the  Finance  and  PD  must  ensure  that  (i)  the 
information contained in the plan adequately reflect the AWPB, (ii) the cost estimates are reasonable, (iii) funds 
are  available  to  conduct  the  procurement  actions  and  (iv)  the  anticipated  procurement  methods  are  in 
conformity with the provisions of the national rules and the Letter to the Borrower. The Procurement Specialist 
makes corrections to the procurement plan as requested by the Finance Unit and PD. Once the plan is validated, 
the Procurement Specialist makes a proposal for grouping goods, works and services to be procured into sizeable 
bid packages so as to permit the optimal use of competitive bidding. The finalized procurement plan is an integral 
part of the AWPB. It is therefore submitted to the PSC for approval with the AWP&B, by Mid-May. After approval 
by the PSC, the procurement plan and the proposal for grouping are forwarded to IFAD for review and possible 
No Objection by last week of May. Observations from IFAD are discussed among the Project Director, team and 
the Procurement Specialist will integrate in the plan. In the absence of a reply from within 30 days of sending it, 
the  procurement  plan  is  deemed  approved  by  IFAD.  It  is  then  shared  with  the  relevant  PMU/Components 
Specialist staff. 
257. 
Every time a step is completed in the procurement process, the Procurement Specialist updates the 
procurement plan by inserting in the corresponding column, the actual date on which the step was completed. 
The PP is updated every time there is a revision of the AWPB (usually at half-year); the PP is then reviewed by 
the team and PD and re-submitted together with the AWPB – to the approval of the Project Steering Committee 
(PSC), as well as to IFAD for No Objection. 
258. 
It is prepared by the requesting staff contains the following information: 
Purchase Requisition. The purchase requisition is the document that initiates the procurement action. 
a.  AWPB activity code 
b.  Description of goods, works or services requested 
47 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
c.  Cost estimate (including transport9, insurance and incidental costs) 
d.  Date of required delivery 
e. 
f. 
Justification for waiver of competitive bidding, if applicable. 
Technical specifications/TOR must be attached to the requisition. 
259. 
Administration (MFA) who indicates the expense category and account numbers and verifies that: 
The  requisition  is  signed  by  the  requesting  staff  and  forwarded  to  the  Manager  Finance  and 
a.  The procurement request is included in the procurement plan; if not, s/he asks the requesting staff for 
justification and notes it on the requisition. 
b.  Funds  are  available  under  the  component/AWPB  activity  and  expense  category;  s/he  prints  out  a 
budget statement and attaches it to the requisition. 
c.  The MFA consults with the Procurement Specialist as needed to ensure that the requisition is complete 
and the information adequate. 
260. 
After verification by the MFA, the requisition goes to the Project Director who ensures that: 
a.  Proposed items are in accordance with the approved procurement plan; if not, s/he ensures that the 
justification provided by the requesting staff is acceptable10. 
b.  Estimated cost is reasonable and within the budget for the current year. 
c.  Proposed goods, works or services are technically appropriate. 
d.  Potential bidders have been identified. 
e. 
f. 
Information  on the  form complies with  procurement  rules, policies and procedures adopted  for  the 
Project. 
If  funds  are  not  available, the Project  Director  decides  whether  to postpone  the procurement  or  to 
reallocate  the  budget  and  informs  the  requesting  staff  and  MFA  accordingly.  Once  approved  the 
requisition the requester shall submit it to procurement unit. The Procurement Specialist determines 
the appropriate method for the procurement of goods, works or services on the basis of threshold and 
input in PTS. 
261. 
Upon receiving an approved purchase requisition, the Procurement Specialist must: 
a. 
Input the information on the requisition into the PTS 
b.  Note the system-generated sequential number on the requisition, and 
c.  Create a procurement file. 
262. 
The  Procurement  Specialist  then  updates  the  procurement  plan  by  entering  the  file  number.  All 
documents related to a particular procurement case are kept in the same file. In order to facilitate filing and 
search, the same number, preceded by the appropriate prefix (e.g. ITB, RFP, RFQ, PO, etc.) will be used to identify 
the competition document and corresponding contract. 
263. 
Technical  Specifications  and  Terms  of  Reference  (ToR).  The  technical  specifications  (for  goods  and 
works) or terms of reference (for services) attached to the purchase requisition are normally prepared by the 
requesting  staff  (under  supervision  by  the  component  head)  and  checked  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  for 
quality  and  suitability.  However,  assistance  from  specialized  technical  experts  may  be  needed  to  develop 
complex specifications (including specific packaging/shipping requirements) or terms of reference. 
264. 
Technical  Specifications.  Specifications  are  based  on  relevant  technical  characteristics  and/or 
performance requirements. The specifications must clearly and fully describe the goods or works required, as 
accurately as possible and in generic terms. The use of brand names, catalogue numbers or similar classifications 
that could favor a particular supplier must be avoided. Where there is no choice but to use a brand name or 
catalogue number of a particular manufacturer in order to clarify an otherwise incomplete specification, then it 
9 For purposes of estimating the cost on the requisition, airfreight is assumed to represent 30% and ocean freight 15% of the 
cost of goods. 
10 If the purchase is authorized, the Procurement Specialist will amend the procurement plan as part of the next update 
48 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
shall  be  complemented  with  the  words  “or  equivalent”.  The  specifications  must  be  drafted  to  allow  the 
evaluation of offers for goods or works  which have similar characteristics and which provide performance at 
least substantially equivalent to those specified. 
265. 
There are three types of specifications, which may be combined: 
a.  Functional specifications. Define the function or duty to be performed and focus on what the product 
is to do. Less emphasis is given to materials or dimensions. 
b.  Performance specifications. Define the performance and results required of the product. 
c. 
In order to assure quality of the goods/works, relevant product standards (international or national) 
and environmental standards (energy star ratings, recyclable materials, etc.) should be included. Where 
certain standard specifications are referred to, a statement should follow that other international or 
national standards that promise to confer equal or better quality will also be acceptable. 
d.  Design  requirements  specifications.  The  exact  dimensions,  materials  or  characteristics  must  be 
provided. It should be  noted that this  type  of  approach might exclude  certain  suppliers (and hence, 
lessen competition) because of differences in engineering practices.  
e.  Dimensions should always be quoted using the metric system. 
266. 
Standards  and  technical  specifications  quoted  in  bidding  documents  should  promote  the  broadest 
possible  competition,  while  assuring  the  critical  performance  or  other  requirements  for  the  goods  or  works 
under  procurement.  As  much  as  possible,  the  requesting  staff  should  try  to  specify  internationally  accepted 
standards such as those issued by the International Standards Organization (ISO) with which the equipment or 
materials  or  workmanship  shall  comply.  Where  such  international  standards  are  unavailable  or  are 
inappropriate,  national  standards  specified  by  Pakistan  Standards  Quality  and  Control  Authority  may  be 
specified. In all cases, the bidding or proposal documents shall state that equipment, material, or workmanship 
meeting other standards, which promise at least substantial equivalence, will also be accepted. 
267. 
Terms  of  References  (ToRs).  are  normally  used  for  the  services  contracts.  They  detail  the  objective, 
scope and nature of the assignment, and form an integral part of the contract. The following information must 
be included in the ToRs: 
a.  The background of the Project, including objectives and main components/activities; 
b.  A description of the required services. The activities to be performed or services to be rendered must 
be described in detail: for example, modalities of a survey (defining area, data needed, means to be 
employed);  organization  of  a  training  course  (defining  target  group,  curriculum  outline,  training 
materials, course duration); 
c.  A comprehensive list of the tasks and standards to comply with; 
d.  Coordination arrangements (including the list of documents and/or services to be provided by the PMU 
or the end-user in order to facilitate the execution of the assignment); 
e.  Modalities for monitoring and control of progress by the PMU; 
f.  A detailed work schedule, i.e. duration of activities/services from inception to completion, indicating 
any factors influencing that timeframe, such as seasonal considerations, schedule for initial submission, 
review/approval time, etc.; 
g.  A  clear  definition  of  expected  outputs/results  and  the  final  products  to  be  submitted  (e.g.  survey 
completed, maps drawn, research undertaken, data collected/elaborated, workshop conducted), and 
h.  Reporting requirements (for example, specification of format and content for interim and final reports, 
periodicity and deadlines, number of copies, recipients, etc.). 
268. 
Identification and Shortlisting of Suppliers. The identification and shortlisting of suppliers for the KP-
RETP procurement is normally carried out by means of a competitive process, in compliance with the national 
procurement rules. This competitive process may be more or less open depending on the provisions of the KP-
PPRA Rules and the IFAD LTB.  
269. 
various categories of procurement and related thresholds: 
The table below summarizes  the procurement modalities and the IFAD review requirements for the 
49 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table 7: Threshold for Procurement of Goods, Works and Services 
Contract Value 
Threshold (US$) 
Procurement / 
Selection Method 
Contracts Subject  
to Prior Review/  
Post Review 
Thresholds for 
Procurement and 
Review Methods 
Expenditure 
Category 
Works 
Goods 
≥ 1,000,000 
≥ 20,000 < 1,000,000 
ICB 
NCB 
< 20,000 
All values 
≥ 200,000 
≥ 20,000 < 200,000 
National Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
NCB 
≥ 1,000 < 20,000 
National Shopping 
All values 
≥ 200,000 
Direct Contracting 
QCBS (International) 
Consulting Services – 
Firms 
≥ 20,000 < 100,000 
 (QCBS/FBS/LCS) 
< 20,000 
All values 
≥ 100,000 
< 100,000 
All values 
CQS 
SSS 
IC- International  
IC –National 
ICS – SSS 
Consulting Services - 
Individuals (ICS) 
Prior Review  
Prior Review 
(Post review) 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
(Post review) 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Post Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
 Where: 
ICB.  
QCBS.  
FBS. 
SSS. 
ICS. 
International Competitive Bidding 
Quality and Cost Based Selection 
Fixed Budget Selection 
Single Source Selection 
Individual Consultant Selection 
NCB.  
CQS.  
LCS. 
DC. 
National Competitive Bidding 
Selection Based on Consultants’ Qualification  
Least Cost Selection 
Direct Contracting 
270. 
Open  Competitive  Bidding  –  ICB  or  NCB  (Goods  &  Works).  As  indicated  in  the  table  above,  open 
competitive  bidding  may  be  done  at  the  national  or  international  level,  depending  on  the  value  of  the 
procurement. International bidding is appropriate for high value or complex procurement and where the goods, 
works or services by their nature or scope, are more likely to be of interest to international suppliers. National 
competitive bidding is the procedure normally used for public procurement in Pakistan; it is most appropriate 
for goods or works of smaller value, which are not likely to attract adequate foreign competition. In both cases, 
the selection of the supplier is carried out on the basis of an invitation to bid, using national standard bidding 
documents.  Procurement  of  goods  and  works  on  open  competitive  bidding  is  subject  to  validation  from  the 
Project Director. IFAD prior review is required for goods and works valued at USD 20,000 or more. Both ICB and 
NCB procurement is conducted exclusively by the PMU. 
271. 
services, the PMU may decide at planning stage to go through a prequalification process in order to; 
Pre-qualification.  For  high  value  and/or  complex  procurement  of  goods,  works  or  non-consulting 
50 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
a. 
identify potential bidders that have the required capacity, resources and experience for the contract. 
This  procedure,  which 
limited  number  of  qualified 
suppliers/contractors, is particularly useful when: 
limits  the  actual  bidding  process  to  a 
b.  Bidders may  be discouraged  by the high  cost  of  preparing  bids  and  would  be  more  willing to  invest 
resources in bid preparation knowing that they are competing against a limited number of bidders, 
c.  Evaluating a high number of bids would be very costly and time-consuming for the PMU and/or 
d.  Contractor’s qualifications are key for the satisfactory performance of the contract. 
272. 
The  Procurement  Specialist  prepares  the  pre-qualification  documents  using  the  IFAD  standard 
templates,  including  a  short  description  of  the  Project,  a  description  of  the  goods,  works  or  non-consulting 
services, the pre-qualification criteria and the details for submission of applications (name/address, deadline, 
submission  modality,  and  information/documentation  required  to  verify  the  applicant’s  eligibility  or 
qualifications). The Procurement Specialist then drafts the pre-qualification invitation, which is published in the 
KP-PPRA and KP-RETP websites, and in at least 2 daily newspapers (Urdu and in English) based on the required 
KP-PPRA thresholds. Sufficient copies of the pre-qualification documents must be ready for sale at the PMU (by 
the Procurement Specialist) on the first day of publication of the notice. The price charged must only reflect the 
actual cost of production of the pre-qualification documents. The Procurement Specialist records in a dedicated 
register, the name and address of all applicants who purchase a prequalification document. 
273. 
On the submission deadline, the Evaluation Committee augmented with the relevant technical expert 
or consultant, meets to evaluate the applications received against the criteria defined in the pre-qualification 
document  and  to  attribute  a  score  to  each  application.  The  evaluation  report  prepared  by the  Procurement 
Specialist (as  secretary  of  the committee) identifies  the applicants  that are qualified, and  those  that  are  not 
qualified, and states the reasons. The pre-qualification report is signed by all committee members, approved by 
the PD and sent to IFAD for No Objection along with the bidding documents. 
274. 
Documents. The ITB package must contain the following elements: 
Invitation  to  Bid.  The  Procurement  Specialist  prepares  the  ITB  using  the  IFAD  Standard  Bidding 
a. 
b. 
ITB letter and Instructions to bidders (clearly outlining the required validity of bids as well as the criteria 
for bid evaluation and selection of the lowest evaluated bid); 
Information on the deadline and location for bid submission, and public bid opening; 
c.  Bid submission sheet, including sample formats for bid security, if applicable; 
d.  Model contract or PO, including general and special terms and conditions; 
e.  Detailed list of goods or description of works (including norms, standards and/or methods to comply 
with); 
f. 
Technical specifications, list of goods, bill of quantities and/or drawings (provided by the requesting 
staff); 
g.  Place and time of delivery or completion schedule; insurance requirements; 
h.  Description of penalties or bonuses; 
i.  Anticorruption compliance statement and/or permission for IFAD to inspect bidders’ accounts/records 
relating to the bid submission and contract performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed 
auditors; 
j.  Guidance on complaint filing procedures; 
k.  Financial provisions (payment modalities, advances, bank guarantees, etc.). 
275. 
following: 
The Procurement Specialist used IFAD standard document for bid advertisement, which contains the 
a.  The bid number; 
b.  A brief presentation of the Project and the funding source (refer to IFAD Procurement Guidelines/SBD 
for the appropriate text to use); 
51 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
c.  A description of goods/works to be procured, and name of the contracting authority; 
d.  The preference given to goods/works manufactured in Pakistan or in developing countries, as well as 
the eligibility criteria for this preference; 
e.  The method and criteria to be used for the evaluation and comparison of bids; 
f. 
The place, contact name and modalities for retrieving the ITB package; 
g.  The name of the person to contact for queries; 
h.  The place and deadline for submission (date and time); 
i. 
The place, date and time for the bid opening. 
276. 
The ITB and advertisement are reviewed by the project technical/sector specialist for validation, and 
approved/signed  by  the  PD.  When  required,  IFAD’s  No  Objection  on  the  bidding  documents  must  also  be 
obtained prior to publishing the advertisement (the Procurement Specialist must enter the date of the IFAD No 
Objection in the PTS). The Contract Management Officer (under supervision of the Procurement Specialist) is 
responsible  for  organizing  and  monitoring  the  advertising  process.  PS  is  in  charge  of  the  distribution  of  ITB 
packages to prospective bidders. Sufficient copies of the bidding documents must be ready for sale at the PMU 
by the first day of publication of the ITB. The price charged must only reflect the actual cost of production of the 
bidding documents. Prospective bidders are allowed to briefly inspect the bidding documents prior to purchasing 
them. For each ITB package purchased, the Procurement Specialist (i) delivers a receipt to the bidder, (ii) records 
the name and address of the bidder in a register, (iii) obtains the bidder’s signature on the declaration of ethical 
conduct and (iv) obtains written acknowledgement from the bidder that samples have been inspected (if the bid 
is subject to conformity with samples). 
277. 
The CMO acts as petty cash custodian for the cash received from the sale of bids. The cash is kept in a 
petty cash box and locked in a safe. It is used to pay for expenses related to the preparation of bids, the bid 
opening  ceremony  and  the  bid  evaluation  meetings.  The  Contract  Management  Officer  keeps  a  petty  cash 
register  to  account  for  these  monies,  under  the  supervision  of  the  MFA.  There  are  no  major  procedural 
differences between ICB and NCB apart from the language, advertising media used and length of publication. 
International  bids  must  be  advertised  (in  English)  in  international  newspapers,  specialized  websites11  and 
through local representatives of member countries whose firms may potentially be interested. In addition, a 
longer time must be allowed before bid closing to reflect the slower communications involved. National bids, on 
the other hand, are advertised in the KP-PPRA and KP-RETP websites or bulletin boards, and in at least 2 daily 
newspapers (one in Urdu and one in English) according to KP-PPRA Rules and thresholds. 
278. 
National Shopping (NS) (Goods USD >1,000 to ≤ 20,000; Works ≤ USD 20,000). When using the national 
shopping procedure, the competition is limited only to pre-identified suppliers who are known to be qualified 
to furnish the goods, works or services required. This is the preferred procurement method for readily available 
off-the-shelf  goods,  standard  specification  commodities,  simple  civil  works  of  small  value  and  standard,  low 
value  non-consulting  services.  National  shopping  may  be  carried  out  at  PMU  level  for  small  value  contracts 
(under USD 1,000), as agreed by the Procurement Specialist and authorized by the PD, and under the supervision 
of the Procurement Specialist. 
279. 
Identification of Suppliers and Shortlisting. In order to facilitate the procurement process when national 
shopping is used, the PS with support of CMO develops and maintains a roster of suppliers sorted by industry 
and  area  of  expertise  (i.e.  types  of  goods,  works  and  services  proposed).  This  database  is  maintained  and 
updated by the PS with assistance from the CMO; it must contain the following data for each potential supplier: 
a.  Name of company 
b.  Details  of  supplier  (address,  telephone,  fax,  email,  website,  etc.  -  the  country  should  be  input  in  a 
separate field for reporting purposes) 
c. 
Industry or area of expertise 
d.  References (other projects or KP-RETP partners which have contracted the supplier in the past) 
11 United Nations Development Business (UNDB) online, or Development Gateway Foundation (Market). IFAD’s assistance 
may be sought for the publication of Specific Procurement Notices in these websites. 
52 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
e.  Remarks (e.g. evaluation of supplier’s performance). 
f.  Many sources are available to the KP-RETP in order to identify potential suppliers, including: 
g. 
IFAD headquarters and the IFAD Asia network 
h.  The GoP, GoKP and affiliated institutions 
i.  Other donor-funded projects in Pakistan, development partners and other KP-RETP partners, embassies 
of IFAD member countries in Pakistan 
j. 
Specialized procurement websites (e.g. UN Development Business, Development Gateway Foundation, 
Development Ex, Compass, etc.) and search engines 
k.  Professional organizations or associations 
l.  Business seminars, visitors, trade representations 
m.  Trade publications, professional journals, catalogues, and other commercial media 
n.  Local telephone directories. 
280. 
A background check should be conducted on all entities that have never worked for IFAD previously. 
When  launching a restricted  bid  under  national  shopping, the  PS, in  collaboration  with  the  technical staff, is 
responsible for identifying a good mix of qualified candidates with the appropriate expertise from the above 
sources, and preparing an official shortlist. 
281. 
The shortlist is prepared on the basis of set criteria such as the technical and financial capability of the 
supplier, capacity to supply the goods/complete the works/provide the services in the required timeframe, past 
performance,  etc.  The  shortlist  should  contain  3  to  4  suppliers  for  very  small  value  contracts  or  individual 
consultants, and 5 to 7 suppliers for larger value contracts. The shortlist is reviewed by the technical team as 
well as MFA and approved by the Project Director. Requests for quotations are prepared and issued to different 
vendors on their request/demand and award framework contract with the lowest evaluate vendor for the whole 
year through this process. Framework agreement shall be generally adopted in the following cases: 
a.  Goods that can be procured off-the-shelf, or are of common use with standard specification; 
b.  Non – Consulting services that are of a simple and non-complex nature and may be required from time 
to time. 
c.  Small value contractor for works under emergency operations. 
d.  Selection of vendors for the whole year for purchase of expendable items such as stationery, printer 
tonner, office utilities, repair of vehicles, vehicles lubricants, fuel for vehicles, vehicles services etc. 
e.  The  CMO  shall  check  availability  of  required  goods  form  stores  under  any  existing  frame  work 
agreement; 
f. 
The Procurement team shall contact the existing vendor with whom arrangements are made under the 
framework agreement; 
g.  The CMO shall convey the requirements to procurement unit through approved purchase requisition 
form. 
h.  The PS shall convey the requirements through formal purchase order to the vendor. 
i. 
The PS will place the order detailing the nature and amount of procurement(s) made, date of placing 
order and contact details of vendor (conditions are already agreed with the vendor/supplier under the 
frame work contracting mechanism for each delivery of goods and services being made). 
282. 
Request for Quotation. The RFQ selection procedure consists of comparing price quotations obtained 
from at least 3 shortlisted suppliers. The RFQ is prepared by the Procurement Specialist and should contain the 
description  and  quantity  of  the  goods,  specifications  of  works,  or  description  of  services,  and  the  desired 
delivery/completion place and date. It is reviewed by the MFA and signed by the Project Director. After the RFQ 
is  approved,  a  personalized  invitation  to  submit  a  quotation  is  addressed  directly  to  each  shortlisted  firm;  a 
written receipt of acknowledgement is obtained from each firm. 
53 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
283. 
Restricted Bidding (Non-consulting services). Limited international or national bidding procedures are 
used for non-consulting services above USD 100,000. The procedure is similar to the open competitive bidding 
described above, except those invitations to bid are directly addressed to pre-identified bidders instead of being 
advertised. This is also an appropriate method of procurement (i) for goods and works of a very small value, (ii) 
in  emergency  situations,  (iii)  when  the  number  of  potential  suppliers  is  very  limited,  or  (iv)  when  an  open 
competitive bid has failed to result in an award of contract. 
284. 
Force Account. Force account work Force account work (such as construction, equipment installation 
and non-consulting services) is work performed by a government department in the borrower/recipient country 
using its own personnel and equipment. In certain circumstances, this may be the only practical procurement 
method. The force account method requires the borrower/ recipient to set maximum aggregate amounts for 
use of the method, for which IFAD shall give its NO, and apply the same rigorous quality checks and inspection 
as for contracts awarded to third parties. Use of the force account method shall be justified and may be used, 
subject to IFAD’s NO, only under any of the following circumstances:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
the quantities of construction and installation works involved cannot be determined in advance;  
the  construction  and  installation  works  are  small  and  scattered  or  located  in  remote  areas  where 
qualified construction firms are unlikely to bid at reasonable prices;  
the construction and installation works must be undertaken without disrupting ongoing operations 
285. 
procurement files and documents:  
Further  the  force  account  submission  to  IFAD  for  its  No  Objection  shall  be  for  the  following 
a) 
Justification Report for using Force Account (if not already submitted along with PP); 
b)  Solicitation Document for Public entity to be engaged on Force Account basis; 
c)  Negotiation report evidencing verification of resources, capacities, and competence; 
d)  Draft Agreement duly filled; 
e)  Signed agreement (for information and record); 
f)  Agreement amendments exceeding 10% of the original value; and 
g)  Agreement extensions exceeding 25% of the original duration. 
1. 
Consulting Services (QCBS, FBS, LCS, and CQS) 
286. 
Expression  of  Interests  (EOIs). Whether  from  consulting  firms or individual consultants, ‘intellectual’ 
consulting services may warrant the need for an expression of interest (EOI), which is the equivalent of the pre-
qualification process for consulting services and presents the same advantages. The EOI is similar to the pre-
qualification procedure described above. The main difference in the content of the EOI notice is the indication 
of  whether  the  EOI  is  for  consulting  firms  or  individuals.  The  evaluation  process  is  the  same,  and  once  the 
Evaluation Committee members sign the evaluation report, it is approved by the PD and sent to IFAD for No 
Objection along with the request for proposals document. 
287. 
the given thresholds). The RFP is prepared by the Procurement Specialist and consists of four documents:  
Request for Proposal (RFP): RFPs are issued for the procurement of consulting services valued (as per 
a.  Letter of invitation (brief description of Project, funding source, summary of services required, specific 
conditions or criteria, currency of submission, name of contact person for queries, date/time/address 
for submission of proposals) Information to consultants (evaluation criteria and modalities, level of key 
staff  inputs  or  total  budget,  clause  of  preference  for  developing  countries  firms,  proposal  validity 
period, and any other relevant information or instruction) 
b.  TOR provided by the requesting staff 
c.  Model contract. 
288. 
The RFP is validated by the technical team and approved by the PD. The prior review of IFAD is required 
for services valued (see above threshold table), as well as for all services procured through sole-source-selection, 
54 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
regardless of the value. After the RFP is approved, a personalized invitation to submit a proposal is issued directly 
to each shortlisted firm; a written receipt of acknowledgement is obtained from each firm. 
289. 
Individual Consultants. Individual consultants are selected on the basis of a comparison of CVs from at 
least three shortlisted individuals. IFAD’s prior review is required irrespective of value. The following criteria are 
taken into account for the selection: 
a.  Technical capacity of consultant 
b.  Academic qualifications and professional experience of consultant 
b.  Knowledge of the region/country 
c.  Proficiency in local languages or other criteria deemed relevant regarding the ToR. Based on a review 
of  CVs  by  the  selection  committee  (including  the  DPDs,  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E) 
Specialist and the requesting staff/section head), the PS establishes a selection report and submits it 
to the PD for contract award (after IFAD No Objection as required). 
290. 
Sole-Source Selection (SSS)/Direct Contracting (DC). SSS/DC of the consulting firm lacks the benefits of 
competition  in  terms  of  quality  and  cost.  It is not  transparent  in  selection  and may  encourage  unacceptable 
practices. Therefore, SSS should be used only in exceptional circumstances and only after securing IFAD’s NO. 
Any request for SSS/DC by a borrower/recipient must be accompanied by a detailed justification, which will be 
carefully examined by IFAD to ensure that no alternative selection methods can be used. To receive IFAD’s NO, 
it  must  be  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  clear  advantage  to  SSS  over  competitive  selection.  Lack  of  time  to 
conduct competitive procurement is not an acceptable justification for the use of SSS/DC. The SSS/DC may be 
used in the following cases: 
a) 
tasks that are a natural continuation of previous work done by the consulting firm;  
b)  situations in which rapid selection is essential, such as an emergency;  
c) 
selections of low value as agreed with IFAD and as defined in the letter to the borrower;  
d)  only one firm is qualified or has the necessary experience for the assignment.  
e)  All SSS/direct contracting processes are subject to prior review by IFAD. 
2. 
General Procurement 
291. 
Enquiries from Bidders. To maintain the integrity and transparency of the process, potential bidders 
may only clarify or seek additional information related to the relevant bidding or proposal documents in writing 
and  not  by  telephone  or  in  person.  In  the  same  way,  the  PS,  after  consultation  with  the  requesting  staff  is 
necessary,  shall  only  provide  clarification  in  writing  and  to  all  invitees  (unless  the  clarification  is  clearly  only 
applicable to the invitee who asked the question). The clarification shall be written in such a way as to maintain 
the anonymity of bidders and without mentioning the name of the firm that asked the question(s). 
292. 
Bid  Extension  and  Cancellation.  Based  on  a  recommendation  from  the  procurement,  the  PD  may 
propose an extension of the closing date for submission of bids for any practical or justifiable reason, such as: 
modification to the bidding documents after issue; need for additional research/effort by bidders to submit a 
responsive  bid;  request  for  a  time  extension  by  two  or  more  bidders;  and  unforeseen  administrative  issues 
requiring  a  postponement of the  proposed  bid  opening. Proposals for extension  of  the  bid  deadline shall  be 
referred  immediately  to  the  Evaluation  Committee  and  the  IFAD  Country  Director  (through  the  PD)  for  a 
decision. If the extension is granted, the extension shall be notified to all prospective bidders at the same time 
and in writing. Notification of the extension must be copied to the procurement file and the new dates entered 
into the PTS. 
293. 
A bidding process may be cancelled at any time before the deadline for receipt of bids subject to the 
proposal of the Procurement Specialist, and the approval of the PD and IFAD. Justifications for cancellation are: 
a.  The procurement need has ceased to exist or changed significantly; 
b. 
Insufficient funding is available for the procurement; 
c.  There is a significant change in the required technical details, bidding or contracted conditions, such 
that the recommencement of proceedings is necessary; 
55 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
d.  There is evidence of collusion among bidders; or 
e.  Cancellation is deemed to be in the interest of national security. 
294. 
The  Procurement  Specialist  will  in  such  a  case  notify  prospective  bidders,  refund  fees  paid  for  the 
purchase of bidding documents, return any submitted bids unopened and notify all other involved parties of the 
cancellation. The cancellation must be documented in the procurement file and recorded in the PTS. 
295.  Waiver  of  Competitive  Bidding.  There  are  certain  circumstances  in  which  competition  may  not  be 
possible or practical. These are exceptional cases  where direct contracting  for goods/works or single-source-
selection for consultants presents a clear advantage over competition. These exceptional cases are listed in the 
KP-PPRA and in IFAD’s Procurement Handbook. Should the PMU be required to use this procurement modality, 
a request for waiver of competitive bidding would need to be addressed to the Project Director and to IFAD, 
regardless of the contract value12. The request for waiver must include the following information: 
a.  Description of goods, works or services 
b.  Full justification for waiver request 
c.  Detail of costs and demonstration of reasonableness of costs 
d.  Demonstration of the competitiveness of the retained proposal or quotation 
e.  Past experience with the retained supplier. 
f. 
The procurement process will only be pursued if IFAD’s No Objection is secured. 
296. 
Blacklisting of Suppliers and Contractors. As indicated in the KP-PPRA, any supplier or contractor that 
consistently  fails  to  provide  satisfactory  performances  or  is  found  to  be  indulging  in  corrupt  or  fraudulent 
practices shall be permanently or temporarily barred from participating in KP-RETP procurement proceedings. 
The supplier or contractor to be blacklisted is given the opportunity of being heard before such barring action is 
publicized and communicated to the KP-PPRA and to IFAD. 
297. 
Selection  of  Suppliers  –  Bid  Opening  and  Evaluation  Committees.  The  KP-RETP  PS  will  oversee 
organizing  bid  opening  procedures  and  evaluation  committee  meetings.  The  PMU  bid  opening  committee  is 
composed  of  5  members:  a)  a  Project  Director  (as  Chairperson),  b)  M&E  Specialist  c)  Agribusiness/Training 
Officer/4P Specialist, d) the relevant component heads, and e) Representative of relevant end-user entity and 
the PS who serves as the Secretary. The PS is therefore responsible for maintaining the attendance sheets and 
preparing the minutes of the bid opening meetings. Due to the nature of the procurement handled at regional 
level, there is normally no bid opening at PMU. 
Table 8:PMU evaluation committee consists of five members 
Title 
Project Director 
M&E Specialist 
Agribusiness/Training Officer/4P Specialist  
Heads of relevant component 
Representative of relevant end-user entity 
Procurement Specialist  
Role 
Chairperson 
Member  
Member 
Member 
Member 
Secretary 
298. 
In  addition  to  the above,  the Committee may  co-opt  non-members  (such  as consultants or advisors 
with special expertise) to its meetings, on an as-needed basis, particularly in the case of complex procurement. 
The PS is not a member but serves as Secretary to the Committee; as such, s/he is responsible for guiding the 
evaluation  process,  ensuring  that  applicable  rules  and  procedures  are  correctly  followed,  and  drafting  the 
evaluation  reports.  For  low  value  procurement  at  PMU  level,  the  evaluation  committee  is  reduced  to  three 
members, including the PD/Deputy Project Directors (DPDs), the MFA and the requesting staff or component 
head. The Procurement Specialist serves as the Secretary for the committee and is responsible for drafting the 
bid evaluation reports. 
12 Except for petty purchases not exceeding PKR 50,000 (or USD 323 equivalent), for which direct cash purchase is allowed 
without a waiver 
56 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
299. 
Submission, Receipt and Opening of Bids. The time allowed for the submission of bids varies according 
to the size and complexity of the contract. Starting on the date of publication of the ITB, a minimum of 6 weeks 
is  generally  allowed  for  ICB,  while  at  least  4  weeks  are  allowed  for  NCB.  Bidders  may  send  their  offers  or 
proposals in a sealed envelope by mail or hand delivery to the KP-RETP. The PS (or the CMO at the PMU) receives 
the  bids,  stamps  the  envelopes  with  the  day’s  date  and  registers  them  in  a  special  dedicated  logbook.  The 
representatives of the bidders submitting a bid are requested to sign the logbook. All bids are kept in a tender 
box located in a locked cabinet until the bid opening date. The offers or proposals received after the submission 
deadline are returned unopened to the bidders. 
The bids13 are opened in public, preferably on the day of the submission deadline, in the presence of 
300. 
members of the bid opening committee and representatives of the bidders. The chairperson of the committee 
is responsible for opening each bid and reading aloud the following information14: 
a.  Sequential number attributed to the bid 
b.  Name / country of origin of the bidder 
c.  Currency, unit price and amount of the bid, and discounts offered, if any 
d.  Amount of bid security, if any15. 
301. 
This  information  is  recorded  in  the  bid  logbook  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  signed  by  the 
chairperson of the committee. Bids that are obviously not responsive (e.g. no or inadequate bid security) are 
rejected at this stage. The representatives of bidders are requested to sign the attendance sheet and are then 
invited  to  leave,  and  no  further  communication  may  take  place  between  the  bidders  and  the  KP-RETP  bid 
opening committee or evaluation committee until the contract award is announced. The Procurement Specialist 
is  responsible  for  preparing  minutes  of  the  bid  opening  meeting,  which  are  signed  by  the  chairperson  and 
members of the committee. 
302. 
In the case of RFQs, quotations may be sent directly to the PS by mail or hand delivered. Even though 
no public opening of the quotations submitted is required, all quotations must be opened on a predetermined 
date and time to avoid the opportunity for any invitee to become aware of the prices quoted by other invitees. 
303. 
Cancellation of Bids after Bid Opening. ITBs, RFQs and RFPs may be cancelled after the bid opening date 
by  recommendation  of  the  Procurement  Specialist,  following validation  of  the evaluation  committee  and  PD 
approval, and subject to IFAD’s No Objection, in the following instances: 
a.  Only one (or no) bid was presented or after rejection of all other bids only one (or no) bid remains for 
consideration; 
b.  The bids were presented with unacceptable reservations and conditions; or 
c.  The evaluation committee confirms that the lowest priced bid is higher than the budgetary provision. 
d. 
In such a case, the procurement unit will: 
e.  Obtain approval of the evaluation committee and the PD for cancellation of the ITB/RFQ/RFP; 
f.  Notify all bidders that the ITB/RFQ/RFP process has been cancelled and return any bid securities; 
g.  Depending on the causes, decide whether the procurement is to be cancelled or resumed, and by 
what method. 
h. 
If the procurement is to be resumed, resubmit all documents to the requesting staff for preparation of 
revised specifications/TOR, or prepare new bidding documents appropriate to the new procurement 
method proposed. 
304. 
Extension of bid validity. If, due to unforeseen circumstances, the contract award cannot be completed 
within the duration of bid validity specified in the bidding documents, the Procurement Specialist may request 
a bid validity extension from the responsive bidders, upon instruction from the PD. The additional time required 
13 In the case of two-envelope bidding where separate technical and financial bids are submitted, only the technical bid will be 
opened for evaluation at the initial bid opening. The financial bids are retained unopened pending a second public opening of 
those bids achieving more than the minimum technical score 
14 The head of the committee may request the assistance of the Procurement Specialist or decide to delegate this task to 
another member of the committee or to the Procurement Specialist. 
15 All bid securities are given to the Procurement Specialist for review, registration and safekeeping. 
57 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
to  complete  the  evaluation,  obtain  the  necessary  approvals,  and  award  the  contract  is  estimated  by  the 
Procurement Specialist and a new bid validity date is determined accordingly. Bidders who refuse this request 
may withdraw from the bid without incurring any penalty. However, bidders who agree are required to extend 
their bid securities to the new validity date. The quoted price and other conditions of their bids must remain 
unchanged. 
305. 
Evaluation of bids. Bidders’ offers, and proposals are evaluated based on the criteria and procedures 
specified in the bidding documents and in conformity with national procurement rules and IFAD guidelines. The 
first step in the evaluation process consists of ensuring that (i) the bids received meet the eligibility requirements 
of the national procurement laws and IFAD requirements, (ii) the bids do not contain any material computation 
error, are properly signed and are in conformity with the bidding documents, and (iii) the required bid securities 
are attached. Material deviations from, or reservations to the terms, conditions, and specifications in the bidding 
documents, are causes for rejecting a bid or proposal. 
306. 
Evaluation of offers. Offers from responsive bids are evaluated exclusively based on the criteria spelled 
out  in  the  ITB.  Under  the  single  envelope  bidding  system,  the  evaluation  committee  conducts  the  technical 
evaluation followed immediately by the financial evaluation, in one stage. The evaluation criteria are assigned 
weights in order obtain an adequate score. Besides the quoted price (for which the preference margin must be 
taken into account, if specified in the ITB), the following criteria may be considered in the evaluation: 
a.  Conformity of goods/works to specifications and/or drawings 
b.  Product quality, i.e., conformity to national/international standards 
c.  Manufacturers or distributor’s authorization where applicable 
d.  Delivery or completion time 
e.  Compliance with KP-RETP General Terms and Conditions 
f. 
Local after-sales service 
g.  Spare parts availability 
h.  Technical and financial capacity of the supplier. 
307. 
The evaluation committee tabulates all bids on a summary sheet. Only bids meeting or exceeding the 
specifications  of  the  ITB  shall  be  considered  as  acceptable.  The  lowest  evaluated  responsive  bid  is  normally 
recommended for contract award. 
308. 
Evaluation of Proposals. The RFP method normally calls for using the two envelopes bidding system, i.e. 
seeking both a technical and financial proposals in two separate envelopes. The evaluation process is therefore, 
split into two separates stages. The weighting to be given to each proposal must first be determined. Usually, 
the technical proposal is given 70%-80% of the overall score, and the financial proposal 30%-20%. The  more 
complex the assignment and the more significant the end product, the less comparable the proposals and the 
less influence price should have on the selection; thus, the points allotted to the financial proposal would be 
lower.  On  the  contrary,  for  tasks  of  a  more  straightforward  nature,  price  can  play  a  significant  part  in  the 
selection process, provided that the other criteria are also met. 
309. 
To achieve best value for money and to avoid any bias, it is preferable to develop a detailed list of pre-
defined evaluation criteria. Points are assigned to each selection criterion, including the price. The evaluation 
committee must follow the process and criteria indicated in the RFP. Proposals are to be opened accordingly 
(first technical, then financial proposals). The bidders should be considered qualified and responsive if they score 
at least 70-80% marks (or as stated in the RFP) on the technical component. The bidders who do not meet this 
minimum score must be rejected as being non-responsive and their financial proposals are not to be opened. 
Approval on the technical evaluation is sought from the PD prior to proceeding with the financial evaluation. 
The  financial  proposal  of  only  those  bidders  who  meet  the  qualifying  threshold  during  technical  evaluation 
should be opened and examined. The proposal should provide the detailed cost estimate such as daily fee rate, 
number of workdays and travel cost estimates. The evaluation committee prepares a sheet summarizing the 
results of the evaluation for both the technical and the financial proposals. 
310. 
In the case of procurement using the QCBS method, recommendation for award of contract is normally 
made to the bidder whose technical proposal and financial proposal, when taken together, achieve the highest 
overall  score.  In  the  case  of  the  fixed  budget  selection  method,  the  consulting  firm  that  scored  the  highest 
58 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
technical points within the limits of the budget is selected. In the case of the least cost selection method, the 
firm with the lowest financial proposal is selected, provided that it has attained the minimum technical score. 
311. 
Post-qualification  of  Bids. Prior  to  finalizing the  evaluation  report, the  evaluation  committee should 
conduct  a  post-qualification16  of  the  lowest  evaluated  responsive  bidder  to  determine  whether  it  has  the 
resources,  experience  and  qualifications  to  perform  the  contract  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Using  the  criteria 
specified  in  the  bidding  documents,  this  review  should  include  an  assessment  of  the  bidder’s  financial  and 
physical resources available to undertake the contract (including his current workload), based on the evidence 
requested in the bidding documents and submitted by the bidders. If the lowest evaluated responsive bidder 
fails post-qualification, his bid should be rejected17, and the next ranked bidder should then be subject to post-
qualification examination. If successful, this bidder should receive the award based on the PD’s approval and 
IFAD’s No Objection (if required). If not, the process continues with the other bidders. The results of the post-
qualification  exercise  must  be  included  in  the  evaluation  report,  as  well  as  the  reasons  for  disqualifying  any 
bidder. 
312. 
Evaluation Report. The summary evaluation sheets are used as the basis for the PS to prepare a bid or 
proposal evaluation report describing the evaluation process and justifying the recommendation for award of 
contract.  All  members  of  the  evaluation  committee  must  sign  the  evaluation  summary  sheet  and  the 
recommendation of award. They are attached to the bid evaluation report and, together with the minutes of 
the bid opening, are forwarded to the PD for approval. They are then transmitted to IFAD for No Objection. 
313. 
on the following factors: 
Evaluation of Quotations. In the case of quotations received through an RFQ, the evaluation is based 
a.  Conformity to specifications/TOR 
b.  Product quality, i.e. conformity to national/international product standards 
c.  Promised delivery time 
d.  Compliance with KP-RETP General Terms and Conditions 
e. 
f. 
In-country after-sales maintenance facilities 
Landed price. 
314. 
A three-member evaluation committee as described above carries out the evaluation. The Procurement 
Specialist  prepares  a  sheet  summarizing  all  examined  quotations.  The  quotation  that  is  compliant  with  the 
requirements of the RFQ and offers the lowest price is recommended for award of contract or purchase order. 
No  post-qualification  is  conducted  due  to  the  low  value  and  lack  of  complexity  of  the  contract.  The 
recommendation for award is indicated at the bottom of the summary sheet, which is signed by all members of 
the evaluation committee. The award decision is made by the Project Director (who may delegate his authority 
to the DPDs at PMU). 
315. 
Award  and  Signature  of  Contracts.  The  approval  authority  for  contract  awards  is  the  PD.  When 
reviewing the evaluation report submitted by the evaluation committee, the PD ensures that (i) there are no 
inaccuracies in the report, (ii) the evaluation was conducted in accordance with applicable rules, procedures, 
and  provisions  of  the  bid  documents,  and  (ii)  the  award  recommendation  is  consistent  with  the  evaluation. 
Before  giving  approval,  the  PD  also  ensures  that  any  written  complaints  made  by  bidders  concerning  the 
procurement process have been reviewed and responded to18. The PD may issue a full or a qualified approval to 
the award of contract or the action recommended by the evaluation committee. In case of a qualified approval, 
the evaluation committee has 3 working days to make corrections to the report or provide clear explanations 
before  final  issue.  Once  approved,  the  PD  addresses  a  request  for  No  Objection  to  IFAD,  attaching  the  bid 
opening minutes, the evaluation report and summary sheet of bids/proposals, and the award recommendation. 
Only once IFAD’s unconditional No Objection is received should the contract award procedure be commenced. 
16 If pre-qualification was conducted, the lowest evaluated responsive bid should be recommended for the award of contract, 
unless the bidder’s qualifications have since materially deteriorated, or if the bidder has since received additional work that 
reduces the available capacity. 
17 The rejection of a bid for reasons of qualification requires substantial justification, which should be clearly documented in the 
evaluation report. 
18 If the complaint reveals a serious breach of procedures or ethics, or if directed by the independent Procurement Review 
Panel, the Committee shall reject the evaluation report and call for re-bidding. 
59 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
The Procurement Specialist can then enter the evaluation date, name of selected supplier and date of IFAD’s No 
Objection in the PTS, and update the procurement plan accordingly. 
316. 
Once IFAD’s No Objection is obtained, the Procurement Specialist informs the unsuccessful bidders in 
writing and sends a notice of award to the winning bidder who is invited to come to the PMU to confirm the 
terms and conditions of the contract prior to the document being drafted. Award notices are published on the 
KP-PPRA websites or bulletin boards as soon as the evaluation process has been completed and the contract has 
been awarded. 
317. 
Complaints from Bidders. Aggrieved bidders are allowed a maximum of 15 days after announcement of 
the bid evaluation report to file a complaint. In order to investigate the complaint(s), the KP-RETP constitutes a 
special committee (different from the evaluation committee and comprising an odd number of persons) that 
has  15  days  to  make  a  decision.  Any  unsatisfied  bidder  may  then  lodge  an  appeal  in  the  relevant  court  of 
jurisdiction. There are three distinct types of complaints that are typically found in a Project; i.e., (a) complaints 
concerning  bid  protest  from  aggrieved  contractors,  suppliers,  service  providers  and  consultants,  which  are 
addressed during or immediately after the bid process, (b) performance disputes, which are governed by the 
General Conditions of Contract (GCC) and Special Conditions of Contract (SCC), and, (c) non procurement related 
complaints from any parties, which are addressed in the PIM. A complaint is any notification regarding an alleged 
illegal  or  improper  procurement  action  and/or  conduct  of  procurement  officials,  consultants,  and/or  sub-
contractors  directly  or  indirectly  supporting  a  project  or  associated  with  its  implementation,  which  the 
complainant believes is wrong, either under the law or on the grounds of unacceptable behavior.  
318. 
The  PMU  shall  ensure  the  confidentiality  of  any  complainant  and  shall  hold  harmless  any  person 
reporting a complaint, oftentimes referred to as a “whistle blower”, with provisions to shield complainant(s) or 
public official(s) from retaliation when they provide information that they reasonably believe to be a violation 
of  the  provisions  of  the  agreed  procedures.  All  procurement  related  complaints  shall  be  addressed  to  the 
PMU/Project Director, to which the PMU shall respond within 15 days. If PMU needs more time due to complex 
investigation related to the complaints, then it shall state so in writing to the complainants, but in any case, a 
complaint shall be put into closure within 25 business days. The complainant need not be personally aggrieved 
or  impacted, and  may be  acting merely in  accordance  with  a  sense  of  civic  duty,  such  as an  NGO  or private 
citizen,  in  bringing an  occurrence  to  the attention  of project authorities.  All  complaints, whether  notified  by 
persons who feel personally aggrieved or acting out of a sense of civic duty, will be acknowledged and acted 
upon  by  responsible  authorities  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  specified  in  this  section.  Concerning  bid 
protests, from time to time, with and without justification bidders, suppliers, contractors, service providers and 
consultants  may  choose to  lodge  a complaint  concerning some  aspect of  the  contract award  process.  In  the 
event  the  contract  has  been  awarded  and  a  contractual  relationship  exists  between  the  parties,  there  are 
established dispute mechanisms in the GCC that shall be followed, up to and including judicial review. A formal 
mechanism to satisfactorily respond to bid protest complaints must be followed, consistent with this Manual 
and the  steps  to be  followed  by  aggrieved  bidders,  suppliers, contractors and consultants  in  the complaint’s 
procedure will be specified in the Bid/Request for Proposal documents  
319. 
service standard.  
Complaints may also be addressed directly to IFAD, to which IFAD will resolve the complaints within its 
320. 
Preparation of Contract or Purchase Order: The Procurement Specialist drafts the contracts based on 
the  standard  model  and  the  conditions  and  modalities  contained  in  the  bidding  documents  and  the 
offers/proposals.  The  contracts  are  numbered  using  the  unique  procurement  case  identification  number 
preceded by the prefix GC (goods contract), WC (works contract), SC (services contract), or PO (purchase order). 
The drafted contract is submitted to the DPD, MFA/M&E Specialist or technical sector specialists for review and 
validation. It is then reviewed with the supplier/contractor and the performance security, if any, is collected by 
the MFA before the contract is submitted to the PD for review. Once his/her remarks are taken into account, 
the final version is printed in two originals, which are signed by the PD and by the supplier/contractor. 
321. 
As soon as the contract is effective, bid securities are returned to all bidders. Singed copy of the contract 
must be sent to IFAD before the first withdrawal application relating to the contract. A copy of the contract is 
also sent to the P&DD GoKP. The Contract Management Officer updates the contract details online in ICP-CM. 
The procurement plan is also updated with actual dates accordingly. 
60 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
N. 
Types of Contracts 
322. 
the supply of goods shall be issued. The contract must indicate: 
Goods. For goods valued at more than US$1,000 (procured through an ITB), IFAD standard contract for 
a.  The nature, quantity and unit cost of the goods 
b.  The technical specifications and required norms or standards 
c.  The general conditions of the contract 
d.  The special conditions of the contract (e.g. Guarantee and coverage period, insurance, etc.) 
e.  Special instructions relating to packing and freight 
f. 
Special instructions relating to delivery and invoicing 
g.  Advance payments, if any 
h.  Payment terms. 
323.  Works. For works valued at more than USD 20,000 (procured through an ITB), IFAD standard template 
for works contract shall be issued. The contract must include: 
a.  A detailed description of the works, the cost of the works (the drawings, norms, technical specifications 
and supplier’s detailed estimate must be included as annexes) 
b.  The  valuation  of  beneficiaries’  contributions  in  the  cost  of  the  works,  and  in  each  statement  of 
acceptance of work to be invoiced 
c.  The general conditions for the execution of the contract 
d.  The special conditions of the contract (e.g. guarantee and coverage period, surety deduction, insurance, 
etc.) 
e.  Schedule of works and corresponding delivery dates 
f.  Advance payments, if any 
g.  Payment terms (completion certificate from independent firm, signature of statements of acceptance 
of work, etc.) 
h.  Payment schedule. 
324. 
Services. For services provided by consulting firms (procured through an RFP), IFAD standard templates 
for  services  contract  (for  lump  sum  services  or  time-based  payments)  shall  be  issued  (see  IFAD  website  for 
sample of framework contracts). The contract must include: 
a.  A description of the nature and scope of the services (the TOR must be annexed to the contract) 
b.  A reference to the technical proposal of the supplier 
c.  A description of resources to be made available by the supplier (human, material, etc.) 
d.  The general conditions of execution of the contract 
e.  The list of expected outputs (e.g. intermediary and final report) and delivery dates 
f. 
The  cost of  services and  reimbursable  expenses (with  a  reference  to  the proposal  submitted  by the 
supplier) 
g.  The procurement modalities for any assets and equipment needed in the performance of the contract 
h.  A clause on the ownership of data produced, copyrights and assets acquired during the execution of 
the contract 
i. 
j. 
Payment terms (expense claims, supporting documents, financial reports, etc.) 
Payment schedule (deliverables, amounts and dates of invoicing). 
61 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
1. 
Framework Contracts 
325. 
Framework (or “call-off”) contracts can provide an efficient, cost effective and flexible means to procure 
goods,  works  or  services  that  are  required  continuously  or  repeatedly  over  a  set  period  of  time  (see  KP-
PPRA/PPRA website for sample of framework contracts). 
326. 
Framework contracts are particularly useful for small scale works that are readily available from the 
local supply market. Although there are no set rules for the use of framework Contracts, it is generally considered 
that  if  there  is  a  high  level  of  cumulative  annual  expenditure,  or  if  there  are  more  than  10-15  separate 
procurement processes initiated in a year, for a grouping of similar activities then a framework contract should 
be considered. 
327. 
The  objective  of  framework  contracts  is  to  minimize  the  cost  and  effort  wasted  in  preparation  of 
multiple similar small procurement processes by agreeing fixed prices with a supplier for a set period of time. 
The aggregation of requirements will result in greater price competition among providers to win the right to 
supply all requirements for the subject of the framework contract. 
328. 
works that may be efficiently purchased under a framework contract. 
Routine refurbishment, repair and/or maintenance of offices and grounds are examples of the types of 
329. 
Advances.  Except  where  normal  commercial  practice  or  the  interests  of  the  Project  so  requires,  no 
contract or purchase order shall be signed which requires an advance payment or payments on account of goods 
or performance of works and contracted services. Wherever an advance payment is agreed to, the Procurement 
Specialist records the reasons thereto in a note to the procurement file and enters the amount of the advance 
in  the  PTS.  The  Finance  Unit  also  records  the  advance  in  the  contract  monitoring  form.  Where  the  Project 
Director may approve the payment of advances up to 20% of total contract amount, suppliers are required to 
provide a bank guarantee19 in a form acceptable to the KP-RETP and IFAD. The bank guarantee shall be valid for 
the duration of the contract or until the advance has been fully recovered. Any waiver to this rule requires prior 
authorization from IFAD. To recover the advance payment, the progress payments and the final payment shall 
be subject to a percentage deduction equal to the percentage that advance represents over the total price of 
the contract. 
330. 
Contract amendments. Contract amendments are usually required in two situations: 
a.  Certain aspects of the contract need to be changed at the request of the consultant/or a contractor (for 
example, a no-cost extension of the length of the contract) or  
b.  The  original contract is executed  as  planned  and  it is decided  that  further  related  works  or  services 
should be rendered by the same entity. 
c.  When the amendment results in (i) a material modification of the initial contract, (ii) a relinquishment 
of the terms and conditions of the initial contract, (iii) an extension of the contract duration or (iv) any 
other modification resulting in a 10% (or more) increase in the initial contract amount, then the PD 
must inform the P&DD GoKP. S/He must subsequently prepare a letter to be addressed by the P&DD 
GoKP  and  IFAD  for  No  Objection.  This  letter  must  detail  all  the  modifications  to  the  contract,  and 
provide full justification for the amendment(s).  
331. 
IFAD’s decision is communicated to the P&DD GoKP in writing. In case of rejection, IFAD must explain 
the reasons why the amendment is considered contrary to the provisions of the financing agreement. In case of 
acceptance, the Procurement Specialist prepares the contract amendment, including all the clauses modifying 
or  replacing  the  initial  contract,  and  the  new  or  amended  ToR.  The  MFA/M&E  and  technical  experts 
reviews/validates the contract amendment, which is then signed by the PD and the supplier/contractor. Copies 
are sent to IFAD and P&DD GoKP. Contract amendments are recorded in the online ICP-CM and the individual 
contract monitoring form. 
332. 
Small Value  Contracts. Small  value contracts are defined as contracts for goods and works and non-
consulting  services  under  USD  1,000  that  are  procured  through  RFQ.  After  signature  by  the  evaluation 
committee,  the  quotation  summary  sheet  containing  the  recommendation  for  award  is  transmitted  to  the 
Project Director along with the quotations received, for review and award of the contract. In these cases, the 
19  The  bank  guarantee  requirement  does  not  apply  to  government  institutions  contracted  by  the  KP-RETP  through  MOUs  as 
suppliers or implementing partners. 
62 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
contract award is approved by the Project Director. The related files are kept at the disposal of IFAD and P&DD 
GoKP for post review purposes. 
333. 
Purchase orders are used for the acquisition of small value goods and for non-consulting services (e.g. 
maintenance and repairs, publications, advertisements, etc.). The Procurement Specialist prepares the purchase 
orders from the information contained in the supplier’s quotation or estimate. The POs are signed by the PD and 
the MFA, as well as the supplier. At Regional level (for the procurement of goods, works and non-consulting 
services valued at less than USD 1,000), the purchase orders are signed by the RC (who receives a delegation of 
authority from the PD). Similarly, IFAD’s20 simplified version of the services contract shall be used for small value 
consulting services by a firm. In the case of individual consultants, a specific contract. These contracts are also 
signed by the Project Director. The PO or contract amount, date and number are entered into the ICP-CM, and 
the procurement plan is also updated accordingly. 
O. 
Contract Administration 
334. 
At  each  stage  of  the  procurement  process  (purchase  requisition,  prequalification,  preparation  of 
bidding documents, advertisement, bid opening, bid evaluation, post- qualification, contract signature and final 
delivery),  the  Procurement  Specialist  updates  the  procurement  plan,  indicating  the  date  of  the  event 
immediately  after  the  step  is  completed.  All  relevant  information  pertaining  to  procurement  cases  is  also 
entered  into  the  PTS  database  during  the  process.  The  requesting  staff  must  remain  informed  of  ongoing 
activities relating to the contract, as s/he is responsible for the monitoring of the contract implementation and 
for the evaluation of the supplier’s performance. In collaboration with the Procurement Specialist, s/he must 
ensure that: 
a.  Deliverables or milestones are completed by the supplier in a satisfactory manner, and as scheduled in 
the contract, and 
b.  RETP-KP complies with its obligations as specified in the contract in a timely manner (e.g. assistance 
with import licenses, approval of drawings and reports, provision of storage/working facilities, letters 
of invitation for visas, etc.). 
c.  S/he must inform the Procurement Specialist and the MFA of any modifications in the execution of the 
contract, or any issues relating to the supplier’s performance, so as to allow for timely action, such as 
the  preparation  of  contract  amendments  or  prevention/handling  of  claims  or  disputes  in  a  timely 
manner. 
335. 
This information is also used by the Procurement Specialist to provide the MFA with an update on the 
execution of major contracts in the quarterly progress reports. In the case of claims or disputes, the PD must 
immediately refer to the P&DD GoKP who will in turn inform IFAD so that necessary actions may be taken. The 
Procurement Specialist enters information relating to contract amendments, claims or disputes into the PTS as 
well. As soon as a contract is signed by RETP-KP, the MFA enters the relevant data into the accounting software, 
and the system automatically creates an individual contract monitoring form based on the IFAD ‘C11’ model. 
The contract monitoring form (CMF) contains the basic information on the contract (name/address of supplier, 
procurement  file  number,  contract  date/number/amount,  AWPB  activity  code,  brief  description,  bank 
guarantees) and details the payment schedule, including the milestones for each payment. Every time an invoice 
is received and a payment is made, the Accounts Officer enters the related information into accounting software, 
which  automatically  updates  the  CMF.  The  CMF  is  also  updated  whenever  there  is  an  amendment  to  the 
contract. At the end of each month, the Procurement Specialist checks the contract register against the CMF to 
ensure that all contracts are registered, and a CMF exists for each contract. 
P. 
Contract Register (CR)/Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) 
336. 
The CMT is a mandatory platform for the recording and monitoring of all contracts. It includes:  
a.  procurement contracts (goods, works, services, and non-consulting services): all contracts and purchase 
orders signed based on the PP covering all procurement methods and contract types; 
20 https://www.ifad.org/en/project-procurement  
63 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
b.  Grants (all first-level in kind and monetary grants): The procurement method for Grants will include 
competitive  methods  such  as  QCBS,  QBS, FBS,  CQS, ICS or non-competitive  methods  such  as  SSS or 
Selection  based  on  project  design/PIM;  competitive  methods  are  always  recommended  unless  duly 
justified and exceptional; FBS is the closest method to grants where the ceiling is fixed; 
c. 
Implementing Partner contracts (MoU, MoA): including all agreements with all types of third parties 
who  will  be  delegated  procurement  authority  such  as  UN  agencies  and  community  participation 
contracts  whether  contracted  competitively  or  not;  procurement  methods  for  these  implementing 
partners are the following: 
o  Community contract (single source selection) 
o  Community contract (recipient or selection process defined at design/PIM) 
o  Community contract (competitive selection) 
o  Governmental body / State owned enterprises 
o  UN agency (competitive selection) 
o  UN agency (single source selection) 
o  NGO / International Organization (competitive selection) 
o  NGO / International Organization (single source selection) 
d.  Subsidiary financing agreements and investment agreements: typically include financing contracts for 
micro-credit loans and  other  types of  loans.  In  this case,  only  the first-level financing or refinancing 
contract selected using one of two methods shall be entered in the CMT: 
o  Selection as defined in Design/PIM; or  
o  Single Source Selection. 
337. 
The  Contract  Register  will  be  extracted  as  a  Report  directly  from  the  CMT.  It  will  be  a  cumulative 
document that is augmented progressively and automatically with the new contracts signed and inserted in the 
system.   
338. 
The  Project  Management  Unit  will  adopt  the  Contract  Monitoring  Tool  deployed  by  IFAD  and  will 
dedicate sufficient resources to use and operate and generate reports from this system as instructed by IFAD. 
CMT Help section offers guidance and support on how to use this tool. The recording of contracts  signed by 
Implementing Partners with third parties (goods, works, consulting services, non-consulting services, grants or 
loans). 
339. 
Delivery of  Goods. works and services: Delivery of goods:  Goods are normally delivered to the PMU 
office in Peshawar, or the RMUs in the concerned divisions. The PS and the CMO are responsible for receiving 
the goods; the presence of the requesting staff may be required for large value contracts. In the case of imported 
goods,  the  contract  may  specify  that  a  pre-shipment  inspection  of  the  goods  must  be  conducted  by  an 
international third-party agent. All shipping documents are sent by the supplier to the PMU and forwarded to 
the Procurement Specialist for tax and duty exemption formalities. Once obtained from the Ministry of Finance, 
the duty-free concession is forwarded to the supplier who is responsible for clearing shipments through customs 
upon arrival at the port/airport. The PS or CMO must be present when goods are released from customs. All 
external abnormalities to the shipment (e.g. dents, holes, cracks) or missing boxes/crates must be noted by the 
PS or CMO in the clearance receipt or bill of lading/airway bill, for reporting to the supplier and to the insurance 
company. 
340. 
Upon  receipt  of  goods  procured  by  way  of  a  goods  contract,  the  Procurement  Specialist,  CMO  and 
requesting  staff  conduct  a  detailed  inspection  of  the  goods  before  acceptance.  They  immediately  fill  out  a 
receiving & inspection report, indicating the contract number and whether all goods ordered were received and 
in what condition. In case of a problem (damaged or missing goods), the PS or CMO notes the details on the RIR. 
S/he gives a copy of the RIR to the MFA for the accounting files, and uses the original to file the claim against 
the  freight  carrier,  the  insurance  company  and/or  the  supplier  under  the  supervision  of  the  MFA.  The 
Procurement Specialist files the original RIR in the procurement file and inputs the date and number of the RIR 
in the PTS. 
64 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
341. 
For small value goods procured by way of a purchase order, the Procurement Specialist or CMO checks 
the  goods  received  against  the  PO  directly  on  the  delivery  slip,  which  serves  as  the  RIR.  Depending  on  the 
remarks or reservations noted on the delivery slip, the supplier’s invoice is either partially paid or not paid at all 
until the object of contention is resolved. 
342. 
Delivery of Works. The delivery of works is usually completed in several tranches. The technical officer 
(requesting  staff)  of  the  PMU  or  RMUs,  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  the  representative  of  the  end-
user/beneficiaries  all  verify  the  work  and  sign  the  statements  of  work  issued  by  the  contractor.  For  large 
contracts, the supervising engineer (normally from a contracted engineering bureau) in charge of the monitoring 
and supervision of the works also issues certificates of completion to certify the amount of works completed. 
343. 
The  provisional  and  final  takeover  (i.e.  receipt)  of  works  is  carried  out  by  an  ad  hoc  Inspection  and 
acceptance committee. In the case of small value works (less than US$ 20,000), the committee is made up of the 
Procurement Specialist, the requesting staff, a representative from the PMU (if applicable) and a representative 
of  the beneficiaries.  For large  value  works  (US$  20,000  or  more),  the committee  includes,  in  addition  to  the 
above-cited members, a representative of the relevant line agency and the supervising engineer. In both cases, 
a  takeover  report  detailing  any  delay  or  fault  in  the  execution  of  the  works  is  signed  by  all  members  of  the 
Inspection and acceptance committee. A copy of the report is given to the Procurement Specialist for updating 
of the PTS and for the procurement files. As the works progress and partial payments are issued, the MFA enters 
the data into the FM accounting software, which automatically updates the CMF. Upon completion of the works 
contract, a copy of the final acceptance certificate is given to the Procurement Specialist for updating of the ICP-
CM and PTS. 
344. 
Delivery of Services. The delivery of consulting services is materialized by the production of reports, 
studies or surveys, as indicated in the contract. The report is addressed at first to the requesting staff/component 
head  who  after  review  may  send  comments  or  request  additional  information  from  the  consultant.  After 
validation by the component head, the final report is sent to the Project Director for final review and approval. 
The acceptance of the report is materialized by the signature of the Project Director on the final version of the 
report. A copy of the final report is given to (i) the Procurement Specialist for updating of the PTS and (ii) to the 
Finance Manager to update the CMF. 
345. 
Payment and Reporting. The procedures for verification and certification of invoices as well as payment 
by the Finance Unit are detailed in FM sections. The Manager Finance and Administration gives a copy of the 
invoices to the Procurement Specialist who enters the invoice date, number and amount into the PTS. Once the 
payment is made, the contract monitoring form is automatically updated in the accounting software. Reporting 
on procurement actions is achieved through the following documents: 
a.  The procurement plan; 
b.  The PTS reports; 
c.  The contract register on ICP-CM 
346. 
Once it is approved, the procurement plan is updated on a ‘real-time’ basis: The Procurement Specialist 
enters the actual date every time one of the actions in the procurement steps detailed in the PP is completed. 
At the end of the process, when the contract is signed, the Procurement Specialist enters in the PP the date and 
amount of the contract, as well as the name of the contractor. S/he also enters the details of the contract in the 
contract register, which is sent to IFAD at the end of each month. The PP also contains a separate sheet (linked 
to the detailed procurement plan sheets) that shows PP execution, i.e., actual vs. plan by component and by 
type  of  procurement  (goods,  works  and  services).  Throughout  the  procurement  process,  the  Procurement 
Specialist updates the Procurement Tracking System. The information entered in this database allows the Project 
to obtain detailed statistics and reports on the various stages of procurement activities, including processing 
delays,  execution  by  component,  sub-component  or  expense  category,  suppliers  by  country  of  origin, 
comparisons  by  month/quarter/year,  trends,  etc.  Promptly  after  the  end  of  each  month,  the  Procurement 
Specialist prepares a short section on the status of execution of the procurement plan. The section contains the 
summary  of  PP  execution  by  component  and  by  type  of  procurement,  as  well  as  an  analysis  of  significant 
variances between actual and planned amounts, and explanations of delays in procurement execution.  
347. 
File  System/Record  Management:  an  integral  part  of  procurement  processes.  To  ensure  that  the 
purpose  and  objectives  of  the  procurement  records  can  be  best  realized,  all  communications,  decisions  and 
instructions  between  IFAD  and  GoKP  RETP-KP  and  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors  or  consultants  will  be 
65 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
exchanged or recorded in writing. Best practice determines that each procurement activity will have its own 
separate file or folder or dossier where records are kept properly coded in chronological order, relating only to 
the matter of the procurement in question. The purpose of good record keeping is to be able to review at any 
one  moment  the  entire  historical  record  of  the  procurement  of  one  requirement  in  a logical  and  sequential 
manner. Records  relating  to  any  procurement  proceeding documents  shall be  maintained  for a  period  of 10 
years from the completion date. Each procurement dossier must contain the following elements; 
  External label identifying the component and the tender (Works, Goods, Services). 
  Separators indicating: 
  ToR or Specifications or Quantities Maps (commonly referred to as BOQ). In this section are ToR or 
Quantities  Specifications  or  Maps  (commonly  referred  to  as  BOQ)  sent  to  IFAD  for  NO.  IFAD 
comments  and  corrections  incorporated  in  the  TOR  or  in  the  Specifications,  the  IFAD  letter  of 
referral (if so requested) and the final NO should also be archived; 
  Announcement.  Announcement  of  Request  for  Expression  of  Interest  (REOI)  or  General 
Procurement  Notices  (GPN),  Specific  Procurement  Notice  (SPN)  and  letter  requesting  NO, 
incorporation  of  comments  (if  any),  final  announcement  and  copy  of  your  publication  in  the 
newspapers with the largest circulation in the country with the respective date; 
  Manifestation of Interest (EOI). Protocol of reception of Manifestations of Interest with a list of the 
companies that responded, the dates of the answer, the number of the documents in the PMU, the 
type and number of documents that arrived per company Mail and E-mail box of the PMU). For the 
Consulting  processes,  the  Evaluation  Report  of  the  Manifestations  of  interest,  the  letter  of 
transmission to the IFAD with Evaluation Report and short list proposed for submission of the RFP, 
the IFAD NO response on the short list; 
  Request for Proposals (RFP) and Bidding Documents (BD). For the Consulting processes, RFQ's NO 
letter  to  IFAD,  IFAD's  response  to  comments  and  changes  to  be  made,  incorporation  of  these 
corrections in the final RFP, sending it to the IFAD for verification, receiving the final NO, sending 
the RFPs to the shortlisted companies (if any). For the Goods and Works processes, the letter of NO 
to the Bidding Documents (BD), the incorporation of the IFAD comments (if any), the submission of 
the corrected BDs for IFAD approval and the final NO of the IFAD. 
  Correspondence exchanged on the RFP and BD. For the Consulting processes, receipts of reception 
of the RFP by the companies, letters to confirm the participation in the contest by these companies, 
clarifications requested in writing, sending the written explanations in the PMU to all shortlisted 
companies, requests for a written extension and granting such extension in writing to all shortlisting 
companies, where appropriate. 
  For  the  processes  of  acquisition  of  Goods  and  Works,  sales  receipts  of  the  specifications  (BD), 
requests and clarification made by the companies, clarifications provided to all companies, requests 
for written extension and grant of such extension in writing to all companies that have purchased 
the specifications (BD), if any. 
  Notification  of  the  Evaluation  Committee.  The  Evaluation  Committee  proposed  by  the  PD  and 
respective approval (Dispatch). 
Evaluation of Proposals. For the Consulting processes, Evaluation Report Submission Letter 
  Signed  minutes  of  all  meetings  relating  to  the  procurement,  including  pre-bid  and  negotiation 
meetings where these were held 
  A contract award notice 
  Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor, or consultant 
  The signed contract document and contract acceptance 
  Any contract amendments 
  All  contractual  correspondence  between  the  procuring  entity  and  a  supplier,  contractor,  or 
consultant  
66 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
  Post-contract documents relating to the fulfilment of contract obligations, in particular photocopies 
of bank guarantees, or payment guarantees 
Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including contract progress or 
review meetings 
  Signed  delivery  documents  evidencing  delivery  of  supplies  or  signed  completion  certificates  in 
relation  to  a  contract  for  services  or  works  under  the  contract  including  any  contract  delivery 
records 
  A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies including work-papers verifying the accuracy 
of payments claimed and details of the actual payment authorized 
  A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management of all payments made 
  A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate approval authority related to the 
procurement  including  the  approval  of  the  invitation  documents,  approval  of  the  evaluation 
report(s),  contract  award,  approval  of  contract  documents  and  contract  amendments  and  any 
decision to suspend or cancel procurement proceedings 
  A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity in respect of any warranty, non-warranty, short 
supply, damage, and other claims upon the provider or upon the procuring entity 
In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in relation to the seeking of 
IFAD’s NOs 
  A copy of any complain or action taken documentations; and  
  Any  other  communications  relating  to  the  procurement  in  questions  including  internal  entity 
correspondence. 
348. 
the following matters and issues: 
Other procurement-related coordination with IFAD: The PMU shall coordinate in advance with IFAD on 
  Any changes to the PIM; 
  Any changes to the staffing of the Project Management Unit; 
  Composition of Evaluation committees; 
  Summaries of Debriefing requests and copies of Protests for all prior review procurement activities 
before a decision is issued (optional for post review procurement activities); 
  The  PMU  shall  inform  IFAD  of  any  related  Appeal  filed  to  competent  National  Authorities  (if 
applicable) immediately upon becoming aware of such an appeal; 
  Procurement progress reports as well as special reports on critical issues; 
  Details of defaulting or corrupt vendors; 
  Debarment of a vendor who appears to be debarred by another MDB for validation by IFAD if cross-
debarment should apply (for prior and post review); and 
  Any other matter specifically requested by IFAD. 
349. 
In  addition  to  the  above,  the  project  will  provide  full  assistance  to  IFAD  implementation  support, 
supervision, MTR, and project closing missions. The Project will avail all necessary staff and provide all required 
documents, records and files. The same applies for any IFAD audit or investigation.  
350. 
Guidelines (2019) covering the key Procurement Principles: 
Procurement  Principles  and  Ethics.  The  PMU  will  strictly  adhere  to  the  IFAD  Project  Procurement 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Ethics; Accountability; Competition; 
Fairness; Transparency;  
Efficiency, Effectiveness and Economy; and 
Best Value for Money. 
67 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
351. 
Furthermore,  the  PMU/RCUs/Service  Providers/Implementing  Partners/Individual  Consultants  will 
strictly  adhere  to  the  provisions  of  IFAD’s  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  Activities  and 
Operations available at www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506. The Project shall ensure that this 
policy is clearly stated in all procurement documents (solicitation documents and contracts) and that all vendors 
comply with this policy. All such documents shall clearly include also IFAD’s Anti-corruption Hotline: 
Office of Audit and Oversight (AUO) 
Investigation Section (IS) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Email : anticorruption@ifad.org 
Phone : +39 0654592888 
Fax : +39 0654597888 
352. 
Combatting  Corruption  and  Sexual  Harassment:  The  PMU/RCUs/Service  Providers/Implementing 
Partners/Individual  Consultants  will  strictly  adhere  to  the  provisions  of  IFAD’s  Policy  to  Preventing  and 
Responding 
at 
www.ifad.org/anticorruption_policy.  The Project shall ensure that this policy is clearly stated in all procurement 
documents  (solicitation  documents  and  contracts)  and  that  all  vendors  comply  with  this  policy.  All  such 
documents shall clearly include also IFAD’s Ethics Hotline: 
Harassment, 
Exploitation 
available 
Sexual 
Sexual 
Abuse 
and 
to 
Ethics Office (ETH) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Email: ethicsoffice@ifad.org  
Phone: +39 06 5459 2525  
https://www.ifad.org/en/ethics  
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism. The PMU/RCUs/Service 
353. 
Providers/Implementing Partners/Individual Consultants shall ensure commitment to combating money 
laundering and terrorism financing consistent with IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the 
Financing of Terrorism Policy available at https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41942012.
68 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
VI. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
354. 
This  chapter of PIM has been developed to assist the project management—especially the project’s 
financial  management  team  in  understanding  the  basic  fiduciary  requirements  while  implementing  an  IFAD-
funded project. It draws on IFAD’s guidelines and references have been made where appropriate so the users 
can expand on their knowledge by consulting primary sources of information.  A sound understanding of such 
requirements  is  critical  to  ensuring  (a)  proper  control,  accountability  and  reliability  over  funds  and  financial 
information; and (b) compatibility of PMU’s processes with IFAD and GoKP policies and requirements. 
Information on Reference material: 
This document should be read together with the: 
 
 
 
 
 
Project financing agreement entered into between the Borrower and IFAD;  
Letter to the Borrower; 
IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing; 
IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook; (links given in this manual) 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-funded projects ( links given in this manual) 
355. 
Updates  and  changes  to  financial  management  arrangements.  KP-RETP  Project  is  an  IFAD-funded 
Project,  therefore,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  efforts  to  capacitate  and  support  projects,  this  section  was  developed 
during  the  project  design  process.  It  is  envisaged  that  ongoing  improvements  and  updates  to  financial 
management arrangements be updated in this section of the PIM under supervision of the Financial Manager 
and subject to IFAD no objection. 
356. 
Updates  and  changes  to  financial  management  arrangements.  KP-RETP  Project  is  an  IFAD-funded 
Project,  therefore,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  efforts  to  capacitate  and  support  projects,  this  section  was  developed 
during  the  project  design  process.  It  is  envisaged  that  ongoing  improvements  and  updates  to  financial 
management arrangements be updated in this section of the PIM under supervision of the Financial Manager 
and subject to IFAD no objection. 
Table 9: Project summary  
Project Name  
Financiers, Contributors, Facilities  
Project Effective Date 
Implementation Period  
Project Completion Date  
Project Closure Date 
Project Area 
KP-RETP Project 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
69 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
A. 
Project Cycle and Financial Management Activities 
357. 
activities at each stage of the Project cycle as outlined below: 
The FM Team of KP-RETP will have final responsibility for the execution of the financial management 
Start-up
Implementation
Project closure and 
completion
FM activities at each stage of the Project cycle 
Start-up 
Implementation 
Project closure and completion 
 
 
Procure  accounting  software 
acceptable to IFAD 
Preparation of first annual work 
plan and budget  
  Opening of bank accounts  
 
 
Start-up training 
Attend 
workshop hosted by IFAD. 
anticorruption 
  Notification/MOUs 
about 
government’s  share  in  project 
cost 
 
Establish  FM  requirements  for 
FOs/Private 
Partners/Service 
Providers  
  Ongoing  improvements  to  the 
 
IFAD  Specific  completion  and 
closure procedures  
 
 
 
and 
Final audit  
Asset and inventory handover 
Budget wrap up 
Financial Manual 
Budgeting  
Accounting  
Disbursements 
withdrawals 
Record keeping  
Internal controls  
Cash flow forecasting 
Auditing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  On-going training 
 
 
Implement 
evaluation21 
performance 
Financial reporting to IFAD  
IFAD Ongoing Support 
NB:  KP-RETP  Project  Financial  Manager  will  have  the  final  responsibility  to  prepare  consolidated  financial  reports  for 
submission to IFAD. Refer to Section X (Financial Reporting) for more detail. 
21 Develop (in consultation with the Project Coordinator) a performance evaluation process for FM staff within 1 year of project 
commencement and document process in the PIM. This process should identify skills gaps and assist with identifying 
appropriate training interventions.  
70 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
B. 
Pre-Implementation Activities  
358. 
During the start-up phase, it is recommended that Project staff to undertake following activities. This 
will ensure that the relevant staff are well informed and knowledgeable with regards to the core work processes 
that will—in turn, determine the implementation effectiveness of any project.  
Activity 
Overview 
Financial  management 
staff appointment 
Accounting software  
 
 
 
Provincial government to fill vacancies within PMU and RMPUs to ensure that the project 
has required organization and staffing arrangements for project implementation. Refer to 
(VIII) for the proposed organogram. 
PMU/Finance Manager to procure an accounting software and trained relevant staff in its 
use to ensure that a robust accounting function is in place; 
The software to use/incorporate correct chart of accounts (categories and components) 
in line with the detail in Schedule 2 of the Financing agreement with IFAD. 
  Upload  the  Cost  Table  (Schedule  2  of  the  Financing  Agreement)  to  the  accounting 
software for the purposes of budgeting / monitoring. 
Open bank accounts 
 
Finance  Manager  to  engage  with  provincial  Finance  Department  and  provincial 
Accountant General to open the Designated Accounts for the project. (Refer to Fund of 
Flows section – Designated Account for details).  
of 
Preparation 
first 
annual  work  plan  and 
budget 
 
The Financial Manager to finalize the draft Annual Work plan and Budget, as directed by 
the Project Director, subject to IFAD no-objection. This budget will be a consolidation of 
the  budgets obtained  from RCUs (Refer to  the  process as outlined in Section V Annual 
Work Plan and Budgeting section). 
Staff 
training 
capacity building 
and 
  Newly appointed financial Management staff will be required to complete the IFAD FM e-
learning  and  submit  completion  certificates  to  IFAD  within  1  month  of  date  of 
appointment. Refer to the Useful links below for the training link. 
 
All staff are required to study the project related documents at project start-up. 
**Other training at project start-up: 
o 
PMU Financial management training workshop for RCUs. This training will be organized 
by the PMU Financial Manager and it will focus on PMU requirements (monthly reporting, 
document retention etc.) and cover practical issues / lessons learnt. 
C. 
Principles of Financial Management 
359. 
IFAD requires the recipient of IFAD’s funds to make arrangements to ensure that the proceeds of any 
financing  are  used  only  for  the  purposes  for  which  the  financing  was  provided,  with  due  attention  to 
considerations of economy, efficiency and social equity. This responsibility is generally described as a “fiduciary 
obligation” with respect to the investment funds approved for financing provided by IFAD. 
360. 
The primary responsibility for fiduciary obligation rests with the borrower/recipient (B/R) to maintain 
financial  management  (FM)  arrangements  that  assist  in  meeting  fiduciary  obligations  and  that  provide 
reasonable assurance to stakeholders that funds have been used as intended. IFAD’s role is to support the B/R’s 
capacity  to  meet  this  responsibility  and  to  provide  general  oversight  on  the  design  and  functioning  of  FM 
arrangements  during  project  implementation.  Financial  management  refers  to  the  organization,  budgeting, 
accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting and internal and auditing arrangements by which 
B/Rs receive funds, spend them and record their use. 
The country’s inherent risk rating has been “Substantial” bordering on being “High”. The country risk 
361. 
rating has worsened in recent years22.  The project would be using country PFM system for implementation and 
22 For details, please see reports at https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2020/index/pak and at 
https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/open-budget-index-rankings  
71 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
therefore several actions have been proposed in this part of the manual to keep fiduciary risks to acceptable 
level in the light or recent years external audit reports and inputs of relevant officials met during the PDR. PMU 
would be responsible to implement the proposed mitigation actions. 
362. 
IFAD will monitor FM performance of KP-RETP Project at regular intervals and provide implementation 
support  as  needed.  IFAD  has  assessed  disbursement  risk  initially  based  on  the  country  portfolio  review  and 
overall fiduciary risk assessment as part of the PDR.  This assessment is the basis for proposing disbursement 
arrangements for the project 
363. 
During project implementation, IFAD Supervision/Implementation Missions would examine the extent 
to  which  the  project  is  identifying  and  managing  fiduciary  risks.    IFAD  will  process  disbursements  after 
considering these FM risks, in addition to the specific characteristics of withdrawal applications (WAs), and will 
determine the timing, frequency and scope of ex-post checks to be performed on the applications. 
364. 
In the light of disbursement experience, and where appropriate, IFAD also updates FM risk ratings and 
modifies disbursement arrangements for the remainder of the project period. IFAD will take remedial measures 
in case it is not satisfied with the way the project funds are being managed. 
D. 
IFAD’S Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption 
365. 
IFAD’s anticorruption policy establishes zero-tolerance towards prohibited practices, such as fraud and 
corruption, in IFAD-funded or managed operations and activities. Accordingly, the prevention and mitigation of 
fraud and corruption in its activities and operations are core components of IFAD’s development mandate and 
fiduciary  duties.  The  anti-corruption  policy  has  defined  prohibited  practices  that  are  subject  to  remedial 
actions23. 
1. 
Prohibited Practices 
366. 
IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity: 
The following practices are considered to be prohibited practices when engaged in connection with an 
(a) 
 A “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of anything of 
value in order to improperly influence the actions of another party; 
(b)   A  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that  knowingly  or 
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party in order to obtain a financial or other benefit or 
to avoid an obligation; 
(c)  
A  “collusive  practice”  is  an  arrangement  between  two  or  more  parties  designed  to  achieve  an 
improper purpose, including improperly influencing the actions of another party; 
(d)   A “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or indirectly, 
any party or the property of the party in order to improperly influence the actions of that or another 
party; 
(e)   An “obstructive practice” is: (i) deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering or concealing evidence that 
may be material to an investigation by the Fund or making false statements to investigators in order 
to materially impede an investigation by the Fund; (ii) threatening, harassing or intimidating any party 
in order to prevent that party from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to an investigation 
by the Fund or from pursuing such an investigation; and/or (iii) the commission of any act intended 
to materially impede the exercise of the Fund’s contractual rights of audit, inspection and access to 
information. 
2. 
General Principles 
367. 
FAD has zero tolerance towards prohibited practices in its activities and operations. All individuals and 
entities that will be involved  in implementing the KP-RETP Project are required to take appropriate action to 
prevent, mitigate and combat prohibited practices as stipulated below. 
23 IFAD’s Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations is available at 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189363/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf/e2ae80aa-e423-4d7c-a582-c01c1917b427  
72 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
368. 
IFAD  protects  Individuals  and  entities  that  help  to  prevent  or  report,  in  good  faith,  allegations  of 
prohibited practices are protected against retaliation and to protect individuals and entities that are the subject 
of unfair or malicious allegations. 
3. 
Responsibilities of the Provincial Government/Project 
369. 
prohibited practices. In particular, they will: 
The  provincial  government/project  will  take  appropriate  action  to  prevent,  mitigate  and  combat 
(a)  
Adopt appropriate fiduciary and administrative practices and institutional arrangements in order 
to ensure that the proceeds of any IFAD financing or financing managed by the Fund are used 
only for the purposes for which they were provided; 
(b)   When taking action to enter into contractual relationship with a third party, conduct appropriate 
due diligence to ensure that the selected bidder or potential contractor is not publicly debarred 
by any of the IFIs and it otherwise is eligible; 
 (c)  
(d)  
Take appropriate action to inform third parties and beneficiaries of the prohibited practices and 
how to comply with IFAD’s Anti-corruption Policy; and 
Include provisions in procurement documents and contracts with third parties to facilitate the 
implementation of IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy. 
370. 
The policy encourages the government to have in place, in accordance with their laws and regulations, 
effective  whistle-blower  protection  measures  and  confidential  reporting  channels  in  order  to  appropriately 
receive and address allegations of fraud and corruption relating to IFAD-financed projects. 
4. 
Reporting 
371. 
the ambit of prohibited practices as outlined above. Relevant information is provided in the box. 
KP-RETP Project can contact the IFAD Officer of Audit and Oversight to report any event that falls within 
How to contact the IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight 
All communications are treated with the utmost CONFIDENTIALITY. 
By phone: +39 06 54592888 
By fax: +39 06 54597888 
By e-mail: anticorruption@ifad.org 
Through the online complaint form: 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm 
In person or by mail to: 
IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight, Investigation Section 
Via Paolo di Dono, 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
372. 
A  designated  confidential  and  secure  e-mail  address  for  the  receipt  of  allegations  of  prohibited 
practices is available on the Fund’s website. If anyone suspects misconduct or wrongdoing, or have an allegation 
to report, he or she may contact anticorruption@ifad.org. This is secure and confidential channel managed by the 
Investigation Section of IFAD. 
373. 
The KP-RETP Project should also have similar reporting mechanism to get information on fraud, waste 
or abuse of funds from anyone who may have such information. The project should promote awareness that 
such safeguards have been provided to minimize risk of fraud, waste and abuse in the use of IFAD’s funds. 
73 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Anti-Corruption Legal Framework in KP and Mitigating risks  
At the provincial level, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Anti-Corruption Establishment (ACE) Rules of 1999 provide the legal 
framework for fraud and corruption. Any citizen can complain against any official to the ACE which is investigated 
subject to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 2011 by head of the 
office/department to which the accused belongs. The KP Right to Information Act 2013 provides for citizens’ access to 
information and if a government entity does not comply with this law, the aggrieved can take the matter with the 
Independent Right to Information Commission for resolution. The KP Prevention of Conflict of Interest Act 2016 
establishes clear conflict of interest and related post-employment principles for public office holders.  The KP also 
enacted Whistleblower Protection and Vigilance Commission Act 2016 which enables the citizens to make public 
interest disclosure that relates to the irregular, illegal or corrupt practices and to protect them from disadvantageous 
measures, and reward them for such actions. However, these laws work when communities are aware of their rights 
and government invests in promoting a general literacy of means for grievance redress.  
The project focuses on the most vulnerable segments of society which are inherently reluctant to demand their rights. 
In addition to promoting general awareness of IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy among all parties that are involved in 
project implementation, PMU shall ensure that  all contracts for procurement of goods, works, and services, include a 
provision requiring suppliers, contractors and consultants to (i) ensure compliance with IFAD’s anticorruption policy 
and (ii) allow IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission and contract 
performance, and to have them audited, if deemed necessary. Lastly, the project will promote good governance 
through the involvement of communities and beneficiaries in (i) the preparation of the annual work plans and 
budgets; (ii) the procurement process (at community level); and (iii) the monitoring and evaluation of project 
activities. PMU may establish a hotline/online interface with the beneficiaries to encourage confidential reporting of 
improprieties to the PD or senior management in P&DD under the existing provincial laws. 
The project’s communication policy shall also promote a general mass awareness among citizens about how to report 
to PMU/P&DD/IFAD when they find any impropriety in the use of official authority or project funds or violation of any 
of the IFAD’s policies applicable to the situation. The project shall provide an interface to the citizens to file their 
complaints when they find non-compliance with applicable requirements in project implementation. A log of  such 
complaints shall be maintained to check how frequently such complaints are being received and efficiency in the 
redress of such complaints. 
5. 
Remedies 
374. 
In  case  it is determined—after  due  process, that an  individual  or  an  entity is  involved  in  any of  the 
prohibited acts stipulated above, the project would take a prompt remedial action. Detailed guidance is available 
in the IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption. 
E. 
FM Organizational Structure, Roles and Responsibilities  
1. 
FM Organizational Structure  
The FM team in PMU is headed by a full time Finance Manager (FM)/Deputy Director Finance who 
375. 
shall report to Project Director directly. The FM is supported by a team of support staff. A Budget and Finance 
Coordinator is also placed in each of the five (5) RCUs for FM related coordination with PFOs, FSCs, Private 
Partners under 4Ps arrangements, and Service Providers to enable these Implementing Partners to understand 
and comply with applicable compliance requirements in the use of project funds. The flowchart exhibits the 
organizational arrangement for the FM section. 
74 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Project Director
Internal Audit 
Manager/IA Firm
Finance Manager 
(PMU)
Deputy Finance 
Manager/FM 
Specialist (PMU)
Budget and Finance 
Officer (PMU)
Accounts Officer 
(PMU) 
Budget and Finance 
Coordinatior(RPMU)
Budget and Finance 
Coordinator (PPMU)
Budget &Finance 
Coordinator (RPMU)
Budget & Finance 
Coordinator (RPMU)
Budget and Fnance 
Coordinator (RPMU)
Assistant B&F Officer 
(PMU)-2
Assistant Accounts 
Officer (PMU)-2
Flow Chart 1: FM organizational arrangement
75 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
376. 
they would be supporting the heads of RCUs in overall coordination and implementation.  
The B&F Coordinators in PPMUs would be functionally reporting to Finance Manager directly though 
377. 
The  payment  system  shall  be  centralized  at  PMU  though  the  F&B  officials  at  regional  offices  shall 
facilitate maintenance of proper internal controls, accounting, financial reporting etc. in partner organizations 
and verify the completeness and authenticity of documents submitted along with invoices to PMU for payments. 
The FM team would conduct periodic/random checks in fields to ensure that reporting to PMU is credible. Roles 
and responsibilities of key actors who will be involved in project FM are summarized below.    
378. 
In  addition  to  the  permanent  FM  staff  at  PMU  and  RCUs,  the  project  design  envisages  that 
partners/service providers—that will be engaged to support implementation shall have a strong FM capacity. 
This is critical since these partners will use IFAD’s funds and therefore they must comply with the applicable 
fiduciary  requirements.  PMU  and  RCUs    will  ensure  effective  facilitation,  oversight  and  monitoring  of  these 
partner organizations.  
2. 
Role of Finance Manager  
379. 
The  FM  shall  be  responsible  for  establishing  and  managing  the  accounting  and  internal  controls 
systems, reviewing and  clearing  documents and transactions,  controlling the  posting of  transactions  and  the 
accuracy of the books, monitoring the budgets and treasury, Project funds and donor contributions, overseeing 
the closing of accounts, and preparing financial reports, year-end financial statements and annual audits. 
1.  General Management and Leadership  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Liaise with IFAD on all aspects of project’s financial management.  
Lead  capacity  building  activities  in  the  area  of  financial  management  under  the  project  to 
capacitate  accounting  staff  within  PMU  and  other  partner  organizations  to  comply  with 
guidelines and policies and procedures. 
Keep  PD  updated  on  latest  developments  and  issues  in  project’s  financial  management  and 
provide suggestion to the best possible option.  
iv.  Maintain liaison with IFAD in managing the assignment account.  
v. 
Participate  in  Project  Steering  Committee  meetings  and  activities;  assist/advise  the  PD  in  all 
financial matters as and when required.   
2.  Budgeting and Planning 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Assist  the  PD  in  preparation  of  AWPB  and  facilitate  in  the  approval  of  AWPB  from  Project 
Steering Committee.  
Prepare  report  on  monthly  financial  progress  of  the  project  for  the  attention  of  the  PD  and 
further discussions.  
Prepare annual, quarterly and semi-annually disbursement forecasts for all components of the 
project/s in line with project’s procurement plan and Work Plan/Cash Plan. 
3.  Funds Management 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Ensure timely releases of counterpart funds from provincial government. 
Liaison  with  P&D,  line  departments,  Provincial  Accountant  General  (AG)  in  connection  with 
budget, releases, disbursement and other issues of financial management. 
Prepare  realistic  cash  forecasts  on  quarterly  basis 
team/implementing partners. 
in  coordination  with  the  project 
Engage  with  IFAD  for  release  of  funds  and  maintenance  of  sufficient  liquidity  for  project 
implementation. 
Prepare and process withdrawal application in accordance with IFAD’s Disbursement Guidelines 
for drawing funds from the assignment account(s).  
76 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
vi. 
Track funds and follow up with National Bank of Pakistan and IFAD to ensure timely credit of 
funds into the project’s assignment account(s). 
4. 
Internal Controls 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Perform internal control assessment in view of the systemic weaknesses as reported from time 
to  time  in  the  supervision  missions/audits/periodic  inspections  by  PMU  and  take  remedial 
actions 
Take measures to strengthen internal controls system as per IFAD’s guidelines stipulated in this 
document;  
Assess  the  need  of  other  monitoring  controls,  such  as  internal  audit  and  suggest  it  to  the 
management accordingly. 
5.  Expenditure/Payment Processing 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Ensure compliance with internal control framework—including applicable government rules and 
procedures while processing payments. 
Analyze, plan, design, implement, and monitor a system to augment internal controls in line with 
best practices in the process of payment and expenditure management. 
Apply  pre-audit  checks  on  all  payments  before  payment  from  the  assignment  account(s) 
including budget availability, sanction of competent authority and compliance with applicable 
financial rules & regulations.  
Ensure that IFAD’s No Objection Letter (NOL) is obtained for every prior review activity before 
processing any payment. 
Prepare request for payment and forward to PD for approval after fulfilling all codal formalities.  
Ensure  that  only  eligible  payments  are  forwarded  Coordinator’s  approval  and  drawing  funds 
from the assignment account. 
vii.  Manage  financial  aspects  of  the  contracts  under  implementation,  including  payment  terms, 
purchase orders and variation orders. 
6.  Accounting and Record Management 
i. 
Record  all  transactions  timely  and  accurately  in  the  books  of  accounts  and  ensure  that  no 
expenditure remained unaccounted. 
ii.  Maintain accounts on cash basis as per government accounting procedure i.e. New Accounting 
Model.  
iii. 
iv. 
Ensure  up-to-date  maintenance  of  adequate  registers,  books  of  accounts  and  records  in 
appropriate order and format to meet the government and IFAD’s requirements and to facilitate 
classification and analyzing the financial information for monitoring the project progress. 
Prepare supplementary record, which provides timely and up-to-date financial information of 
contracts. 
v.  Maintain imprest /petty cash account (where applicable) and ensure maintenance of separate 
petty cash book and petty cash vouchers in compliance with approved procedures. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Prepare monthly bank reconciliation statements of assignment accounts. 
Reconcile  the  expenditure  on  government  prescribed  format  with  the  office  of  Accountant 
General KP on monthly basis. 
Be the payroll manager and process monthly payroll of project employees. Ensure proper payroll 
controls are applied and the payments are made directly in the Bank accounts. 
77 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
Prepare and process monthly project payroll and submit to PD for approval prior to making any 
payment under salaries. 
Ensure that the  fixed  assets  and inventory  records  are  maintained for  the project identifying 
location and user of each asset/inventory and arrange for the annual and periodical inventory 
of the assets/consumables. 
Ensure safe custody of all financial records for review by IFAD Missions, third party monitoring 
agents; and external & internal auditors. 
7.  Financial Reporting 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Prepare quarterly financial reports and submit to PD and Bank in a timely fashion for review and 
approval. 
Ensure  that  annual  financial  statements  and  other  reports  as  specified  under  the  Financing 
Agreements  and  as  per  recommended/suggested  by  supervision  missions  are  accurately 
prepared and timely submitted – annual financial statements to be prepared in accordance with 
Cash Basis IPSAS ‘ Financial Reporting under Cash Basis of Accounting’.  
Prepare Annual financial statements of the three project/program and submit for review and 
approval to PD. 
Define  and  produce  other  financial  reports,  as  and  where  required  on  utilization  of  funds  to 
facilitate PD in decision-making process. 
8.  Audit 
i.  Make arrangements for timely initiation and completion audit of project and ensure that report 
produced is in compliance with audit requirements of the Government and IFAD.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Ensure that the project is adequately reflected in audit plan of Auditor General of Pakistan and 
that audit is periodically conducted. 
Cooperating  with  IFAD,  Government,  and  other  partners  to  improve  project  financial 
management, particularly in terms of following up the action points agreed in the project legal 
documents, during the IFAD supervision missions, Aide Memoires and the recommendations of 
external auditors and internal auditors. 
Attend entry and exit meetings with external auditors, facilitate timely completion of audits by 
arranging  timely  submission  of  annual  financial  statement  in  appropriate  format,  supply  of 
information  and  documents  responding  to  queries,  initiate  actions  for  holding  tripartite 
meetings and coordinating with relevant project entities in settling audit paras.  
Prepare  working  papers  on  audit  observations  raised  by  external  auditors  and  arrange  to 
convene Departmental Accounts Committee (DAC) meeting to settle the audit observations to 
the extent legally and logically possible.   
3. 
Role of Budget and Finance Officer (1 Position)  
Support Finance Manager in preparing annual work planning and budgeting; 
Facilitate FM in engaging with P&D to include budget in the Annual Development Plan (ADP) as 
per rules; 
Upload budget on Financial Management Information System, and prepare monthly monitoring 
reports comparing actual expenditure against the budget. Highlight weak performing areas for 
management intervention; 
Prepare cash forecasts on quarterly basis in coordination with the project team and submit to 
IFAD for advance/replenishment of advance. 
78 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
Prepare and process withdrawal application in accordance with IFAD’s Disbursement Guidelines 
Prepare  disbursement  reports—and  ensuring  that  sufficient  funds  are  available  in  the 
Assignment Accounts all the time. 
Prepare annual financial statements as per Cash Basis IPSAS and submit to the Auditors within 
two months of the close of the financial year. 
Prepare periodic financial reports specified in the Loan Covenants. 
Prepare Quarterly Financial Summaries (budget vs actual) to support oversight over use of funds 
Track funds and follow up with National Bank of Pakistan and the World Bank to ensure timely 
credit of funds into the projects’ assignment account. 
xi. 
Loan Covenants Monitoring 
4. 
Role of Accounts Officer (1 Position) 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Ensure compliance with internal control framework (Operations Manual, Financial Management 
Manual, SOPs and IFAD’s fiduciary guidelines etc.) and government rules and procedures while 
processing payments. 
Analyze, plan, design, implement, and monitor a system to augment internal controls in line with 
best practices in the process of payment and expenditure management. 
Apply  pre-audit  checks  on  all  payments  before  payment  from  the  assignment  account(s) 
including budget availability, sanction of competent authority and compliance with applicable 
financial rules & regulations.  
Ensure that No Objection is obtained from IFAD for every prior review activity before processing 
any payment. 
Ensure that only eligible payments are submitted to FM for seeking PD’s approval and drawing 
funds from the assignment account. 
vi.  Manage  financial  aspects  of  the  contracts  under  implementation,  including  payment  terms, 
purchase orders and variation orders. 
vii. 
Record all transactions timely and accurately in the books of accounts (both in Pak Rupees and 
US$) and ensure that no expenditure remained unaccounted. 
viii.  Maintain accounts on cash basis as per government accounting procedure; 
ix.  Maintain  up-to-date  maintenance  of  adequate  registers,  books  of  accounts  and  records  in 
appropriate  order  and  format  to  meet  the  government  and  donors’  requirements  and  to 
facilitate  classification  and  analyzing  the  financial  information  for  monitoring  the  projects 
progress. 
x. 
Prepare  supplementary  record  which  provides timely and  up-to-date  financial  information  of 
civil works and consultancies. 
xi.  Maintain imprest of petty cash and ensure maintenance of separate petty cash book and petty 
cash vouchers and compliance with established procedures. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
Verify vehicles log books & compare with the fuel consumption reports 
Tax Withholding on each payment 
Data entry into accounting software 
Prepare  monthly  bank reconciliation  statements of  assignment account(s) both  in  Pak  Rupee 
and US$. 
79 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
Reconcile the expenditure on government prescribed format with Accountant General Office on 
monthly basis. 
Prepare and process monthly payroll and submit to Project Director for approval prior to making 
any payment under salaries. Ensure proper payroll controls are applied and the payments are 
made directly in the Bank accounts. 
Ensure that the fixed assets records are maintained  for both the projects identifying location 
and user of each asset and arrange for the annual and periodical inventory of the assets and 
updating of the records. 
Ensure safe custody of all financial records for review by Bank Missions, third party monitoring 
agents; and external & internal auditors. 
xx.  Maintenance of filing system ensuring safekeeping of confidential material as per the guidelines 
given in this manual 
xxi. 
Custodian for management of office stationery supplies including maintenance of stock list of 
stationery and supplies and maintain log book. 
xxii. 
To maintain daily cash book & cash flow management. 
5.  Role of Budget and Finance Coordinator (5 Positions—one each in the RCU) 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Facilitate PFOs/FSCs in signing MOUs with PMU for project implementation 
Facilitate PFOs in selecting HR for professional management—including FM staff based on the 
criteria established by PMU 
Organize training for the staff at PFOs/FSCs focusing on core compliance/reporting requirements 
Facilitate PFOs in the opening of account, and the maintaining of up-to-date books of accounts 
as specified in the MOUs.  
Facilitate PFOs in mobilizing farmers’ share to implement business plans 
Support PFOs in collect funds from members to meet the requirements of MOUs. 
Conduct  due  diligence/post  qualification  assessment  of  private  partners  selected  for  4Ps 
arrangements based on the guidelines established for this purpose. 
viii. 
Promote basic FM/economics literacy among farmers involved in project implementation. 
ix.  Maintain 
internal 
liaison  with  service  providers  to  ensure  they  are  complying  with 
controls/compliance requirements  (set  out  in  this  manual  later)  stipulated  in  PMU’s contract 
agreements with them.  
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
Facilitate PFOs/others involved in microfinancing process in complying with the criteria of age 
group, social status, amount of each loan, recovery time etc.in the process; 
Facilitate PFOs/others involved in microfinancing in robust documentation of the microfinance 
operations etc. 
Submit monthly report to PMU on issues and challenges as well as possible practical solutions 
to move forward.  
The Finance Manager will distribute work between the B&F Officer, Accounts Officer, and B&F 
Coordinators based in RCUs following the principles of internal controls outlined in the relevant 
section of the manual to get the best value out of them.   
80 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
6. 
Procurement and Contract Management 
380. 
The  project  provides  for  one  position  each  of  Procurement  Specialist  and  Contract  Management 
Specialist. Detailed guidelines on public procurement and contract management under the KP-RETP Project are 
provided in a separate Procurement Manual. 
F. 
Annual Work Plan & Budgeting 
381. 
Annual  Work planning  and  budgeting  is  a key  project activity since  it allows  the  project to plan and 
manage its  financial resources  to  support  the  implementation  of  its  activities. It  is  important  for  the  PMU in 
general and the finance team in particular to understand the country PFM system—inasmuch as it affects AWP/B 
of  the KP-RETP. Accordingly,  a  brief review of  Pakistan’s PFM system  with  its  link  to  IFAD  is  provided  before 
getting into AWP/B process for the KP-RETP. 
G. 
Pakistan’s PFM system and its link with the KP KP-RETP  
The  Planning  Commission,  Government  of  Pakistan  is  responsible  for  establishing  criteria  and 
382. 
guidelines---including templates for formulating development projects for federal and provincial governments24. 
As per current arrangements, if the cost of a provincial development project exceeds PKR 10 billion, the P&DD 
of a province will have to seek the approval of the Executive Committee of the Economic Council (ECNEC) for 
that project. ECNEC is the highest forum to review and approve development projects in Pakistan. A well-defined 
process is in place for this purpose 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The Provincial Development Working Party (PDWP)—which is the clearing house of 
development project would review and recommend the project for consideration of the 
federal government; 
The Central Development Working Party (CDWP)—housed in the Planning Commission, 
Islamabad, conducts financial and economic analysis of the projects and—the projects it finds 
well-designed, are recommended to ECNEC for review and approval; 
ECNEC is the final approving authority for any provincial projects costing beyond 10 billion and 
all projects with foreign component. 
383. 
The provincial government must prepare PC-1 for the KP-RETP as its estimated cost is higher than PRK 
10 billion. The provincial P&DD is to prepare the PC-1 in compliance with applicable requirements and to engage 
with relevant government agencies to obtain approval of the PC-1 from the PWDP, the CWDP, and ECNEC. Any 
PC-I document that is submitted with missing elements is not accepted by PWDP/CWDP/ECNEC. To avoid delays 
in the processing of the PC-1, the P&DD should start preparing the PC-1 based on the PDR. This is critical since 
any significant deviation(s) from the Project Design may require changing the PC-1 form which, in turn, could 
mean going through a long bureaucratic tier of approvals. 
H. 
Project design changes during project life 
384. 
IFAD’s projects are subject to performance reviews periodically. These reviews help in identifying what 
is working and what is not and taking remedial measure to ensure the project remain on track to achieving the 
intended  outcomes  of the  project. While  minor  adjustments  are carried  out  subsequent to  each  supervision 
mission, the Mid Term Review (MTR)---carried out when a project is almost halfway through implementation, is 
the  time  to  revisit  the  whole  design  and  make  significant  adjustments  in  the  design—if  such  a  response  is 
warranted by implementation experience. 
385. 
IFAD considers reallocations of funds between difference categories of expenditure to make the most 
of available resources. The purpose of these reallocations is to divert resources toward the activities that are 
contributing more effectively toward the intended project outcomes. The categories of expenditure where the 
project performance is not acceptable, it does not make sense to keep funds idle.  
24 Details about how to formulate project proposal are provided in the Manual for Development Project, Planning Commission 
available at https://www.pc.gov.pk/uploads/downloads/perform/Manual-for-development-projects.pdf 
81 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
386. 
actual project cost does not go beyond 15% of the approved project cost, no revision in the PC-1 is required. 
The  current  planning  guidelines—applicable  to  the  KP-RETP  require  that  in  cases  where  the  overall 
1. 
AWP/Budget Process  
387. 
The budgeting process can be broken down in four steps: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Preparation of the annual work plan 
Preparation of the annual budget 
Budget monitoring 
Budget revisions. 
388. 
The annual work plan describes in detail all the activities that must be carried out by the Project during 
the year based on management priorities; it includes a chronogram for each activity, the verifiable indicator(s) 
and the staff/entities responsible for implementation. The annual budget, which is derived from the work plan, 
aims at providing detailed cost estimates for the implementation of project activities as well as the operation of 
the PMU and RCUss. These two parts of the Project planning process (the work plan and the budget) are brought 
together in a unique document called the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
389. 
The  AWPB  is  an  essential  management  tool  that  serves  to  establish  priorities  for  Project 
implementation, set out activities in a timeline, and forecast the resources (both financial and human) needed 
to achieve the set objectives. It is also required for the mobilization of funding by the various Project financiers. 
Finally,  it  represents  the  main  tool  for  Project  management,  IFAD  and  the  GoKP  to  control  costs  and  assess 
Project  performance.  The  preparation  of  the  AWPB  is  a  participatory  exercise  involving  the  relevant  line 
departments,  implementing  partners  /service  providers,  and  project  beneficiaries.  The  Project  Steering 
Committee and IFAD are responsible for the review and approval of the AWPB. 
390. 
both IFAD’s and GoKP’s planning processes.  
The AWPB covers the period from July to June each year, in line with the Project fiscal year. It integrates 
82 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
2. 
Preparation of the Annual Work Plan 
391. 
The annual work plan sets the Project objectives for the coming year, details activities to be conducted, 
specifies  deliverables  and  outputs  (along  with  key  M&E  indicators),  as  well  as  resources  needed  and 
implementation delays, and identifies institutional responsibilities. During the life of the Project, and particularly 
during the first year, the PDR and PC-1 serve as a framework for the preparation of the AWPB. The AWPB process 
will follow a sequential process as depicted in the flowchart. 
•Preliminary 
meeting at 
PMU
1
•Identificati
on of needs
• District 
work plans 
2
3
•PMU 
specific 
workplans
•Consolidati
on of work 
plans
4
5
•Conversion 
of workplans 
into budget
Flow Chart 2: WPB process 
392. 
Preliminary meeting. The preparation of the annual work plan starts with a preliminary meeting within 
the PMU, to  which the heads of RCUs, and  senior officials of line departments, and representatives of other 
implementing partners (PFOs, FSCs, Partners under 4Ps, Service Providers shall participate. The purpose of the 
meeting is to: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Set the objectives of the Project for the coming year, for each district and overall 
Establish  priorities,    taking    into    account    the    results    obtained    to    date    and    the 
recommendations of supervision missions 
Assess  the  achievements  of  the  current  AWPB  so  as  to  (i)  take  any  necessary  corrective 
measures and (ii) determine the activities that will not be completed in the current year and 
will need to be carried over to the year Y+1 
iv. 
Agree on the different steps and set the schedule for the preparation of the AWPB. 
393. 
Identification of needs. Planning meetings with implementing partners shall be organized subsequently 
at RCUs level and all key stakeholders involved in project implementation in the districts shall participate in the 
deliberation. This exercise is coordinated by the RCUs’ technical staff to ensure that the planning down to district 
levels is aligned with the project’s objectives and priorities set during the AWPB preliminary meeting.  The FM is 
in charge of identifying PMU/RCUs staff members’ needs relating to financial management and administration, 
while the M&E Specialist is responsible for defining Project needs in terms of internal monitoring. 
394. 
District work plans. The RCUs M&E Officers under the supervision of M&E Specialist consolidate the 
district level plan in close coordination with the FM team and other implementing partners/service providers to 
ensure  that  the  district  plans  are  in  line  with  the  overall  project  objectives  and  the  targets  sets  out  in  the 
preliminary meeting. 
395. 
An AWPB workshop is then organized at district level, with the participation of technical staff from and 
RCUs and other IPs, in order to review the district work plan in detail. Other donor-funded projects in the area 
may be invited to participate so as to harmonize interventions and avoid duplication. During the workshop, the 
participants are invited to formulate observations on the draft district work plan, particularly regarding priority 
activities.  The  observations  made  during  the  workshop  are  taken  into  account  by  the  RCUs  M&E  Officers  to 
finalize the work plan, under the guidance of the M&E Specialist from PMU. 
396. 
PMU Work Plan. At PMU level, each component head is responsible for drawing out a detailed list of 
activities  to  be conducted  during  the  year  (including  activities to  be  carried  over  from the  previous  year). In 
addition to the technical activities to be implemented at PMU level, this also includes the M&E and KM and the 
finance & administration activities. This process is coordinated by the M&E Specialist to avoid duplication and 
to  ensure  overall  coherence.  Once  the  PMU  work  plan  is  drafted,  the  Project  Director  organizes  a  planning 
meeting at the PMU to discuss and finalize the document. 
83 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
397. 
Consolidated work plan. The M&E Specialist is in charge of preparing a KP-RETP consolidated work plan 
based on district work plan and the PMU work plan. Once the Project Director validates the finalized document, 
the FM and M&E Specialist work together on the codification of each work plan activity, using the accounting 
system’s codification structure for AWPB activities. The next step is the preparation of the budget. 
3. 
Preparation of the Annual Budget 
398. 
Based on the finalized work plan, the IPs, RCUss and PMU technical staff are requested to estimate the 
cost of  the  various activities  to  be conducted.  The  estimation  must consider all  cost elements  related  to the 
activities,  including  mission’s  costs,  consultant’s  fees,  workshops,  training,  procurement,  etc.  The  FM  and 
Procurement  Specialist  may  be  consulted  if  necessary  to  assist  in  the  costing  of  certain  items.  The  sources, 
assumptions and calculation bases used for determining each cost estimate must be clearly documented in the 
budget. 
399. 
The PMU operating budget is prepared by the FM and FM which includes: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Salaries, social security contributions, allowances, per diem and other personnel charges 
Staff training costs 
Procurement of goods, works and services for the PMU and RCUs offices 
Office running costs (utilities, telephone, maintenance and repairs, supplies, fuel, vehicle 
costs, etc.) 
Other expenses (meetings, consultants’ fees, audit fees, etc.) 
400. 
to the FM who reviews them to ensure that: 
The detailed cost estimates prepared by the technical staff for each Project component are forwarded 
i. 
ii. 
The costs estimate for each activity are reasonable; 
The budget by activity, sub-component and component is coherent as compared to the 
annual  cost estimates  defined  in the COSTAB  and  the  GoKP  Annual Development  Plan 
(ADP); and 
iii. 
Funds will be available in each expense category. 
401. 
The  FM then  compiles  the detailed  budget  data  by  component/sub-component and  determines the 
funding source for each activity based on the allocation in the COSTAB. Funding sources for the KP-RETP include 
the IFAD Loan, the GoKP counterpart contribution, and the beneficiaries’ contribution. For the GoKP counterpart 
funding, the budget must clearly distinguish between the funding related to duty & tax exemptions and other 
contributions. In-kind and cash contribution should be separately worked out.   
402. 
The  FM  can  then  present  the  detailed  budget  worksheet  by  component/sub-  component  and  by 
activity,  with  an  indication  of  the  funding  source  and  the  expense  category  for  each  activity.  The  budget 
worksheet  includes  separate  sheets  showing  for  each  activity,  the  budget  assumptions,  the  sources  and  the 
calculation bases for the unit costs. This is essential in order to (i) facilitate budget monitoring and budget-actual 
variance analysis and (ii) prepare the budget in the following year(s). 
403. 
the financing agreement: 
The budget includes the following categories, in line with the eligible expense categories as detailed in 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Vehicles & Motorcycles  
Equipment and materials 
Grants to Beneficiaries 
Training and Studies 
Salaries & allowances 
Operating Costs. 
404. 
The  budgets  by  component  only  include  those  expense  categories  relating  to  the  activities  to  be 
conducted. It is essential for the FM to ensure that funds are available in each expense category to accommodate 
the cost estimates. 
84 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
405. 
A  budget  conference  is  held  at  the  PMU  to  discuss  any  necessary  modifications  to  the  budgets  by 
component and by expense category, and to conduct budget arbitration between activities and/or components. 
The budget is finalized and consolidated by the FM on the basis of the decisions made during this conference. 
406. 
main document covers the following: 
The final step is the consolidation and formatting of the AWPB by the FM and the M&E Specialist. The 
i. 
Physical progress made by the Project in the previous year (including quantitative data) 
and activities to be carried over to the coming year 
Financial progress in the previous year, including cost overruns and savings 
Procurement performance 
Constraints and problems from the previous year, and recommendations to resolve them 
Lessons learned and rationale for the activities proposed 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi.  Main activities proposed for the current year, by component/sub-component 
vii. 
Consolidated budget. 
407. 
408. 
The main document is complemented with annexes.  
Detailed work plans and budgets by component/sub-component with an indication of the district; 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The procurement plan. A schedule showing, by expense category, the financing allocation 
(per the financing agreement), the cumulative disbursements to date, the current AWPB 
projections  and  the  remaining  balance.  This  schedule  serves  to  demonstrate  that 
sufficient funds are available in each expense category to cover for the budget projections. 
The same schedule as above, by component and sub-component (the initial allocation is 
obtained from the PDR and COSTAB rather than the financing agreement); and. 
The staff development plan. 
409. 
After validation by the Project Director, the AWPB is forwarded to the head of the PSC who convenes a 
steering committee meeting for the review and approval of the document. The Project Director, and the PMU 
technical  staff  attend  the  meeting  to  answer  questions  from  the  PSC  members.  The  AWPB  is  modified  and 
finalized taking into account the observations from the PSC. The finalized version of the AWPB and Procurement 
Plan must be sent to the PSC and to IFAD for no objection. In the absence of comments from IFAD within 30 days 
after receipt, the AWPB shall be deemed approved. The approval of AWPB by PSC shall be deemed as the final 
approval for the GoB counterpart contribution. 
410. 
components, activities, and relation financial information.  
A template for the AWPB is provided as Annexure-14 to this Manual. It will be customized to reflect all 
4. 
Budget Monitoring 
411. 
The AWPB serves as the reference document for the PMU to assess the Project physical and financial 
implementation progress. As soon as the AWPB is approved, the Finance Manager shall input the annual budget 
into  the accounting system.   The  budget is entered  by account, component,  sub-component, AWPB activity, 
financier, expense  category and district. After due diligence, the Finance Manager prints out the budget and 
distributes copies to the Project Director, the technical staff and the M&E section. 
412. 
The finance section is responsible for monitoring the budget by comparing it with actual expenditures. 
Project expenses recorded in the general accounts are simultaneously recorded against the budget. Thanks to 
this unique data entry system, all Project expenses are automatically recorded in the “actual expense” column 
of the budget. The accounting system can generate budget-monitoring statements showing the status of the 
budget by component/sub-component, by activity, by expense category, by district and/or by financier for any 
period  requested.  These  statements  show  the  budgeted  amount,  the  cumulative  expenditures  to  date,  the 
available balance and the percentage execution. The FM prints a budget-monitoring statement at the end of 
each month preferably or quarterly, or whenever necessary and distributes to the Project Director and other 
relevant component heads for comments or remedial actions—where required. 
413. 
During the first week of each quarter, the Project Director shall a budget review meeting during which 
the  FM,  M&E  Specialist,  and  Procurement  Specialist  shall  analyze  the  budget-monitoring  statement  of  the 
previous quarter.  
85 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
414. 
This exercise may also be carried out monthly if deemed necessary by the KP-RETP  team to determine 
whether funds are being utilized as planned, and to take corrective actions if necessary. Any significant variance 
between  the  budget  and  actual  expenses  is  investigated  and  discussed  during  the  meeting.  The  FM  then 
prepares  a  budget  progress  report  explaining  all  variances  and  formulating  recommendations,  which  may 
include  the  need  for  budget  reallocation  or  revision.  The  quarterly  budget-monitoring  statement  shall  be 
attached to the report. This budget report shall serve as the source document for the AWPB execution section 
of the quarterly financial report prepared by the FM. 
415. 
approved AWP/B at Annexure-15. 
A  template  has  been  provided  to  assess  technical  and  financial  progress  of  the  project  against  the 
5. 
Budget Revision 
416. 
The Project Director or Project team may decide to reallocate funds from one budget line or activity to 
another as long as the impact is less than 15% of the initial budget amount for that budget line. In this case s/he 
sends a memo instructing the FM to proceed with the reallocation. When the impact is up to 15% of the original 
line-item budget, a request a meeting will be held with relevant staff members and submit it for PSC approval. 
This exercise may be carried out at PMU through a formal meeting in which the component head (requesting 
the  change)  would  argue  for  the  change  while  PD,  FM  and  other  technical  lead—where  necessary,  would 
examine the proposal on merit.  Once the proposed change is approved by the PD, it would be communicated 
to FM team to update the accounting system. If the changes are substantial and affecting the overall budget 
more than 15% shall be forwarded to the PSC’s head for his approval and subsequently will be forwarded to 
IFAD for NOC 
417. 
In  addition,  depending  on  the  project’s  performance  during  the  first  half  of  the  year  (or  due  to 
unforeseen circumstances), it may become necessary to conduct a full revision of the budget for the rest of the 
year. The decision to carry out a budget revision is made by the Project Director and materialized in a memo 
sent to all concerned parties. The IPs, and technical PMU staff are requested to prepare a revised work plan and 
budget  taking  into  account  achievements/disbursements  to  date  and  detailing  the  activities  that  can  be 
implemented before the end of the fiscal year. The consolidation, approval and recording process for the AWPB 
revision is the same as described above. 
I. 
Flow of Funds  
1. 
Financiers of the KP-RETP and Flow Chart 
418. 
The funding for the KP-RETP Project comes from three sources (i) the IFAD Loan; (ii) the Counterpart 
Contribution from GoKP—in cash and in kind and (iii) Beneficiaries’ Contributions. The total cost of the project 
is USD 185.8 million which includes the IFAD Loan (USD 100.1 million), Government’s contribution (USD 40.4 
million)  and  Beneficiaries’  contribution  (USD  45.3  million).  The  government  contribution  shall  comprise  (a) 
“cash”—USD 9.1 million for payment of taxes and project management costs; and (b) USD 31.3 million that will 
be leveraged from ongoing development projects under the provincial Annual Development Plan.  
419. 
The project would access IFAD funds through the Imprest Fund methodology. PMU shall establish a 
Designated  Account  in  the  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  (NBP),  Peshawar  to  receive  fund  from  IFAD  as  per 
established procedures.  IFAD shall disburse an initial advance (Imprest Fund) to cover approximately six months 
of planned project expenditures to this Designated Account. The NBP shall make available to PMU equivalent 
amount in PKR for project expenditure through the same account. Further advances to the Designated Account 
will be made for the next reporting period based on the AWPB or expenditures forecast provided that at least 
70%  of  the  immediately  preceding  advance  and  100%  of  all  prior  advances  have  been  fully  justified..  The 
Designated Account  shall show debits, credits and balance in PKR along with USD equivalent. PMU shall utilize 
the advance and replenish the account monthly or once the minimum expenditure limit as agreed with IFAD is 
met  for  submitting  a  withdrawal  application.  Annexure-16  provides  details  about  how  to  open  the 
Designated/Revolving Fund Account for the IFAD Loan.  
420. 
The project shall use the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) package to submit withdrawal applications to 
IFAD. Each quarter, PMU should submit the IFRs package to report on the financial performance and to justify 
the  specified  percentages  of  the  withdrawn  advances  as  indicated  in  the  LTB.  By  justifying  the  required 
86 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
percentage of the withdrawn advances, the PMU will be eligible to withdraw further advances based on next 
period cash forecast. 
421. 
IFRs  package  will  mainly  form  the  templates  of  the  Withdrawal  Application  (WA)  which  will  be 
submitted in ICP. The package should be sent to the IFAD’s Finance Officer concerned for clearance. Once the 
package is cleared by IFAD Finance Officer and the WA is submitted in ICP, the Financial Controller’s Division 
(FCD)  will  proceed  with  finalizing  the  WA  in  IFAD  system.  IFAD  Finance  Officer  could  select  a  sample  of  the 
expenditures included in the IFRs and request the supporting documents for further check. Detailed guidance 
on preparing IFR package is provided in Financial Reporting part and Annexure 20 of this PIM.   
422. 
The  GoKP  shall  allocate  counterpart  funds  through  normal  government  budgetary  process.  The 
provincial  government’s  annual  budget  cycle  starts  usually  in  November/December  with  the  issuance  of  a 
Budget  Call  Circular  (BCC)  that  contains  forms  and  guidance  to  formulate  budget.  PMU  shall  work  out  the 
requirements  of  counterpart  funds  and  ensure  that  sufficient  funds  are  provided  in  the  budget  to  meet  the 
project’s  needs.    PMU  shall  open  a  Designated  Account  for  the  counterpart  funds  and  follow  up  with  the 
government to ensure timely and sufficient release of funds for the project.   
423. 
Details on Designated Accounts, Imprest Fund Procedures, and Recovery of Initial Advances given to 
the PMU are provided later in this section. The flowchart depicts how IFAD funds and Counterpart funds would 
flow through the project. 
IFAD Loan 
GOKP Counterpart Funds 
(PKR) 
PMU KP-RETP Designated 
Account/Imprest Fund (USD-
PKR) 
PMU KP-RETP Project 
PMU KP-RETP Assignment 
Account (PKR) 
s
d
n
u
f
t
r
a
p
r
e
t
n
u
o
C
d
n
a
s
d
n
u
f
D
A
F
I
:
3
t
r
a
h
C
w
o
F
l
Implementing Partners (PFOs, Private Partners under 4Ps, FSCs, Suppliers/Contractors/Project Staff etc. 
IFAD: Initial Advance and Replenishment/GoKP Counterpart Funding 
IFAD Withdrawal Applications/GoKP Funds release requests 
Invoices/Supporting documents/Statement of Expenditure (SOE) 
Payments 
424. 
The PFOs shall individually contribute approximately 30% of the investment envisaged in the business 
plan which is estimated to cost USD 70,000 to USD 100,000. The estimated share of each FPO is likely to be in 
the  range  of  USD  21,000-31,000  accordingly.  This  provisioning  of  this  amount  shall  be  one  of  the  access 
conditions for a PFO to get IFAD funds for project implementation. The share of each Farm Service Center (FSCs) 
and  Private  Partner  under  4P  arrangements  is  estimated  at  50%  of  the  cost  of  activities  planned  under  the 
project whereas the remaining 50% shall come from IFAD. PFO/FSC/Private Partners shall maintain the account 
of  this funding source which  would  be  subject to  periodic verification  by  PMU/RCUs. The  total  contributions 
made by beneficiaries including PFOs shall be reflected in the project financial statements. These requirements 
shall be clearly laid down in the MOUs/contracts with the IPs 
87 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
425. 
 The  PMU/RCOs  shall  conduct  random  inspection  to  check  whether  these  stakeholders  are  in 
compliance with the applicable compliance requirements in the use of funds and the record of such inspection 
shall be properly maintained for IFAD’s missions. Details are provided in the section on Internal Controls later.  
2. 
Evidence of authority to sign Withdrawal Applications 
426. 
IFAD requires the B/R’s representative, as designated in the financing agreement, to furnish satisfactory 
evidence of the authority and authenticated specimen signatures of the individuals who will sign WAs on behalf 
of the borrower. This evidence must reach the Fund before the first WA is presented by the borrower and should 
be the original (photocopies, facsimiles or other means of transmission are not acceptable). Each WA should be 
signed  by  such  duly  authorized  individuals,  and  the  Fund  must  be  notified  of  any  change  in  the  signatories 
authorized to withdraw funds from the loan. For this purpose, the B/R shall provide the names and specimen 
signatures of the newly appointed signatories and include the date when such change is to take effect. PMU 
shall use the following format for correspondence with IFAD on this issue.  
EVIDENCE OF AUTHORITY TO SIGN WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS 
(Sample letter – to be submitted on letterhead) [to 
include full street address, city, country] 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
Paolo di Dono, 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Attention: 
Finance Administration Services 
Accounting and Controller’s Division 
Subject: 
IFAD Loan/Grant/Financing No.: 
Project Name: 
Dear Sirs/Madams: 
Date: 
 Via 
I  refer  to  the  Financing  Agreement  between  IFAD  and  [Name  of  Borrower/Recipient],  dated  [       ]. 
In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Section  4.04(b)  of  IFAD’s  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural 
Development  Financing  dated  29  April  2009  as  may  be  amended  from  time  to  time,  I  hereby    designate  the 
following  person  (or  persons)  whose  authenticated  specimen  signature(s)  appear(s)  below  as  authorized,  on 
behalf  of  the  Borrower/Recipient,  to  sign  Applications  for  Withdrawal  under  the  above-referenced  IFAD 
Loan/Grant/Financing. This notification enters into effect as of [        date 
------]: 
(Optional) The following is the official email address which will be used by the  Borrower/Recipient  to submit 
Applications for Withdrawal and other official communications to IFAD: 
. Any communication not originating from this address should be disregarded. 
(Name(s) and Title(s)) 
Specimen signature 
(Name(s) and Title(s)) 
Specimen signature 
(Name(s) and Title(s)) 
Specimen signature 
(Indicate if the authorization to sign is jointly with another person(s)). 
Signed by: 
Title of the Borrower/Recipient’s 
Designated Representative 
(as provided in the Financing Agreement) 
3. 
Designated Account 
427. 
The  flow  of  funds  for  the  Project  starts  with  the  opening  of  the  project  Designated  Account  (DA), 
denominated in US Dollars, in the National Bank of Pakistan (NBP), in accordance with the Funds requirements 
identified in the Financing Agreement and the Letter to the Borrower. The FM is responsible for opening and 
managing the Designated Account including receiving on a monthly basis the DA Statement of Account from the 
bank and reconciling it against PMU’s records. Disbursements from the DA should be recorded in the PMU’s 
account records as of the date they are made, that is when the checks are issued. 
88 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
428. 
These funds can only be used for expenditures relating to the execution of the Project. PMU cannot 
make  financial  commitments  or  authorize  disbursements  over  and  above  the  funding  made  available  to  the 
Project.  In  the  case  of  insufficient  funds  to  conduct  certain  IFAD-financed  Project  activities,  a  request  for 
reallocation of loan funds may be presented to IFAD through the EAD. The IFAD contribution comprises an IFAD 
loan of USD 100.1 million. The loan funds are made available to the Project in several installments and using the 
Imprest Account modality25. 
4. 
Imprest Account 
429. 
The  Imprest  Account  procedure  is  a  disbursement  procedure  where  IFAD  makes  an  advance 
disbursement  from  the  Loan  Account  for  deposit  to  an  Imprest  Fund  Account  to  be  used  exclusively  for  the 
IFAD’s share of eligible expenditures. The main objective of this procedure is to help the borrower reduce cash 
flow difficulties in financing project expenditures, thereby facilitating project implementation. Other objectives 
are  providing  the  borrower  with  more  control  over  payments  and  reducing  the  number  of  withdrawal 
applications (WAs), particularly for payments for small expenditures and related costs. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
PMU opens  a Designated  Account denominated  in  the  USD  to receive  funds as  Imprest. A 
parallel account in PKR is also made operational to pay against project liabilities; 
An initial deposit (or authorized allocation) amounting to the estimated expenditure for first 
six months of implementation will be drawn as an advance for the start-up phase once the 
project becomes  effective  at  the  request of  EAD.  The  ceiling of  the  initial  advance  may  be 
increased if it is not enough to meet project disbursement. 
Periodic replenishments of the designated account corresponding to the reimbursement of 
eligible expenditures incurred by the Project throughout its implementation period. 
The initial deposit would be recovered by deducting a portion of the replenishment amount 
requested  in  each  withdrawal  application  submitted  to  IFAD  towards  the  end  of  the 
implementation period. 
Direct payments by IFAD of expenditures incurred by the Project may be made at the request 
of PMU is provided in the LTB/FA. 
430. 
The  periodic  replenishments  will  be  made  at  the  request  of  PMU  (in  the  form  of  withdrawal 
applications), based on which IFAD withdraws funds from the loan account. The minimum withdrawal amount 
is normally set at 30% of the initial advance amount. In order to avoid cash flow problems, PMU is required to 
submit at least one withdrawal application (WA) to IFAD every quarter. When preparing the WAs, PMU shall 
follow the instructions contained in IFAD’s LTB and Loan Disbursement Handbook (which also contains model 
documents and forms to use) and the procedures described below. 
5. 
Recovery of Initial Advance 
431. 
To  avoid  an  excessive  outstanding  advance  at  the  financial  closing  date,  recovery  of  the  advance  is 
required ideally to begin six months before the Project Completion Date (PCD) where advances are large, and at 
the latest three months before the PCD where special circumstances may warrant this. Recovery of the advance 
may begin either: (i) six months before completion date; or (ii) when the undisbursed balance of the financing 
(including  outstanding  special  commitments)  is  equal  to  twice  the  amount  of  the  advance.  Under  Imprest 
Account modality,  the Fund will effect a  gradual recovery  of  the  advance  –  normally  by applying  part of  the 
amount documented in each replenishment application to reduce the outstanding advance. This offers the most 
effective means of ensuring that some funds remain available to finance eligible expenditures to be incurred 
using the imprest account. 
A template to guide the finance team in recovering the initial advance is shown in the box on next page. 
432. 
Detailed guidance is provided in the IFAD Handbook on Disbursement. 
25 Details on different disbursement methods are available in the IFAD Financial and Administration Manual available at  
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39637251 
89 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Sample Recovery Plan-Designated Account 
IFAD Loan 
No.: 
IFAD Loan Amount (SDR) 
20 000 000.00 
Project Completion 
Date: 
31-Dec-
12 
Loan Closing 
Date: 
30-Jun-13 
Reportin
g Period 
Authorized 
Allocation 
Justification: 
WA No. 
Date 
US $ 
EUR 
SDR 
Unjustified 
balance USD
SD
R 
1 
18/01/20
06 
$ 
250 
000.00 
€ 
€ 
- 
- 
172 648.51 
172 648.51 
0.00 
(77 351.49) 
Exchange Rate:   
0.00 
#VALUE! 
WA No. 
Date 
Estimated 
WA 
value 
(SP) 
Estimated WA 
value 
(USD) 
Proposed 
Recovery % 
Recovery 
Commulative 
Amount 
(USD) 
Recovery 
Amount 
(US
D) 
Commulati
ve 
Unjustified 
balance  
(USD) 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
21-Feb-12   
3-Mar-12 
5-May-12 
7-Jul-12 
5-Sep-12 
31-Dec-12   
10-Jun-13 
111 832.56 
72 685.11 
74 685.11 
70 885.11 
64 885.11 
82 627.66 
26 065.11 
45% 
35% 
35% 
42% 
40% 
80% 
100
% 
50 324.65 
50 324.65 
(50 324.65)
25 439.79 
75 764.44 
(75 764.44)
26 139.79 
101 904.23 
(101 904.23)
29 771.75 
131 675.98 
(131 675.98)
25 954.04 
157 630.02 
(157 630.02)
66 102.13 
223 732.15 
(223 732.15)
26 267.85 
250 000.00 
(250 000.00)
TOTAL  503 665.77 USD 
250 000.00 USD 
Ref
. 
No
. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
In accordance w ith IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date w ill be promptly refunded 
to IFAD. 
Prepared by:   
Confirmed by: 
15-Oct-11 
Date 
Date 
6. 
Direct Payment Procedures  
433. 
pays a designated beneficiary (e.g., supplier, contractor, or consultant) directly.  
The  direct payment procedure  is  a  disbursement  procedure  where IFAD, at  the  borrower’s  request, 
434. 
A signed withdrawal application (WA) must be submitted to IFAD together with a summary sheet and 
the required supporting documents. PMU shall use the standardized form for estimating its funding needs and 
prepare a WA for direct payments where necessary. To prove the requested disbursement is for eligible project 
expenditures  incurred,  the  PMU  has  to  provide  following  supporting  documents  with  every  withdrawal 
application that it submits to IFAD: 
90 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table 10: Requirement of supporting documents with withdrawal application 
Payment for 
Goods 
Services 
Payment type 
One  time  or 
payment 
Advance Payment 
Instalment 
Progress Payment 
Civil Works 
Advance Payment 
Progress Payment 
Release 
Money 
of 
Retention 
Required supporting documents 
Supplier’s invoice, or purchase order (indicating date, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Consultant’s or service provider’s invoice (indicating amount 
of advance payment and bank account details) 
Consultant’s or service provider’s invoice (indicating date, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Contractor’s invoice (indicating date, amount, and bank 
account details) 
Contractor’s invoice and interim payment certificate a or 
summary of work progress (indicating period covered, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Contractor’s invoice (indicating date, amount, and bank 
account details) and unconditional bank guarantee 
7. 
Statement of Expenditure (SOE) Procedure 
435. 
For  any  expenditure  item  costing  less  than  (to  be  inserted  later  based  on  FA)  PMU  can  use  this 
procedure for replenishment of its imprest fund. The statement of expenditures (SOE) procedure is a simplified 
procedure  requiring  no  submission  of  supporting  documentation  of  expenditures.  The  procedure  derives  its 
name from the SOE form which is submitted with the WA. The SOE replaces the usual supporting documents 
and the summary sheet. The SOE form provides data on contracts and disbursements of individual payments 
(up to any applicable SOE ceiling). During IFAD’s supervision mission, the FM Specialist shall conduct a review of 
sample  transactions  for  compliance  with  all  applicable  requirements.  PMU  is  required  to  maintain  complete 
supporting documentation for SOEs for this purpose.  
436.  While using this method, PMU certifies that (a) expenditures have been incurred and paid for proper 
execution  of  project activities  under  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  loan  agreement;  (b)  all  documentation 
authenticating these expenditures has been retained and will be made available for examination by PMU upon 
request; and (c) for projects with an SOE ceiling, payments have not been split to enable them to pass through 
such ceiling. 
437. 
preparing claims for withdrawal of funds for the project.  
PMU shall use a standardized form (Summary/Statement of Expenditure Sheet) prescribed by IFAD for 
8. 
Preparation of Withdrawal Applications 
438. 
in detail in the LTB and IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook: 
The WA is a standard IFAD package comprising several forms and documents, which are all described 
 
 
 
 
Form 100 – the application for withdrawal, which indicates the amount of replenishment requested 
in  the  WA  currency  and  the  payment  instructions.  It  contains  the  signatures  of  the  authorized 
representatives (mostly PD, and FM) 
Summary sheet – the recap schedule showing the amounts claimed (in local currency and in the 
WA currency) by expense category under Forms 101 and 102 
Form 101 sheets – used for expenditure exceeding the SOE threshold or for the Direct Payment 
procedure (see below). Copies of supporting documents must be attached to the Form 101 sheets 
and  sent  to  IFAD.  In  order  to  facilitate  processing  by  IFAD,  the  item  numbers  on  the  summary 
sheets are cross-referenced to the supporting documents. In addition, the IFAD no objection date 
is included in the “Remarks” column, if applicable. 
Form 102 sheets – used to detail all expenditure claimed under the SOE procedure (all expenditure 
under  USD  50,000),  for  which  no  supporting  documentation  is  sent  to  IFAD.  The  relevant 
supporting  documents  must  be  retained  instead  by  the  PMU  for  periodic  inspection  by 
representatives  of  IFAD  during  supervision  missions,  and  by  the  auditors  as  part  of  the  annual 
audits. It should be noted that the SOE threshold applies to the value of the contract rather than 
the amount of the payment. Form 102 sheets must be separated by expense category, and certified 
by the FM and the Project Director as authorized signatories. 
91 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
 
 
Form 104 – the designated account reconciliation, which serves to reconstitute the IFAD advances 
from bank balances, WAs in process and unclaimed disbursements. Any difference between the 
outstanding  IFAD  advance  and  the total  accounted  for  must be  justified  and  cleared  as soon  as 
possible.  
Form 105 – the WA checklist must be completed to make sure that the WA was properly completed 
in accordance with IFAD instructions. 
439. 
monitoring forms (for all contracts with more than one payment). 
In  addition,  PMU  is  required  to  submit  with  each  WA,  an  updated  contract  register  and  contract-
440. 
The production of the WAs should preferably be automated in Accounting Software. At least at the end 
of  each  quarter  (following  month-end  verification  procedures  detailed  in  Section  1.4),  the  Finance  Manager 
launches the preparation of a WA, which necessitates three steps: 
i. 
ii. 
Preliminary  verifications.  The  check  stubs  and  bank  transfers  for  the  month  are  checked 
against  the  bank  journal  to  ensure  that  all  disbursements  have  been  recorded  in  the 
Accounting  Software  and  are  supported  by  proper  documentation.  The  bank  journal  is 
reviewed in detail to ensure that the description of the transactions posted in the system are 
sufficiently  clear  and  complete.  Finally,  the  Deputy  Finance  Manager  ensures  that  bank 
reconciliations have been completed for all accounts. 
Accounting system processing. The accounting system is set up so as to exclude advances from 
the amounts claimed for reimbursement in the WA. The FM selects the financing under which 
the  WA  is  prepared,  the  period  covered  by  the  WA,  and  enters  the  SOE  threshold  (to  be 
inserted  as  stipulated  in  the  LTB/FA)  and  the  month-end  exchange  rate.  The  system  then 
shows all ‘claimable’ disbursements since the previous WA issued. 
441.  WA printing: Once the processing is complete, the WA number and period are automatically generated 
by the system, and the WA forms 100, 101, 102, and 104, as well as the summary sheet, can then be printed. 
442. 
The FM makes copies of all supporting documents backing up the WA and cross- references them to 
the summary sheets. Copies of the bank statements for the corresponding months are also attached to the WA. 
After having checked the WA to ensure that the references, amounts, and other details are correct, the FM fills 
out PMU’s checklist to ensure that all steps have been properly followed. The FM also verifies the WA, signs the 
relevant forms and completes both the PMU’s and the WA’s checklists. S/he then forwards the entire package 
to the PD for review and approval. The WA checklist (form 105) is verified by the PD as s/he performs a final 
check on the WA prior to signing it.  Before to sending/submitting the WA to IFAD, the FM scans and makes a 
copy of the entire signed WA package for PMU records. Withdrawal applications are sent to IFAD along with all 
supporting documents through the online WA submission portal and it is duly verified by FM & PD. 
443. 
IFAD  financing  proceeds  may  also  be  obtained  through  direct  payments.  This  procedure  is  used  for 
eligible Project expenditures to be paid directly by IFAD to suppliers, contractors, consultants, or third parties as 
authorized  by  the  Borrower.  The  direct  payment  procedure  may  be  used  to  request  the  payment  of  one  or 
several  invoices  (totaling  more  than  the  minimum  amount  as  stipulated  in  the  LTB/FA),  but  to  the  same 
supplier/contractor. The Direct Payment package includes Forms 100 and 101 described above. 
444. 
Once the payment is processed, IFAD sends a payment advice to the EAD (with a copy to the PMU), 
including the value date of the payment, the amount and currency of the payment, the SDR equivalent of the 
WA and the categories charged. The FM uses this information to fill out the monitoring schedule for WA and 
IFAD reimbursements. This schedule allows the FM to monitor the payment delays, and the differences between 
the amounts of the WA submitted and the amounts paid by IFAD, if any. In addition, at the end of each month, 
the  FM  requests  the  status  of  funds  by  category  from  IFAD  and  reconciles  it  with  the  PMU  accounts.  Any 
difference must be investigated and explained as soon as possible. 
Annexure-17    indicates  the  checks  that  the  finance  team  is  required  to  apply  while  preparing  withdrawal 
applications.  
92 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Introduction to IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook 
The effectiveness of the finance team to  manage project funds depends on its understanding of the Imprest 
Fund procedures and the ability to use withdrawal application formats and proper documentation to draw on 
IFAD’s funds. The finance team will prepare withdrawal applications frequently, carry out monthly reconciliation 
of  the  designated  accounts  with  the  NBP,  and  prepare  disbursement  reports  etc.  The  finance  team  should 
consult  IFAD  Handbook  for  Disbursement—in  addition  to  what  is  explained  in  this  manual  to  ensure  that  it 
complies with IFAD’s relevant instruction in its work. 
This Loan Disbursement Handbook is intended to familiarize both borrowers and recipients with the procedures 
for  withdrawing  proceeds  of  loans/grants/financing  provided  by  and  through  the  International  Fund  for 
Agricultural Development, when financing is to be administered and the project supervised by the Fund. 
The Loan Disbursement Handbook is available at https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39635782 
9. 
Counterpart Funds 
445. 
The share of government in project financing is estimated at USD 40.4  million. It comprises (a) cash 
contribution;  and  (b)  the  funds  to  be  leveraged  by  the  KP-RETP  which  are  channelled  by  the  provincial 
government through the Annual Development Plan (ADP). 
i. 
ii. 
Cash contribution (USD 9.1 million). This comprises USD 9.1 million for payment of taxes 
and project management costs. The funds shall be made available through the project’s 
Assignment Account established for this purpose. At the beginning of each quarter, the 
FM  prepares  a  funds  request  letter  for  25%  of  the  annual  amount  earmarked  in  the 
approved  AWPB  and  PSDP. The  letter  is  signed  by  the  PD and  sent  to  the  ACS,  P&DD. 
When the funds requested are released, the PMU receives a confirmation letter from the 
Accountant  General  KP  Office,  which  is  responsible  for  maintaining  the  KP-RETP’s 
assignment account in which counterpart funds are held. 
Funds to be leveraged through provincial ADP (USD 31.3 million). PMU shall engage with 
the P&D  to  identify the projects  under  ADP  that shall  be leveraged  and accounted  for 
toward  government  financing.  Provincial  government  notify  a  mechanism  for  this 
purpose. 
10. 
Beneficiaries’ Contributions 
446. 
PMU is required to maintain updated information on the beneficiaries’ contribution to the project in its 
accounting system. This is critical to ensuring that all relevant project investment is properly accounted for and 
reported in the project financial statements. 
447. 
To ensure the authenticity of the beneficiaries’ contribution—reported by FPOs and others as the case 
may be, PMU will carry out periodic review of the primary data sources used in reporting by the beneficiaries.   
J. 
Disbursement Process 
1. 
Classes of expenditure 
448. 
The KP-RETP incurs two types of expenses: administrative expenses (relating to the operation of the 
PMU and RCUs) and project expenses (relating to the implementation of Project activities). The eligible expense 
categories for the Project are in accordance with the financing agreement. For certain categories. The financing 
agreement specifies the total amount allocated for each of the categories, and the percentage of the expenses 
that is financed by IFAD. 
449. 
In  order  to  facilitate  the  management  of  Project  resources  and  corresponding  actions,  annual 
expenditure plans are prepared from the AWPB for the 3 main classes of expenditure incurred by the KP-RETP: 
93 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The procurement plan, prepared by the Procurement Specialist, details the goods, works and 
services  to  be  acquired  for  the  Project  in  the  following  12  months;  it  includes  quantities, 
estimated costs and the anticipated acquisition date; 
The intervention plan, prepared by the PMU technical staff in coordination with the IPs which 
includes all project interventions to be implemented during the following 12 months; 
The annual personnel plan prepared by the Admin & HR at PMU and RCUs, shows the core 
posts, temporary personnel and individual consultants to be engaged in the coming year. For 
each  post or assignment,  the anticipated  dates and duration, the  type  of  contract and the 
estimated cost are specified. 
450. 
Each  of  these  plans  identifies  the  component  and  AWPB  activity  corresponding  to  the  expenditure 
forecasted.  Once  they  are  approved  by  the  Project  Director,  these  plans  are  distributed  to  the  finance  and 
administrative team for implementation. 
2. 
Expenditure Request and Authorization 
451. 
All  Project  expenditures  are  initiated  by  a  request  prepared/signed  by  the  requesting  staff  and 
indicating the nature of the expenditure and other relevant information, the amount, AWPB activity, and the 
transaction coding. Expenditure requests may take the form of a purchase requisition (for the procurement of 
goods, works or services), an activity request (for the organization of workshops, training or demos sessions, 
meetings, or other activities directly implemented by Project staff), a request for temporary assistance (for the 
engagement of temporary personnel or individual consultants), the monthly payroll statement (for the salaries 
of Project staff) or a travel authorization (for official missions). 
452. 
Requests are first sent to the FM who verifies that (i) the expenditure is included in the appropriate 
annual plan and the AWPB and (ii) funds are available, before forwarding it to the Project Director for approval. 
The request is only approved by the Project Director if the relevance of the expenditure and the availability of 
funds have been established. Project funds cannot be committed unless the request has been signed by the FM 
and approved by the Project Director. Once the request is approved, the expenditure process is launched via a 
procurement action, an advance, a recruitment action or a travel authorization. 
453. 
At the RCUs level, the requests (usually from technical staff) are sent to the B&F Coordinators who send 
it to PMU Finance section for signature of FM and approval of Project Director. No expenditure may be approved 
if it exceeds the amount budgeted, unless there is prior written approval from the Project Director. 
3. 
Payment Request 
454. 
Payment requests may take different forms, depending on the type of expenditure: it can be an invoice 
or progress payment request (for the procurement of goods, works or services),  a  fee  payment  request  (for  
temporary  personnel  or  individual  consultant’s services), an advance request (for workshops or meetings), or 
a travel expense claim (for official travel). 
455. 
For invoices (or progress payment requests), suppliers/contractors are requested to attach a copy of 
the  contract  or  purchase  order  and  the  delivery  slip  or  statement  of  acceptance  of  work  (or  certificate  of 
completion of work) when submitting an invoice for payment. After receiving invoices by the relevant section, 
invoices are sent to the Finance Manager who: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Verifies the mathematical accuracy of the invoice; 
Ensures that the “pack” is complete (invoice, purchase requisition, contract or purchase 
order, delivery slip/statement of acceptance of works/certificate of completion, etc.) and 
checks that the information is the same on all the supporting documents; 
In the case of progress payment request for infrastructure, verifies that the contractor’s 
request matches the approved measurement book maintained by the Project; 
Ensures that the invoice was not previously paid (by checking in the Accounting Software 
and the contract monitoring form); 
Updates the contract monitoring form. 
456. 
logged in by B&F Coordinator at the RCUs and sent to Finance Manager who: 
For fee payment requests, consultants are requested to attach their reports. The payment request is 
94 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Verifies the mathematical accuracy of the request; 
Prepares  the  payment  pack  (payment  request,  request  for  temporary  assistance, 
contract, copy of report if applicable) and checks that the information is the same on all 
the documents; 
Ensures acceptance of the report by the project, if applicable 
Ensures  that  the  fee  payment  request  was  not  previously  paid  (by  checking  in 
Accounting Software). 
457. 
For advance requests, the Finance Manager verifies that: 
v. 
vi. 
The cash advance request is duly approved by the FM and the Project Director, and 
All supporting documents are attached (approved TOR, activity request and budget). 
458. 
For the travel claims, the FM verifies: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The approval of the FM and the Project Director. 
The  completeness of  supporting  documents  justifying the  expenses claimed  (including 
the travel authorization with proof of travel). 
The  accuracy  of computation of  mission costs by  the  traveler  (compared  to the  travel 
authorization). 
459. 
The above verifications are materialized on the transaction voucher used for inputting the payment in 
the accounting system. In case of an error or omission on any of the payment documents, the Finance Manager 
returns the document to the supplier, consultant or Project staff member for them to be corrected and re-issued. 
Once  the  verification  is complete,  the  Finance  Manager sends  the  payment  request (invoice  or  fee  payment 
request) to the originator of  the expenditure (i.e. the requesting staff) for certification. The originator of the 
expenditure  must  sign  the  invoice  or  payment  request  to  certify  the  goods  have  been  delivered,  works 
completed or services rendered in accordance with the contract or purchase order. Invoices must be marked 
“goods delivered”  or  “services rendered” followed  by the  date, to  indicate  that  they have been  certified  for 
payment.  All  invoices  or  payment  requests  must  also  bear  the  Project  Director’s  signature  (for  payment 
approval) before payment can be processed.  
K. 
Accounting Procedures 
1. 
Accounting Rules and Principles 
460. 
The  accounting  method  used  for  the  KP-RETP  is  the  cash  basis  of  accounting;  financial  statements 
therefore only reflect cash receipts and cash disbursements. Consequently, fixed assets are expensed at the time 
of purchase. Financial commitments at the end of the year are shown as footnotes to the financial statements. 
The  KP-RETP  uses  double-entry  accounting,  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  international  accounting 
principles. 
461. 
Generally  accepted  accounting  principles  are  the  foundation  upon  which  the  KP-RETP’s  financial 
information  system  is  built  and  which  (i)  determine  the  methods  of  evaluation  and  recording  of  financial 
transactions and (ii) guarantee the quality of the financial statements. The main principles are: 
Consistency in accounting principles and methods used from one year to the next 
Going concern (up to the Project completion date) 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Matching revenues and expenses within the same fiscal year 
iv. 
Historical cost basis for recording financial transactions 
v. 
Non-offsetting of assets and liabilities or revenues and expenses 
vi. 
Conservatism, regularity and fairness of accounts and financial statements 
vii.  Materiality    (full    disclosure    of    material    information/data    and    omission    of  
immaterial information/data in the financial statements). 
462. 
The Project does not generate revenues; instead it receives subsidies from donors in order to finance 
its  activities.  Due  to  the nature  of these  activities, the  Project must follow the  principle  of  balance  between 
expenses and subsidies. In order for the net result at the end of each fiscal year to be nil, a balance must be 
stricken between: 
95 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Investment subsidies and expenditures (i.e. acquisition of capital assets), and 
 
  Operating subsidies and expenditures (i.e. expenditures relating to Project activities). 
463. 
Project  accounts  are  maintained  in  Pakistan  rupee  (PKR);  however,  in  order  to  facilitate  financial 
monitoring on the part of IFAD, financial reports are also presented in USD or SDR. The Project fiscal year goes 
from July 1st to June 30th. 
2. 
Accounting Software/Financial Information System 
464. 
The Project shall use an accounting software for recording transactions in the financial, analytical and 
budgetary  accounts,  as  well  as  for  the  production  of  various  financial  and  accounting  reports  (accounting 
journals, trial balance, general ledger, etc.). A suitable accounting software shall be procured to help the project 
comply  with  the  reporting  requirements  of  IFAD  while  also  meeting  its  financial  management  needs.  At 
minimum, the accounting software needs to have following functionalities:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
General chart of accounts (for actual and budget transactions) 
Analytical/cost accounting codes 
Currencies used for Project’s financial reporting (PKR, US dollars and SDR) 
Journals (purchase, bank, direct payment, subsidiary ledgers, etc.) 
Suppliers 
Other third parties (banks, government, etc.) 
Balance sheet, income statement and statement of sources and uses of funds. 
465. 
The software is used to input transactions in the accounts, to process transactions, to view movements, 
transactions coding and balances on the screen, to make inquiries, and to consult accounts and journals. The 
system also allows for reporting and printing journals, ledgers and trial balances using different criteria. 
3. 
Recording of Transactions 
466. 
The recording of transactions is completed in four steps: 
KP-RETP financial transactions shall be recorded in the project accounts using the accounting software. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Preparation of a transaction voucher 
Input of the transaction in the appropriate subsidiary ledger 
Back-up of accounting records 
Filing of accounting records. 
4. 
 Transaction Voucher (or bill form) 
467. 
Accounts Officer at PMU/B&F Coordinators at RCU shall prepare the transaction voucher. The voucher 
must be backed up by a supporting document approved by the authorized officer. The supporting document can 
be an invoice, a progress payment request for works, fee payment request, advance request, travel  expense 
claim, payroll statement, check or bank transfer, bank debit or credit advice, or an adjusting entry sheet. The 
transaction voucher serves two purposes 
i. 
ii. 
It materializes the preliminary verifications carried out by on the supporting documents; 
It serves as the support for inputting transactions into the accounting system. 
468. 
The voucher number is obtained from the input screen, as entries are being input into the system. The 
numbering sequence used for the vouchers is therefore the same as the one generated automatically by the 
Accounting Software. 
469. 
 The following information is indicated on the voucher: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Journal 
Nature, date, description and amount of the transaction in PKR 
Name of recipient (supplier, consultant, etc.) 
Reference of the supporting document 
Amount of income tax and VAT 
IFAD and GoKP share 
96 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
vii. 
viii. 
Exchange rate 
Coding for general accounts, analytical accounts, budgetary accounts and PC-1 code. 
The  coding  of  transactions  for  general  accounts,  analytical  accounts,  budgetary 
accounts and PC-1 code are based on the Accounting Software’s charts of accounts—
which are consistent with the chart of account prescribed by the federal government. 
The AWPB activity, the district, the source of funding and the expense category are 
also indicated on the voucher. 
470. 
At PMU level, once the voucher is filled out, it is signed by the Deputy Finance Manager, and verified 
and signed by the FM. In the case of a payment, the Project Director also approves the voucher. Similarly, at 
RCUs, B&F Coordinator prepares the vouchers and verified by the head of the RCU before being submitted to 
PD. 
5. 
Input of Transactions 
471. 
Transactions are input into Accounting Software using a “transaction entry” window. The journal entry 
number generated automatically by the system is noted on the voucher. Using the information on the voucher, 
the transaction type and date, source document code and reference, currency, account numbers and transaction 
amount are entered into the system by the Accounts Officer/B&F Coordinator for each transaction. 
472. 
The inputting of transactions takes place on a daily basis for the vouchers that have been checked by 
the  FM  as  the  case  may  be  and  approved  by  the  Project Director.  Transactions  entered  into  the  system  are 
directly posted into the Project’s general ledger. 
6. 
Backup of Accounting Records 
473. 
Once posted, transactions can only be modified or deleted by inputting a correcting or adjusting entry 
in the system. At the end of each day, all the data input into the system is backed up automatically to the server. 
In addition, FM are responsible to backs up the accounting data on an external device at the end of each week; 
this  weekly  backup  on  external  device  is  kept  by  the  FM/PD.  These  backups  allow  for  restoring  of  posted 
transactions in case of power failure, errors on the data or any other problem. 
7. 
Filing of Accounting Records 
474. 
The Accounts Officer at PMU is responsible for printing the journals and other accounting reports, and 
for filing all accounting records. The original accounting records are filed as a package composed of the voucher 
and the corresponding supporting documents. They are filed in chronological order by transaction type (one or 
more separate file(s) for each month). The accounting records are grouped on a monthly basis with a separate 
binder for each of the following transaction journals: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Purchases 
Payroll 
Subsidies 
Bank – Designated Account 
Bank – Project Account 
Direct payment (if any) 
Correcting/adjusting entries. 
475. 
Reports may be printed as and when needed by the FM staff. Two complete sets of accounting reports 
are  printed  as  part  of  the  monthly  and  annual  closing  of  accounts,  after  all  transactions  have  been  posted, 
verifications carried out and adjustments recorded (one for the FM and one for the files). These printouts are 
stamped with a stamp marked “Final” to indicate that this is the last version. 
8. 
Monthly and Annual Closing of Accounts 
476. 
KP-RETP accounts shall be verified at the end of each month and closed at the end of the fiscal year. 
The objective of the accounts verification and closing procedures is to provide the users of financial information 
with an accurate and reliable accounting and financial situation, as well as to meet the Project’s legal obligations. 
97 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Because the monthly financial and accounting reports are for internal use only, the monthly verification exercise 
is more limited in scope than the annual closing of accounts. 
9. 
Monthly Verification of Accounts 
477. 
Management with: 
Project accounts are closed at the end of each month in order to provide the Finance Unit and Project 
i. 
ii. 
A complete and accurate cash and disbursements situation, for proper monitoring; 
Accurate and up-to-date accounting and financial data for the preparation of the monthly 
financial report, the quarterly IFRs and the withdrawal applications. 
478.  Monthly  verification  procedures  are  carried  out  by  the  FM  during  the  first  10  days  of  the  following 
month and include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
10. 
Review and validation of financial reporting packages; 
Posting of outstanding transactions; 
Checking of accounting records against journals and payment documents (check stubs, 
bank transfers); to verify the completeness of transaction entry and the accuracy of 
transaction coding (for general, analytical and budgetary accounts); 
Reconciliation  of  the  IFAD  status  of  funds  statement  with  the  Project  accounts  (for 
cumulative disbursements to date by expense category); 
Bank reconciliations; 
Designated Account reconciliation; 
Reconciliation  of  the  financial  commitments  schedule  (generated  from  Accounting 
Software) with the individual contract monitoring forms and the contract register; and 
Physical inventory of supplies. 
Annual Closing of Accounts 
479. 
The  main  objective  of  the  annual  closing  of  accounts  is  the  preparation  of  the  year-  end  financial 
statements, in accordance with the financing agreement and national regulations. Annual closing procedures 
start at the beginning of June each year and must be completed prior to the end of August of the following fiscal 
year, so that year-end financial statements may be presented to the PSC and IFAD at the latest on 31st August. 
480. 
The FM prepares an annual closing schedule and communicates it to all Project staff by 30th of June. 
This  schedule  lists  the different steps  of  the  closing  process and indicates deadlines  and responsible  staff.  It 
contains: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Deadlines for carrying out certain tasks (processing of travel authorizations and travel 
expense  claims,  processing  of  purchase  requisitions  and  requests  for  temporary 
assistance, payment of suppliers, etc.); 
Instructions for the year-end inventories (fixed assets and supplies); 
Instructions for the closing of accounts; 
List of documents to obtain or prepare for the annual closing; 
List of documents to prepare for the external auditors; and 
Deadlines for the production of reports, statements and other accounting and financial 
information. 
481. 
include: 
The annual closing procedures are carried out by the FM, with assistance from RMPUs, as needed, and 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Collection and review of financial reporting packages; 
Posting of outstanding transactions; 
Checking of accounting records against journals and payment documents for the month 
of June; 
Analysis  and    justification  of  balances  for  each    general    and    auxiliary  account  (this 
procedure is preceded by the printing of ledgers and balances); 
98 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
Determination  of  estimates  for  accrual  and  deferral  transactions  (for  inclusion  in  the 
footnotes to the financial statements); 
Input of correcting and adjusting entries; 
Reconciliation  of  the  IFAD  status  of  funds  statement  with  the  Project  accounts  (for 
cumulative disbursements to date) by expense category; 
Bank reconciliation; 
Designated Accounts reconciliation; 
Reconciliation  of  the  financial  commitments  schedule  (generated  from  Accounting 
Software) with the contract monitoring forms and the contract register;  
Physical inventory of fixed assets; and 
Physical inventory of supplies. 
L. 
Maintenance of separate accounts and records 
482. 
In  terms  of  IFAD’s  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Finance:“The  Project  Parties  shall  maintain 
separate  accounts  and  records  in  accordance  with  consistently  maintained  appropriate  accounting  practices 
adequate to reflect the operations, resources and expenditures related to the Project until the Financing Closing 
Date…”  
483. 
maintain accounts. Such accounts and records may include: 
In order to comply with the above requirement, PMU and other implementing agencies are required to 
Table 11: Types of Accounts required at PMU and IPs level 
Type 
Electronic information 
Example 
 
  Other documents and files maintained electronically, either on desktops, laptops 
Data and information maintained within the accounting software 
or removable storage devices 
Correspondence 
Documents received from 
external sources 
Internally generated 
information 
Emails 
Hard copy correspondence (letters) 
Bank statements 
Supplier documentation 
Employee files 
 
 
 
 
 
  Withdrawal applications 
 
Forms 
484. 
All documents and information are the property of the KP-RETP and may not be removed. 
1. 
Filing and storage of the financial records 
485. 
PMU and other implementing agencies are responsible for filing records. To fulfil this responsibility: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Project parties should maintain files in a chronological order, assigning appropriate 
codes/sequential numbers; 
Project parties should perform filing activities on a regular basis to prevent the accumulation 
of papers and to ensure that the financial records are always maintained in an up-to-date 
manner; 
Project parties should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in paper 
format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to which access is 
controlled and limited; and 
Project parties should also classify the financial records as "Confidential", or "General".  
2. 
Off-site archiving of financial records 
486. 
The respective Financial Managers should ensure that the financial records are archived at an off-site 
location  on  a  regularly  basis.  Once  a  year,  the  Financial  Managers  should  make  sure  that  the  completed  or 
99 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
inactive files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy retrieval of the files in case they are required at 
some future date.  
3. 
Electronic back-up procedures 
487. 
Financial Manager. It is required that: 
Back-up of electronic information is an important function to be undertaken under instruction from the 
i. 
Daily:  Electronic information at each Project office is backed up on the local server 
ii.  Weekly: Electronic information is saved on an external storage device and kept in a 
locked cabinet  
488. 
Manager. The access of external persons is prohibited except for the auditors and IFAD staff.  
Project  staff  access  to  backup  files  are  subject  to  authorisation  by  the  Project  director  or  Financial 
4. 
Retention period 
489. 
Project parties are required to retain accounts and records for at least ten (10) years after Financial 
Close. The Financial Manager should ensure that all documents and records (electronic and paper) are handed 
over to GoKP at financial closure to ensure that records can be maintained for the 10-year period. 
5. 
Fixed Asset Management 
490. 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the purposes of 
financial  accounting  and  to  ensure  preventive  maintenance,  and  theft  deterrence.  Adequate  Fixed  asset 
maintenance  also  increases  the  sustainability  of  the  Project.  There  are  three  elements  in  fixed  asset 
management that require the attention of the Financial Managers: 
1.  Purchase of equipment 
i. 
ii. 
Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
Setting up a plan for disposal and/or handover of the asset once the Project is completed  
2.  Purchase of Equipment  
491. 
The FM team should follow the following process for each fixed asset purchased: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Assign a unique, sequential asset number (excluding minor items such as stationary).  
Tag each item with its unique asset number.  
Record the item of equipment in fixed asset register  
3.  Fixed Asset Register 
492. 
software. The asset register should record the following information for each individual piece of equipment:  
The FM team must maintain a fixed asset register in the asset management module of the accounting 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Asset description 
Asset number 
Individual responsible for asset 
Implementing agency responsible for purchase 
Source of funding of asset (IFAD, government etc.),  
Location of the asset 
Date of purchase 
Cost of purchase and invoice number 
Remarks regarding the condition of the asset 
493. 
The  FM  shall  ensure  that  the  consolidated  fixed  asset  register  is  maintained  and  updated  regularly. 
Assets purchased for beneficiary use should be included in the fixed asset register if the assets remain under the 
ownership of the Project (therefore beneficiaries to return to Project at Project closure). 
4.  Asset Verification Review 
100 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
494. 
the following checks are performed: 
Under the management of FM, the KP-RETP must conduct an annual asset verification process whereby 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Verify that all fixed assets are still held in the location recorded on the register;  
Confirm  the  completeness  and  accuracy  of  the  information  recorded  on  the  fixed  asset 
register; 
Check that equipment and vehicles are still in a reasonable state of repair and that remarks 
regarding the condition of the assets are correct as recorded in the fixed asset register; 
495. 
The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the equipment, to 
ensure  adequate  segregation  of  duty.  Discrepancies  between  the  verification  exercise  and  the  fixed  asset 
register should be investigated. Where assets are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from 
the asset register. The removal should be formally documented and approved by Financial Manager and Project 
Director. Moreover, the Financial Manager will undertake random verification of fixed assets during field visit. 
6. 
Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
496. 
Following general guidelines should be followed. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Drivers are required to maintain waybills/itinerary lists and vehicle history records. 
No cash shall be advanced to drivers for the purposes of refueling. 
Each vehicle to have dedicated fuel card which indicate the vehicle registration number. 
Each fuel card to have a set daily / monthly limit based on average consumption. 
Changes to the monthly limit is subject to approval by the Financial Manager (which will be 
approved base on approved trips). 
The waybill shall indicate the reading of odometer at the beginning and end of the period, i.e. 
the  mileage  of  the  car,  as  well  as  fuel  consumption.  This  process  shall  be  checked  by  an 
accountant based on GPS system (“Teltonika FM 4200) in the data server of “Realcom” LLC, 
which  is set  in  each  vehicle  of PMU.  Using the  device,  one  can  track the  route,  stop  time, 
kilometers  traveled,  etc.  The  data  shall  be  entered  into  the  accounting  software  which 
distributes fuel by projects, depending on whether one or the other trip was made on any 
project.  (Manual recording / monitoring at PMU is acceptable given limited number of vehicle 
Fuel  stations  shall  provide  a  monthly  summary  report  on  fueling  and  invoice  which  the 
accountant  shall  compare  to  the  fuel  invoices  attached  to  the  waybill.  Differences  to  be 
followed up/resolved. 
Provision  of  fuel  and  lubricants  shall  be  strictly  limited  per  each  vehicle  per  month  in 
accordance with the order signed by the Management.  
1.  Vehicle insurance 
497. 
The Financial Manager should ensure that all Project vehicles are comprehensively covered and that all 
drivers are noted on the insurance policy. Under no circumstanced may uninsured drivers drive the vehicles. The 
insurance  policies  should  be  renewed  annually  or  as  stipulated  in  the  policy.  The  safety  of  cars  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  drivers  assigned  to  the  vehicles.  Consequently,  they  must  ensure  that  the  vehicles  are 
parked in a secure area when not in use or outside working hours.  
2.  Maintenance 
498. 
The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles. The drivers must notify 
the project administration of the vehicles’ maintenance needs so that the cars can be serviced on a timely basis. 
The Administration shall seek the approval of PD for any major repair and maintenance of a project vehicle. The 
FM team would not make payment unless prior approval on estimates of such repair has been obtained as per 
approved procurement process and PD has accorded approval for the cost. Ideally, a service provider should be 
engaged for this purpose.  
101 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
M. 
Internal Controls 
1. 
General 
499. 
PMU is subject to numerous internal controls stipulated in the provincial Rules of Business, Delegation 
of Financial Powers Rules, Procedures for the Assignment Account and Revolving Fund Account, KP PPRA Rules, 
Accounting Policies and Procedures (APPM) etc. Compliance with the established internal controls, however, 
remains “weak” as per independent audit reports and therefore the project needs to pay special attention to 
internal controls in its operations. Actions that can strengthen internal controls—based on government system 
and IFAD guidelines are summarized hereunder:   
i. 
Segregation of duties; 
ii. 
Authorization; 
iii. 
Reconciliation and checks 
iv. 
Restricted access; and 
v.  Monitoring and Review 
Internal Control Regime adopted by IFAD for its operations 
IFAD requires that R/B to follow COSO Internal Control Framework in designing internal controls to achieve (a) 
operations; (b) reporting; and (c) compliance related objectives in project operations. The COSO Framework has five 
components of internal controls: 
Components 
Requirements 
Control 
Environment 
Competent project staff of high integrity—including project leadership, a sound organizational 
structure with clearly established job description and a strong culture of accountability. 
Risk 
Assessment 
A system of identifying, preventing, and rectifying problems to achieve results, ownership of 
processes and support from all key stakeholders. 
Control 
Activities 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Suitable policies and procedures included in PIM, compliance assessment to improve control 
environment, a robust accounting system including back-up of relevant data. 
Continuous horizontal and vertical flow of critical information for informed decision making, an 
active PSC providing direction and oversight, all line departments on board, IPs are alert to risks and 
PMU is closely managing information/communication processes   
Monitoring 
PMU has developed reporting template for continuous monitoring risks to the project and taking 
prompt remedial measures. Monitoring reports are shared with key stakeholders for their 
input/action. 
Finance Manager/Senior Management is encouraged to review details at 
https://www.ifad.org/elearning_cfs/04-
New%20COSO%20Principles%20applied%20in%20IFAD%20DECEMBER%202015%20Final.pdf  
2. 
Segregation of duties 
500. 
An important element in any control system is the separation of those duties which would, if combined, 
enable one individual to record and process a complete transaction. It is the Finance Manager’s responsibility to 
ensure  that  the  following  duties  are  segregated  under  the  project:  preparation,  authorization,  execution, 
custody, recording and operation of systems 
3. 
Authorization 
501. 
Authorization  controls  require  the  certification  that  a  transaction  or  event  is  acceptable  for  further 
processing. Several types of authorization are in effect at the project, mainly in the procurement cycle, payment 
cycle,  and  bank  and  cash  management  cycle  including  reconciliation.  The  FM  team  should  ensure  that  the 
authorizations  of  PMU  staff  ensure  efficient  implementation  while  keeping  the  risk  as  low  as  possible.  The 
authorization of project staff should be in line with their respective job descriptions. 
102 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
4. 
Verification 
502. 
Transactions  and  significant  events  are  verified  before  and  after  processing,  e.g.  when  goods  are 
delivered, the number of goods supplied is verified with the number of goods ordered. Afterwards, the number 
of goods invoiced is verified with the number of goods received. 
5. 
Reconciliation and checks 
503. 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data are a key control for identifying 
errors and discrepancies in balances. The FM section should perform the following reconciliations each month: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Bank reconciliation 
Reconciliation between system and special account receipts and payments statement 
Any reconciliation or balancing amount should be promptly cleared. Unusual or long 
outstanding reconciling items must be brought to the attention of the financial officer. 
The financial officer will review and sign all reconciliations as evidence of his review. 
504. 
In addition, physical checks should be performed on assets held and on petty cash—if maintained. 
6. 
Reviews of operating performance 
505. 
Operating performance is reviewed against a set of standards on a regular basis, assessing effectiveness 
and  efficiency.  If  performance  reviews  determine  that  actual  accomplishments  do  not  meet  established 
objectives or standards, the processes and activities established to achieve the objectives should be reviewed 
to determine. 
506. 
All data, records and assets should be kept in a physically secure environment. This should cover safe 
keeping of finance records such as official order forms and bank details. In addition, any petty cash should be 
kept securely. Financial data and other records should also be protected in the form of back up procedures. All 
work should be regularly backed up and copy records stored securely off site. 
7. 
Restricted access 
507. 
All data, records and assets should be kept in a physically secure environment. This should cover safe 
keeping of finance records such as official order forms and bank details. In addition, any petty cash should be 
kept securely. Financial data and other records should also be protected in the form of back up procedures. All 
work should be regularly backed up and copy records stored securely off site. 
8. 
Monitoring and review 
As  detailed  in  financial  reporting  section  later,  periodic  financial  reports  must  be  prepared  and 
508. 
submitted  to  IFAD.  For  the  purposes  of  internal  control,  the  same  information  should  be  prepared  and 
monitored by the project Director on a monthly/quarterly basis. The reports should be prepared on a timely 
basis and should normally be available for distribution two weeks after the end of the reporting period to which 
they  relate.  The  periodic  reports  should  be  reviewed  by  the  FM,  and  PD  as  a  minimum.  Where  necessary, 
corrective action should be taken to ensure the authorized budget and procurement plan are not breached. 
Competent  supervision  helps  to  ensure  that  internal  control  objectives  are  achieved.  This  includes 
509. 
assigning, reviewing, and approving an employee's 
9. 
Supervision 
Competent  supervision  helps  to  ensure  that  internal  control  objectives  are  achieved.  This  includes 
510. 
assigning, reviewing, and approving an employee's work. 
10. 
Information and technology related controls 
511. 
Information  and  technology  controls  can  be  both  general  and  related  to  applications.  The  major 
categories  of  general  controls  are  (1)  entity-wide  security  program  planning  and  management,  (2)  access 
controls,  (3)  controls  on  the  development,  maintenance  and  change  of  the  application  software,  (4)  system 
103 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
software controls, (5) segregation of duties, and (6) service continuity. Application controls are the structure, 
policies,  and  procedures  that  apply  to  separate,  individual  application  systems,  and  are  directly  related  to 
individual  computerized  applications.  These  controls  are  generally  designed  to  prevent,  detect,  and  correct 
errors and irregularities as information flows through information systems. 
512. 
The  KP-RETP  will  have  independent  arrangement  for  internal  audit  to  strengthen  internal  controls 
within  the  project.  A  Chartered  Accountant  firm/Internal  Audit  Manager  shall  be  engaged  for  this  purpose. 
Details is provided in the relevant section of this manual. 
Summary of Mandatory Checks 
i.  Monthly bank reconciliation must be performed and record thereof maintained; 
ii. 
Budgetary controls must be ensured for each transaction at the PMU. Further on monthly basis, 
budget v/s actual report must be prepared by the FMS and shared with the PD and Project Steering 
Committee for continuous project oversight; 
Fixed  Asset  Register  shall  be  maintained.  These  assets  shall  be  tagged  and  physically  verified 
periodically  by  the  admin  section  of  the  PMUs.  Accuracy  and  completeness  of  the  fixed  assets 
register shall be verified independently periodically; 
FM team shall maintain complete documentation for each category of expenditure and it shall also 
conduct periodic/random inspection of partner organizations’ project record to ensure that project 
activities/expenditure  are  properly documented  and  factually  reported. Specific  documentation 
requirements for different partner organizations are provided in PIM.   
Internal Auditor shall review project transactions, processes, procedures, and performance at least 
semi-annually  to  provide  assurance  regarding  the  fiduciary  controls,  risk  management  and 
monitoring mechanisms in place;  
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
11. 
Controls related to PFOs/FSCs 
MOUs  signed  with  FPOs  should  clearly  establish  roles  and  responsibilities  i.e.  engagement  of 
professional  staff—especially  FM  official,  registration  under  relevant  laws,  dedicated  bank  account, 
deposit of counterpart share etc. 
Business plans should be based on solid evidence and drawn on prescribed template to create harmony 
across PFOs; 
Provincial government should notify specific activities to be implemented by line departments under 
the project. PFOs/FSCs should be aware of this in their plans etc. 
Release of funds should be in tranches—and subject to continuous fulfilment of criteria—as stipulated 
in MOUs;  
FM officials at PFOs should be capacitated to manage funds/accounts in line with the requirements of 
IFAD/PMUs 
Transparent criteria should be used for lending funds to farmers which should include i.e. age group, 
social status, amount of each loan, recovery time etc. 
Recovery of financing provided to farmers should be fully documented down to individual beneficiaries 
and linked with banking information; 
Periodic progress reporting—covering technical as well financial aspects, by FPOs should be ensured. 
Standardized  template  should  be  used  for  this  purpose  to  generate  meaningful  data—including 
disaggregated  information  on  project  beneficiaries.  The  PFOs/FSCs/Private  Partners  under  4Ps  shall 
submit monthly, quarterly and annual reports on the format included in their respect contracts. The 
reporting date will be one week after the close of the period for which the report is due.  Budget and 
Finance Coordinator—placed in each region, shall ensure these partner organizations understand and 
comply with the applicable reporting requirements; 
Random  inspections  should  be  carried  out  by  PMU/RCUss  to  ensure  that  what  is  reported  by  the 
partner organizations is credible; 
PMU/RCUs shall  maintain  complete record  of  their  inspection  for external review i.e external audit, 
IFAD missions etc.  
104 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
12. 
Controls related to Private Partners under 4Ps Arrangements  
Conduct  post  qualification  assessment  to  ensure  these  partners  have  technical,  managerial,  and 
financial management capacity to deliver against their contractual obligation; 
Ensure monthly/quarterly and annual reporting against business/work plans on the prescribed formats 
included  in  contracts  with  these  private  partner  organizations. The  reporting  date  will  be  one  week 
after the close of the period for which the report is due.  Budget and Finance Coordinator—placed in 
each  region,  shall  ensure  these  partner  organizations  understand  and  comply  with  the  applicable 
reporting requirement; 
Conduct periodic verification to ensure that the reporting by these partners is credible; 
Assess  randomly—from  time  to  time,  that  these  partners  continuously  comply  with  the  technical, 
managerial, and FM requirements as per the terms of their engagements; 
Obtain certification/verification from the partners that taxes are being deducted from payments they 
are making to different beneficiaries, and proper documentation is being maintained of all transactions 
as required. 
PMU/RCUs shall  maintain  complete record  of  their  inspection  for external review i.e external audit, 
IFAD missions etc.  
13. 
Controls related to Service Providers (Trainings) 
Conduct post qualification before awarding contract to ensure that service providers have  sufficient 
technical, administrative, and financial capacity for the required tasks; 
Ensure training plans are agreed before any training is imparted; 
Copies of such plans should be maintained in PMU and RCUs; 
Ensure that selection of beneficiaries is subject to established criteria; 
Ensure that for each training, service provider shares both training schedule, training material (hard or 
soft copies as appropriate) 
Conduct random inspection of training events—and cross-check whether trainees are the same that 
are  indicated  in  the  training  schedule/plans  and  instructors  are  also  the  same  that  are  required  to 
deliver the training; 
A  training  report  for  each  major  training—2-3  pages  write-up  coupled  with  annexes  i.e.  list  of 
participants  (CNIC,  address,  title  and  duration  of  training,  certificate  of  completion  for  accredited 
courses issued by the training institute, pictures etc. 
Ensure  that  the  service  provider  is  maintaining  job  placement  data  of  each  trainees—whether  self-
employed  or  hired  as 
information  for  cross-
laborers  with  someone  along  with  contact 
check/verification as needed. 
PMU/RCUs shall  maintain  complete record  of  their  inspection  for external review i.e external audit, 
IFAD missions etc.  
513. 
The  KP-RETP  will  have  independent  arrangement  for  internal  audit  to  strengthen  internal  controls 
within  the  project.  A  Chartered  Accountant  firm/Internal  Audit  Manager  shall  be  engaged  for  this  purpose. 
Details is provided in the relevant section of this manual. 
N. 
Financial Reporting 
514. 
IFAD  requires  borrower/recipient  to  maintain  accounting  records  that  are  adequate  to  reflect  the 
operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  project  up  to  the  Financing/grant  Closing  Date.  In 
addition, the borrower/recipient is required to deliver detailed financial reports on its operations, in accordance 
with standards and procedures that are acceptable to IFAD. Project accounting records and financial statements 
must be prepared in accordance with IPSAS-Cash Basis Accounting. This information should be specified in the 
notes to the audited financial statements26. 
26 Details are available in the IFAD’s Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing available at  
105 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
1. 
Annual Project Financial Statements  
515. 
IFAD  requires  the  project  to  deliver  unaudited  project-specific  financial  statements  annually,  within 
four months of financial year-end, covering the duration of the implementation period. The Financial statements 
must contain all material and relevant information required to provide IFAD and other stakeholders with a full 
understanding of the project’s activities and financial position. The reporting period will be a period of twelve 
months—starting from 1 July to 30 June coinciding with Pakistan’s financial year. The content of the project’s 
financial statements is prescribed under the applicable accounting standards used as the basis of preparation. 
IFAD also requires certain additional specific disclosures. A summary of the required content for project financial 
statements is given below: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Comparison of budget and actual amounts; 
Notes (a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes); 
Statement of cash receipts and payments; 
Fixed asset schedule; 
Withdrawal application statement; 
Sources and uses of funds statement; and 
Designated Account statement and reconciliation. 
516. 
PMU will ensure that IFAD-specific disclosures referred to above are easily and clearly traceable. PMU 
will disclose the contribution of the Government’s Counterpart Funds and the Beneficiaries Contribution (both 
in cash and in-kind) in the financial statements. The quantification of the contribution should be consistent with 
the policy agreed with IFAD and readily available for verification by external review i.e. IFAD, External Audit etc. 
517. 
meaningful and effective financial reporting to IFAD have been attached as Annexure-19 to this manual.  
To provide guidance to the KP-RETP, sample financial statements that may be customized further for 
2. 
Interim Financial Reports 
It is important for any project to monitor its financial performance continuously. IFAD emphasizes the need for 
such  monitoring.  The  PMU  needs  to  analyse  significant  variations  between  planned  and  actual  spend,  take 
remedial  actions—where  required  and  submit  interim  financial  reports  to  IFAD.  This  practice  needs  to  be 
established. Several  IFAD’s  supervision missions  recommended  this action  and require  that Interim  Financial 
Reports (IFRs) may be used to operationalize this practice. The aim of IFPRs is to answer the following questions 
regarding a reporting period: What expenditures were incurred, paid by which financing source, at what time, 
for what purposes and what was accomplished (output). As the ideal set of reports depends on the project’s 
activities and the project risk profile, some supplementary reports might also be included to complete the set of 
reports.  Generally speaking the reported expenditures in the IFPRs (totals and by financier) should match with 
those reported by the project to the government as well as other possible financiers. Usually, the template of 
the  annual  financial  report  (as  briefly  explained  above)    is  sufficient  for  interim  financial  reporting  as  well. 
Annexure-20 provides detailed guidance for Intrim Financial Reporting. 
The requirement of the KP-RETP submitting IFRs to IFAD need to be complied with. The project may discuss the 
format and narrative part of the report with IFAD. 
3. 
Analytical Reviews 
518. 
PMU, while finalizing financial statements, must carry out an analytical review to ensure that financial 
statements present a fair view of the financial health of the project. The external audit will also review these 
statements  from this perspective.   Analytical reviews  will  minimize  the  risk of  errors  and  irregularities  being 
reported in financial statements.   
i. 
ii. 
Is the financial information consistent with the available record? 
Is any expenditure unusual or ineligible?  Does the PMU have any solid justification to 
explain such differences away? Has such justification been properly examined, agreed on 
with the relevant stakeholders, and fully documented for internal/external scrutiny? 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Reporting+and+Auditing+of+IFAD-
Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-aef95b79dd67 
106 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Are there trends or comparisons that should be clarified? Is expenditure pattern broadly 
aligned with the activities envisaged in the AWPB? 
Are reported expenditures within budget and consistent with the cost estimates? 
Are  there  significant  computational  errors  and/or  inconsistencies  in  the  information 
presented 
Are there any indications of fraud and corruption noted in the review?  
519. 
PMU  shall  prepare  monthly  and  quarterly  financial  reports  to  identify  possible  cost  savings,  detect 
possible  misuse of project  funds, and ensure  that operating  remains  within  agreed  budget. The  report is for 
internal consumption. The report will indicate expenditure incurred against budget during the month and the 
cumulative expenditure recorded till the end of the preceding month. Further, the expenditure by categories 
and by sources of funds shall be documented in the report. The report will also indicate balance of imprest funds 
and preparedness for next WA.  
520. 
are not, what needs to be done to make mid-course correction 
These reports should be linked with the AWPB to ascertain whether the activities are on track, if they 
O. 
Internal Audit 
1. 
Responsibilities 
521. 
The  KP-RETP  shall  engage  the  services  of  a  reputable  chartered  accountant  for  internal  audit.  The 
internal  audit  activity  shall  report  to  the  Project  Director,  PMU.  The  internal  audit  function  shall  cover  the 
following aspects of the project: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Adequacy and effectiveness of financial, operational, and management controls against 
relevant risks; 
Compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations; 
Economy, efficiency and effectiveness in managing operations (VFM); 
Safeguarding of organizational assets 
Suitability, accuracy, reliability, integrity of financial and other relevant information 
Integrity of the process to establish adequate protection against errors, frauds, and losses 
of all kinds 
vii.  Mitigating  other  fiduciary  risks—especially  ones  arising  from  public  procurement  and 
corrupt practices 
viii. 
Supporting 
recommendations; 
improvement 
2. 
Process modalities 
in  governance  process  at  PSC’s 
level 
through 
522. 
The Internal Audit function shall report to the Project Director directly and it shall be responsible for (i) 
planning, executing, and reporting on internal audit to PD/P&DD—covering FPOs, FSCs, and Service Providers 
and  other  partner  organizations;  (ii)  facilitate  implementation  of  audit  recommendations—internal/external 
audits; and (iii) ensuring that the recommendations of IFAD Mission are fully complied with by the project. The 
TORs for the hiring of a chartered accountant (internal audit firm) have been included as an Annexure-18 to this 
manual. 
523. 
PMU shall select the internal audit firm in accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. IFAD’s No 
Objection to the TORs of the internal auditing firm shall be obtained before initiating the procurement process. 
The contract shall be initially for one-year subject to extension based on the performance of the firm and IFAD’s 
No Objection.    
107 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
P. 
External Audit 
1. 
General considerations 
524. 
As per the Constitution of Pakistan, the Auditor General of Pakistan (AGP)—which is the Supreme Audit 
Institution  (SAI)  of  Pakistan,  shall  conduct  audit  of  the  project.  An  audit  is  required  to  confirm  whether  the 
financial statements provide a true and fair view in all material respects of the financial activities undertaken. 
525. 
PMU shall prepare—and submit to the AGP the Annual Financial Statements (AFS within two (2) months 
of the close of a financial year for this purpose. Report of each Audit—along with the Management Letter shall 
be submitted to IFAD within six months of the close of financial year (by 31 December) to which the audit relates. 
PMU must maintain continuous liaison with the Director General Audit, KP to ensure that (a) the audit of project 
is included in the annual audit plan of the audit office; (b) audit is executed on time; (c) audit quality is acceptable 
to  IFAD;  and  (d)  audit  report  is  shared  with  IFAD  within  the  stipulated  timeline  i.e.  by  31  December  for  the 
preceding financial years. Follow-up with the relevant FAO is also critical to ensure timely resolution of audit 
observations at Departmental Audit Committee (DAC)—to minimize the backlog of audit observations during 
the life of the project and mitigate the risk of audit observations converting into ineligible expenditure which 
would require to be refunded to IFAD.   
526. 
The contractual agreements with service providers/private partners under 4P arrangements will include 
a provision for external audit of activities funded with IFAD funds. The service providers/private partners shall 
propose names of three reputable chartered accountant firms for this purpose out of which PMU shall select 
one against already notified criteria. The audit shall be conducted within three months of the close of financial 
year and audit report furnished to PMU within six months of closure of annual accounts. The maximum duration 
of contract with an auditing firm for this purpose shall be three year. 
Key Source Document for External Auditing  
The IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects is 
available online for public use and dissemination. It is primarily intended as a guide for 
IFAD borrowers and recipients and other external stakeholders on operational aspects and 
requirements related to financial reporting and auditing of IFAD-funded projects. Tailored 
guidance is provided for investment projects and for grants, both those subject to the 
Policy for Grant Financing and those financed by supplementary funds. The finance team 
should use the guidelines in external auditing matters. 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Re
porting+and+Auditing+of+IFAD-Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-
527. 
External  audit  of  the  KP-RETP  shall  be  conducted  by  the  Office  of  the  Auditor-General  of  Pakistan 
(OAGP)  that  has  constitutional  mandate  for  external  audit  of  all  public  sector  entities.  The  OAGP  conducts 
compliance, financial, and performance audits—following International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions 
(ISSAIs) and its reports are laid before the Public Accounts Committees (PACs) at national and provincial levels. 
The external audits are, in general, carried out for following purposes:  
Provide an independent assurance of accountability; 
Give credibility to the financial statements and other management reports; 
Identify weaknesses in internal controls and financial systems; 
Verify compliance with financing agreement provisions relating to financial matters; and 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v.  Make recommendations for improvement. 
528. 
General Audit, KPK is the FAO for the external audit of the KP-RETP.   
A network of Field Audit Offices (FAOs) has been established for this purpose. The Office of Director 
529. 
PMU must maintain continuous liaison with the Director General Audit, KP to ensure that (a) the audit 
of project is included in the annual audit plan of the audit office; (b) audit is executed on time; (c) audit quality 
is acceptable to IFAD; and (d) audit report is shared with IFAD within the stipulated timeline i.e. by 31 December 
108 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
for the preceding financial years. Follow-up with the relevant FAO is also critical to ensure timely resolution of 
audit  observations  at  Departmental  Audit  Committee  (DAC)—to  minimize  the  backlog  of  audit  observations 
during the life of the project and mitigate the risk of audit observations converting into ineligible expenditure 
which would require to be refunded to IFAD.   
530. 
PMU  is  responsible  for  preparing  the  audit  (financial  statements,  accounting  reports  and  other 
necessary documents),  providing adequate  office  space  and other  facilities, and  assisting the auditors  in the 
course of their mission. In addition to the preparation of year-end financial statements and other reports, getting 
ready for the annual external audit entails the following: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Printing of all year-end accounting ledgers and reports; 
Verifying that all vouchers and supporting documents exist; 
Verifying that all accounting ledgers, accounting records and supporting documents are 
properly filed; 
Preparing  a  complete  file  for  the  auditors  (including  financial  statements  and  reports, 
accounting ledgers, individual account justifications, reconciliations, etc.);. 
Ensuring  that  FPOs,  FSCs  and  other  partner  organizations  that  use  project  funds  have  
separate financial reports and statements detailing the utilization of project funds);and 
Organizing all site visits, meetings and work sessions at the request of the auditors. 
531. 
meaningful financial reporting as per the requirements of IFAD. 
Sample  project  financial  statements  have  been  provided  as  Annexure-16  which  may  be  refined  for 
2. 
Types of audit opinion 
532. 
The auditors are required to issue a report including the audited financial statements and expressing 
their opinion on the Project financial statements covering (i) the Project’s compliance with national and IFAD 
rules  and  guidelines  in  the  area  of  procurement  and  disbursement,  and  (ii)  the  project’s  compliance  with 
financing  agreement  covenants.  The  external  audit  will  examine  SOEs,  particularly  the  adequacy  of  the 
procedure used for preparing the SOEs, the eligibility of SOE expenditures, and the extent to which IFAD can rely 
on this disbursement method. Further, the external audit will examine the designated account statements and 
reconciliations,  indicating  whether  the  funds  received  and  disbursements  made  are  fairly  presented  in  the 
statements. 
533.  While certifying project financial statements of a project, the DGA KPK can express either one of the 
following opinions:   
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
An  unqualified  opinion  indicates  the  auditor’s  satisfaction  in  all  material  respects  with  the 
preparation  of  the  financial  statements,  and  with  their  consistency,  adequacy,  and 
compliance with regulations, statutory requirements and any additional requirements stated 
in the request for audit sent to the DGA (KPK) by PMU. 
 A  qualified  opinion  reflects  that  the  auditor  has  some  reservations  on  specific  areas  and 
concludes  that  an  unqualified  opinion  cannot  be  issued,  but  deems  that  the  effect  of  any 
disagreement,  uncertainty  or  limitation  of  scope  of  the  audit  does  not  require  an  adverse 
opinion or a disclaimer of opinion. PMU should urge the auditor to clearly state the financial 
effect of the qualification in the report. 
An adverse opinion is issued when the effect of the disagreement is so pervasive and material 
to the reliability of the financial statements that the auditor concludes that a qualification of 
the report will be insufficient to disclose the misleading or incomplete nature of the financial 
statements.  
A disclaimer of opinion is issued when the possible effect of an uncertainty or of a limitation 
on the scope of the auditor is so significant that the auditor is unable to express an opinion 
on the financial statements. 
109 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
3. 
Key requirements in Management Letter 
534. 
internal controls systems and more specifically: 
Audit reports should also include a Management Letter addressing the adequacy of the accounting and 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Commenting on the financial and accounting records, systems, procedures and controls that 
were examined during the course of the audit; 
Identifying specific deficiencies and areas of weakness in systems and internal controls; 
Bringing  to  the  Borrower’s  and  IFAD’s  attention  any  other  matters  that  they  consider 
significant and 
Providing  recommendations  to  improve  the  accounting  and  internal  controls  systems.  If 
deemed necessary, the management letter may also provide: 
Comments on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of Project resources; 
Comments on the achievement of planned Project results and communicating matters that 
have come to their attention during the audit which might have a significant impact on the 
implementation and sustainability of the Project; 
Comments  on  the  extent  of  compliance  or  non-compliance  with  the  legal  and  financial 
obligations and commitments of the Project. 
535. 
during the previous year’s audits. 
The management letter must also show evidence of the auditors’ follow-up of recommendations issued 
536. 
As per the established practices, an audit report is finalized after discussion at Departmental Accounts 
Committee (DAC) level in which PMU gets an opportunity to clarify its stance in response to the findings and 
recommendations highlighted in the report.  The recommendations made in the final audit report need to be 
implemented as next audits examine the implementation status of previous audit recommendations. 
537. 
The final audit reports must be communicated to IFAD at the latest 6 months after the end of the fiscal 
year,  i.e.  before  December  31st  of  the  following  year.  The  financing  agreement  and  the  General  Conditions 
attached  thereto  specify  IFAD’s remedies in  case  of  non-submission of  the audit  reports  within  the  required 
timeframe, which may include the suspension of the Borrower right to request withdrawals from the loan/grant 
accounts. 
538. 
IFAD’s Financial Management Services Division conducts a detailed review of the audit report in order 
to assess the quality/reliability of the audited financial statements and audit reports, as well as the performance 
of the auditors. Within 60 days of receiving the audit report, IFAD informs the GoP of the results of this review. 
In  the  case  of  problems/irregularities  arising  from  IFAD’s  review  or  from  the  audit  report  (e.g.  qualified  or 
adverse opinion, or disclaimer of opinion), IFAD communicates to the GoP an action plan detailing the remedial 
actions to be implemented, as well as the corresponding deadlines. The GoP is required to keep IFAD informed 
as to the progress of implementation of the action plan.  
4. 
Audit Follow-up 
539. 
Follow-up on audit recommendations usually assesses the adequacy, effectiveness and timeliness of 
actions taken by the project and those charged with governance on observations and recommendations given 
in audit reports.  Audit reports generally include actions that seek to correct, prevent or improve the working of 
the auditee. Further, such actions indicate agreed timeframe for implementation. A weak follow-up is likely to 
render external audit ineffective because the systemic improvements emphasized in audit reports would not be 
implemented. This is the reason IFAD gives importance to these follow-ups. 
540. 
IFAD requires the project to maintain an Audit Log on the format given in the table:  
110 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table-12: Template for Audit Follow up 
Sr. No 
Audit 
Observation 
Total Amount of 
observation  
Status 
AUDIT LOG (TEMPLATE) 
Insert 
# 
Reproduce 
Audit 
Observation 
from the 
External Audit 
Report 
Indicate the value 
held under audit 
observation 
What is the viewpoint of the 
project? What is the decision of 
the Departmental Accounts 
Committee (DAC) on the audit 
observation? Has it fully or partly 
settled the observation? In some 
cases, only a fraction of the 
amount held under audit 
observation is settled whereas the 
material fraction remains 
unsettled. In some cases, the 
observation may not have any 
amount attached but the nature 
of observation would be serious 
enough to warrant a DAC 
decision? 
Total Amount not 
settled / 
outstanding 
Remarks 
What is the 
amount 
settled/unsettled 
etc. 
Is the action 
taken by the 
DAC/PMU 
appropriate in 
the 
circumstance 
and no further 
action is 
required? Or 
what else 
should 
happen? 
541. 
PMU is required to be alert to the follow-up actions. This will require it to engage with the DGA (Quetta) 
and provincial P&DD to hold frequently DAC meetings. Rigorous follow-up is likely to improve internal control 
environment.  
Q. 
Completion and Financing 
542. 
The KP-RETP’s completion date is set at (to be inserted later) and the closing date six months later, on 
(to  be  inserted  later).  One  year  before  completion  date,  the  Project  must  start  reducing  its  activities,  and 
concentrating on the setup and/or capacity building of the entities that will take charge of project activities after 
completion. On completion date, all activities under IFAD funding must be completed. Only expenditures relating 
to goods delivered, works completed, and services rendered on or before (to be inserted later) are eligible for 
reimbursement by IFAD. The FM and Procurement Specialist must therefore carefully and periodically review 
the procurement plan during the last implementation year, so that contracts that cannot be executed on time 
are cancelled as soon as possible. 
543. 
On completion date, Project staff contracts must be terminated, except for key staff who are needed 
during the winding up period (i.e. the six months from Project completion to the closing of the financing). The 
key  staff  generally  include  the  Project  Director,  the  FM,  the  M&E  Specialist,  and  the  required  support  or 
outsourced staff (for example, one driver, one office helper and one guard). 
544. 
The only expenditures authorized during the completion period are key staff salaries, operating costs, 
and expenses related to the preparation of the completion report and the final audit. In addition, during this 6-
month  period,  the  disbursements  related  to  contracts  fully  executed  prior  to  the  completion  date  are 
authorized, provided they are eligible. The FM is responsible for preparing the related withdrawal applications, 
and must ensure that all eligible expenditures are claimed before closing date. 
545. 
During  the  last  project  implementation  year,  the  FM  prepares  an  initial  advance  recovery  plan  and 
submits it to IFAD for no objection. The recovery of the initial advance by IFAD is triggered by one of the following 
two criteria, whichever comes earlier: 
i. 
ii. 
The undisbursed balance in the loan account is twice the amount of the initial advance, 
or 
Six months before completion date (i.e.to be inserted later). 
546. 
The recovery plan indicates, for each withdrawal application submitted until closing, the percentage 
that must be retained by IFAD to recover the initial advance, and the percentage that must be reimbursed to 
the Project in order to replenish the designated account. As the closing date approaches, certain WAs may need 
to  be  fully  allocated  to  the  recovery  of  the  initial  advance,  therefore  drawing  no  reimbursement  to  the 
designated account. 
111 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
547. 
In the event that the initial advance is not fully recovered at closing date, the GoP must reimburse the 
unjustified balance of the advance to IFAD. Moreover, at closing date, IFAD cancels the undisbursed balance of 
the loan. IFAD closes the loan account once the following conditions are met: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Full recovery of the initial advances (or reimbursement of any unjustified amount); 
Confirmation  by  PMU  of  the  final  WA  sent  to  IFAD  (after  verification  that  all  eligible 
expenditures have been claimed); and 
Submission of the completion report and the final audit report. 
548. 
At closing date, PMU is required to conduct a final inventory of Project assets, including the detailed 
description, acquisition date and value, book value, and asset location. This inventory report is submitted to the 
P&DD, when the assets are transferred to the GoKP. Finally, all Project files and documents must be scanned / 
saved and properly archived in order to comply with the legal covenant to retain them for a period of 10 years 
after closing. 
R. 
IFAD’s Financial Management Support 
1. 
Overview of IFAD support 
549. 
IFAD’s Financial Management Division (FMD) will remain involved with the project—from PDR stage to 
financial  closure  of  the  project  to  ensure  that  fiduciary  requirements  are  met.  The  FMD  periodically  shall 
periodically field supervision missions for this purpose with the aim to:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Assess the progress of project implementation;  
Identify/anticipate problems or constraints in implementation; and 
Propose solutions or corrective measures for improvement. 
550. 
FMD’s  Finance  Officer  will  establish  ongoing  contact  with  the  Project,  by  liaising  with  the  Financial 
Manager of PMU and will be available to provide remote support on financial management matters. In addition, 
FMD  will  visit  the  project  during  missions  to  the  Project  (represented  by  either  the  Finance  Officer  or  an 
appointed  consultant).  Mission  types  include  supervision  missions,  mid-term  reviews  and  implementation 
support missions. During missions, FMD will assess and monitor the adequacy of project’s financial management 
arrangements  such  as  accounting,  budgeting,  internal  controls,  flow  of  funds,  financial  reporting  and  the 
auditing practices. 
551. 
If the project’s financial management arrangements are deemed acceptable, IFAD will rely on them to 
provide assurance that the financing proceeds are being used for the intended purposes. In cases where IFAD 
identifies  weaknesses in  the  financial arrangements, it  will  require  the  project to  take  remedial measures  to 
mitigate fiduciary risks.  
552. 
The key findings and recommendations of missions will be captured in the Aid Memoire which is shared 
with the P&DD. The Aid Memoire includes an overview of issues identified and actions that need to be taken by 
the project/IFAD to enable the project to achieve its intended objectives.  
112 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
2. 
 Roles and responsibilities related to IFAD support 
553. 
PMU will be required to participate in IFAD missions as follow: 
Stage 
Before IFAD missions 
Project roles and responsibilities 
 
 
 
 
During IFAD missions 
Prepare Appendix 1 and submit to the FO/Consultant in electronic format 
(Excel  Workbook,  including  formulae)  before  commencement  of  the 
mission – the FO/Consultant will specify the date range to be covered within 
Appendix 1. 
Each  project  party  (PMU,  SPMUs  and  other  implementing  agencies)  to 
complete  the  Financial  Management  Assessment  Questionnaire  (FMAQ) 
and submit to the FO/Consultant in electronic format (FO to provide most 
recent template). 
Prepare  all  other  information  as  requested  by  FO/Consultant  before 
commencement of the mission. 
Provide the FO/Consultant with all information which was requested before 
the mission. 
  Arrange  meeting  with  the  auditors  (internal  and  external)  and  any  other 
 
selected party requested by the mission. 
Ensure  that  all  FM  staff  are  available  to  assist  the  FO/Consultant  in 
performing their duties which may include: 
o  Review of financial reports, reconciliations 
o  Physical verification of fixed assets and inventory 
o  Meeting with the auditor 
o  Reviewing and completing the FMAQ 
  Discuss  identified  FM  weaknesses  and  risks  and  assist  the  FO/Consultant 
with developing appropriate actions for inclusion in the aide memoire. 
  Respond to any wrap-queries from the FO/Consultant 
 
Commence  with  implementing  all  actions  which  are  included  in  the  Aide 
Memoire 
  Update the Action Tracker (see illustration in 21.11) with all actions raised 
during the missions. 
  Monitor  and  update  the  Action  Tracker  to  ensure  all  actions  are 
implemented  in  a  timely  manner.  Liaise  with  the  Financial  Manager  if 
required. 
  Respond to ad-hoc queries received from the Financial Manager or other 
IFAD staff as it related to FM matters. 
After IFAD missions 
Ongoing 
554. 
The PMU is required to do proper preparation for the mission to make this more meaningful since the 
mission lasts for around two weeks. The PMU should prepare financial tables and compliance status vis-à-vis 
agreed loan covenants. IFAD has also prescribed templates for this purpose which are attached as Annexure 22 
and Annexure 23 to this manual.  
113 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ANNEXURES        
114 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-1: Organizational Chart Job Description of Key Positions 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
Internal Auditor 
Project Director (PMU) 
Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Chairman 
Secretary, Finance (Member) 
Secretary, Agriculture, Livestock & Cooperatives (Member) 
Secretary, Industries, Commerce, and Tech. Education (Member) 
Managing Director, TEVTA (Member) 
Secretary, Zakat, Usher, Social Welfare, Special Education, and 
Women Empowerment (Member) 
Secretary, Youth Affairs (Member) 
Secretary, Local Government and Rural Development (Member) 
Representative of Civil Society (Member) 
Project Director (Secretary) 
Manager 
(Employment & Job 
Placement) 
Manager (M&E, 
Transversal Themes) 
Procurement 
Specialist 
Administration and 
HR Officer 
Manager (Agri-
business & Agri-skills) 
Manager Finance 
Labor Market Specialist (1) 
Skills Development 
Specialist (1) 
Social Inclusion and Youth  
Policy Specialist (1) 
KM/Communication 
Specialist (1) 
Gender, Nutrition, 
Climate Change 
Specialist (1)  
M&E Officer (2) 
M&E Assistants (4) 
Contract Management 
Officer (1) 
IT Officer (1) 
Office Assistants (4) 
Institutional Development 
Specialist (1) 
Accounts Officer (1) 
Budget &Finance Officer 
(1) 
Accounts Assistants (4) 
Regional Coordinator (RPMU)-5 
Regional Offices 
Regional M&E 
Officers (10) 2 in 
each region) 
Agri-business/4P 
officer (5) one in 
each region 
Gender Officer (5) 
one in each region 
Budget &Finance 
Coordinator (5) one 
in each region 
Note: Some lower staff/ministerial positions are not reflected in the organizational chart. For details, please consult the Cost Tab that provide complete 
information on the staffing etc.TORs for key positions have been indicated hereunder where for the remaining positions, the TORs will be finalized once PC-
1 is approved. 
115 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Project Director, PMU 
Assignment Title  
Project Director, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Whole province 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Economic 
Transformation  Project,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3) Programme Management and Policy Support.  
The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will be managed through a provincial project management unit 
(PMU) at Peshawar and 5 regional offices to allow for coverage of all agro-ecological zones.  
Scope of Work:  
The Project Director will be responsible for the overall management and coordination of the programme activities as 
well as the programme implementation in accordance with the provision of financing agreement and project design. The 
PD will act as the principal accounting officer (PAO) for the Programme and report to the Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC), which is chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary, KP.  
Role and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Ensure  that  all  resources  are  made  available  for  the  timely  and  smooth  implementation  of  the  project 
activities as per the project design and scope of the financing agreement(s); 
Be responsible for the appropriately capacitating of PMU/RCUs including necessary recruitment, account(s) 
opening and operation and management of PMU in an effective and efficient manner; 
Establishment  of  sound  management,  supervision  and  monitoring  system(s)  within  the  programme  for 
planning, coordination, reporting, financial management, M&E and troubleshooting in line with financial 
agreement(s) and programme documents; 
Develop  an  effective  stakeholders’  and  media  management  and  develop  and  operationalize 
communication  strategy  for  the  programme  and  efficient  dissemination  of  all  programme  purpose  and 
activates within and outside programme area; 
Be responsible for the overall management of the programme and of the PMU and RCUs staff and activities 
undertaken by implementing partners; 
Lead the preparation of the annual work plan and budget (AWPB) and associated procurement plan and 
ensure its timely submission to relevant fora and seek necessary approvals; 
Ensure  the  effective  and  efficient  utilization  of  programme  funds  and  other  resources  according  to  the 
116 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
AWPB and procurement plan through supervision and monitoring; 
Ensure that progress, audit and other reports are produced and submitted to the appropriate parties on a 
timely basis; 
Ensure  effective  targeting  of  the  poor  and  vulnerable  in  target  villages/valleys  and  main  streaming  of 
gender, youth and indigenous people in the programme, achievement of gender impacts as planned, and 
identifying and managing any gender, youth and indigenous people related risks; 
Ensure the timely dissemination of programme experience and results to relevant stakeholders within the 
learning community; 
Ensure effective linkages, liaison and networking with other implementation partners and service providers 
either working in  the programme area  or potentially concern with programme activities and with other 
relevant interventions; 
Establish effective fora for public-private sector interaction and promotion of private sector linkages with 
the provincial, district and regional/valley/cluster levels or any other beneficiary group representing the 
programme at relevant events and meetings; 
Implement the decisions of the PSC and recommendation of the IFAD missions; and  
Perform any other duty relevant to the programme as may be assign by the PSC and IFAD. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
555. A civil servant of at least BPS-19,  from Pakistan Administrative Services/Provincial Management Services. Master 
level  educational  attainment  in  social  or  management  sciences;  MBA,  economics,  development  studies,  public 
administration or any other related discipline, at least 15 years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor 
funded project(s) involving policy reform, value chain development, labor market/employment generation, strong 
communication, team building and management skills; and sound understanding of the context of KP, customary 
practices, policy environment and economic dynamics. 
556.  
117 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Regional Coordinator, PPMU (five positions) 
Assignment Title  
Regional Coordinator, PPMU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
KP-RETP Project 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Economic 
Transformation  Project,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP)).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow  for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The Project Director will be responsible for the overall management and coordination of the programme activities as 
well as the programme implementation in accordance with the provision of financing agreement and project design. The 
PD will act as the principal accounting officer (PAO) for the Programme and report to the Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC), which is chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary, KP.  
Role and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Establishment of systems  for  planning, coordination, reporting, financial management, M&E  and  trouble-
shooting at the district level.  
Be responsible for the overall management and coordination of the Programme activities in the district and 
of the RCU staff.  
Preparation of the divisional annual work plan and budget (AWPB) and associated Procurement Plan;  
Ensure  the effective utilization  of  Programme  funds and  other resources  according to the  AWPB through 
supervision and monitoring;  
Ensure  mainstreaming  of  gender  in  the  Programme,  achievement  of  gender  impacts  as  planned,  and 
identifying and managing any gender-related risks;  
Ensure the timely dissemination of Programme experience and results to relevant stakeholders within the 
learning community;  
Ensure adequate linkages, liaison and networking with other implementation partners and service providers 
either working in  the district or  potentially concerned with Programme activities  and with  other  relevant 
interventions;  
118 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
Establish effective fora for public-private sector interaction and promotion of private sector linkages with the 
district and valley level farmers or any other beneficiary groups.  
Represent the Programme at relevant functions and meetings.  
Perform any other duty relevant to the Programme as may be assigned by the PC  
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
557. A civil servant of at least BPS-19,   from Pakistan Administrative Services/Provincial Management Services. Master 
level  educational  attainment  in  social  or  management  sciences;  MBA,  economics,  development  studies,  public 
administration or any other related discipline, at least 10 years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor 
funded project(s) involving policy reform, value chain development, labor market/employment generation, strong 
communication, team building and management skills; and sound understanding of the context of KP, customary 
practices, policy environment and economic dynamics. 
119 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Finance Manager, PMU  
Assignment Title  
Finance Manager, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Whole province 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Economic 
Transformation  Project,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The FM shall be responsible for overall financial management and reporting. The FM shall liaise with IFAD on all aspects 
of project’s financial management, lead capacity building activities in the area of financial management under the project 
to capacitate accounting staff within PMU and other partner organizations to comply with guidelines and policies and 
procedures,  keep  PD  updated  on  latest  developments  and  issues  in  project’s  financial  management  and  provide 
suggestion to the best possible option, maintain liaison with IFAD in managing the assignment account, and participate 
in Project Steering Committee meetings and activities; assist/advise the PD in all financial matters as and when required. 
Key responsibilities are briefly described below: 
Role and responsibilities: 
Budgeting and Planning 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
Assist  the  PD  in  preparation  of  AWPB  and  facilitate  in  the  approval  of  AWPB  from  Project  Steering 
Committee.  
Prepare  report  on  monthly  financial  progress  of  the  project  for  the  attention  of  the  PD  and  further 
discussions.  
Prepare annual, quarterly and semi-annually disbursement forecasts for all components of the project/s 
in line with project’s procurement plan and Work Plan/Cash Plan. 
Funds Management 
Ensure timely releases of counterpart funds from provincial government. 
Liaison  with  P&D,  line  departments,  Provincial  Accountant  General  (AG)  in  connection  with  budget, 
releases, disbursement and other issues of financial management. 
Prepare realistic cash forecasts on quarterly basis in coordination with the project team/implementing 
partners. 
120 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
Engage with IFAD for release of funds and maintenance of sufficient liquidity for project implementation. 
Prepare  and  process  withdrawal  application  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s  Disbursement  Guidelines  for 
drawing funds from the assignment account(s).  
Track funds and follow up with National Bank of Pakistan and IFAD to ensure timely credit of funds into 
the project’s assignment account(s). 
Internal Controls 
Perform internal control assessment in view of the systemic weaknesses as reported from time to time 
in the supervision missions/audits/periodic inspections by PMU and take remedial actions 
Take  measures  to  strengthen  internal  controls  system  as  per  IFAD’s  guidelines  stipulated  in  this 
document;  
Assess the need of other monitoring controls, such as internal audit and suggest it to the management 
accordingly. 
Expenditure/Payment Processing 
Ensure  compliance  with  internal  control  framework—including  applicable  government  rules  and 
procedures while processing payments. 
Analyze, plan, design, implement, and monitor a system to augment internal controls in line with best 
practices in the process of payment and expenditure management. 
Apply  pre-audit  checks  on  all  payments  before  payment  from  the  assignment  account(s)  including 
budget  availability,  sanction  of  competent authority and compliance  with  applicable financial rules  & 
regulations.  
Ensure that IFAD’s No Objection Letter (NOL) is obtained for every prior review activity before processing 
any payment. 
Prepare request for payment and forward to PD for approval after fulfilling all codal formalities.  
Ensure that only eligible payments are forwarded Coordinator’s approval and drawing funds from the 
assignment account. 
xxiv.  Manage  financial aspects of the  contracts under  implementation,  including  payment terms, purchase 
orders and variation orders. 
Accounting and Record Management 
xxv. 
Record all transactions timely and accurately in the books of accounts and ensure that no expenditure 
remained unaccounted. 
xxvi.  Maintain accounts on cash basis as per government accounting procedure i.e. New Accounting Model.  
xxvii. 
Ensure  up-to-date  maintenance  of  adequate  registers,  books  of  accounts  and  records  in  appropriate 
order and format to meet the government and IFAD’s requirements and to facilitate classification and 
analyzing the financial information for monitoring the project progress. 
xxviii. 
Prepare supplementary record, which provides timely and up-to-date financial information of contracts. 
xxix.  Maintain imprest /petty cash account (where applicable) and ensure maintenance of separate petty cash 
book and petty cash vouchers in compliance with approved procedures. 
xxx. 
Prepare monthly bank reconciliation statements of assignment accounts. 
121 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xxxi. 
xxxii. 
xxxiii. 
xxxiv. 
Reconcile the expenditure on government prescribed format with the office of Accountant General KP 
on monthly basis. 
Be the payroll manager and process monthly payroll of project employees. Ensure proper payroll controls 
are applied and the payments are made directly in the Bank accounts. 
Prepare and process monthly project payroll and submit to PD for approval prior to making any payment 
under salaries. 
Ensure that the fixed assets and inventory records are maintained for the project identifying location and 
user  of  each  asset/inventory  and  arrange  for  the  annual  and  periodical 
inventory  of  the 
assets/consumables. 
xxxv. 
Ensure safe custody of all financial records for review by IFAD Missions, third party monitoring agents; 
and external & internal auditors. 
Financial Reporting 
xxxvi. 
xxxvii. 
xxxviii. 
xxxix. 
Prepare  quarterly  financial  reports  and  submit  to  PD  and  Bank  in  a  timely  fashion  for  review  and 
approval. 
Ensure that annual financial statements and other reports as specified under the Financing Agreements 
and  as  per  recommended/suggested  by  supervision  missions  are  accurately  prepared  and  timely 
submitted – annual financial statements to be prepared in accordance with Cash Basis IPSAS ‘ Financial 
Reporting under Cash Basis of Accounting’.  
Prepare Annual financial statements of the three project/program and submit for review and approval 
to PD. 
Define and produce other financial reports, as and where required on utilization of funds to facilitate PD 
in decision-making process. 
Audit 
xl.  Make  arrangements  for  timely  initiation  and  completion  audit  of  project  and  ensure  that  report 
produced is in compliance with audit requirements of the Government and IFAD.  
xli. 
xlii. 
xliii. 
xliv. 
xlv. 
Ensure that the project is adequately reflected in audit plan of Auditor General of Pakistan and that audit 
is periodically conducted. 
Cooperating  with  IFAD,  Government,  and  other  partners  to  improve  project  financial  management, 
particularly in terms of following up the action points agreed in the project legal documents, during the 
IFAD supervision missions, Aide Memoires and the recommendations of external auditors and internal 
auditors. 
Attend entry and exit meetings with external auditors, facilitate timely completion of audits by arranging 
timely  submission  of  annual  financial  statement  in  appropriate  format,  supply  of  information  and 
documents responding to queries, initiate actions for holding tripartite meetings and coordinating with 
relevant project entities in settling audit paras.  
Prepare  working  papers  on  audit  observations  raised  by  external  auditors  and  arrange  to  convene 
Departmental Accounts Committee (DAC) meeting to settle the audit observations to the extent legally 
and logically possible.   
Establishment  of  systems  for  planning,  coordination,  reporting,  financial  management,  M&E  and 
trouble-shooting at the district level. 
122 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xlvi. 
xlvii. 
xlviii. 
xlix. 
l. 
li. 
lii. 
liii. 
liv. 
Be responsible for the overall management and coordination of the Programme activities in the district 
and of the RCU staff. 
Preparation of the divisional annual work plan and budget (AWPB) and associated Procurement Plan;  
Ensure the effective utilization of Programme funds and other resources according to the AWPB through 
supervision and monitoring;  
Ensure  mainstreaming of  gender in the  Programme,  achievement of  gender  impacts  as planned,  and 
identifying and managing any gender-related risks;  
Ensure the timely dissemination of Programme experience and results to relevant stakeholders within 
the learning community;  
Ensure  adequate  linkages,  liaison  and  networking  with  other  implementation  partners  and  service 
providers  either  working  in  the  district  or  potentially  concerned  with  Programme  activities  and  with 
other relevant interventions;  
Establish effective fora for public-private sector interaction and promotion of private sector linkages with 
the district and valley level farmers or any other beneficiary groups.  
Represent the Programme at relevant functions and meetings.  
Perform any other duty relevant to the Programme as may be assigned by the PC  
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
Master level educational attainment in finance, MBA, ACCA, CA (preferred) or any other related discipline, minimum 10 
years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor funded project(s), familiarity with Government financial 
regulations and IFAD financial management guidelines, and sound understanding of the community procurement and 
financial management of community driven sub-projects implementation . 
558.  
123 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Budget and Finance Officer, PMU  
Assignment Title  
Budget and Finance Officer, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Whole province 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Economic 
Transformation  Project,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow  for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The FM shall be responsible for overall financial management and reporting. The FM shall liaise with IFAD on all aspects 
of project’s financial management, lead capacity building activities in the area of financial management under the project 
to capacitate accounting staff within PMU and other partner organizations to comply with guidelines and policies and 
procedures,  keep  PD  updated  on  latest  developments  and  issues  in  project’s  financial  management  and  provide 
suggestion to the best possible option, maintain liaison with IFAD in managing the assignment account, and participate 
in Project Steering Committee meetings and activities; assist/advise the PD in all financial matters as and when required. 
Key responsibilities are briefly described below: 
Role and responsibilities: 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
Support Finance Manager in preparing annual work planning and budgeting; 
Facilitate FM in engaging with P&D to include budget in the Annual Development Plan (ADP) as per rules; 
Upload budget on Financial Management Information System, and prepare monthly monitoring reports 
comparing  actual  expenditure  against  the  budget.  Highlight  weak  performing  areas  for  management 
intervention; 
Prepare cash forecasts on quarterly basis in coordination with the project team and submit to IFAD for 
advance/replenishment of advance. 
Prepare and process withdrawal application in accordance with IFAD’s Disbursement Guidelines 
Prepare  disbursement  reports—and  ensuring  that  sufficient  funds  are  available  in  the  Assignment 
Accounts all the time. 
Prepare  annual  financial  statements  as  per  Cash  Basis  IPSAS  and  submit  to  the  Auditors  within  two 
months of the close of the financial year. 
124 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
Prepare periodic financial reports specified in the Loan Covenants. 
Prepare Quarterly Financial Summaries (budget vs actual) to support oversight over use of funds 
Track funds and follow up with National Bank of Pakistan and the World Bank to ensure timely credit of 
funds into the projects’ assignment account. 
xxii. 
Loan Covenants Monitoring 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
Master level educational attainment in finance, MBA, ACCA, CA (preferred) or any other related discipline, minimum 5 
years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor funded project(s), familiarity with Government financial 
regulations and IFAD financial management guidelines, and sound understanding of the community procurement and 
financial management of community driven sub-projects implementation . 
559.  
125 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Budget and Finance Coordinator (5 Position—one each at RCU) 
Assignment Title  
Budget and Finance Officer, RCU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Assigned Region (to be inserted at the time of appointment) 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Economic 
Transformation  Project,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow  for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The Budget and Finance (B&F) Coordinator shall be responsible for overall coordination and oversight of BPMs/SPs, PFOs, 
FSCs, Partners under 4Ps, etc. to ensure that transparency, accountability, and compliance requirements set out in the 
Financing Agreement and relevant rules and regulations of the provincial government are met by different actors involved 
in project implementation in the region.  The position will report to the FM in the PMU though it would provide general 
and technical support to the Regional Coordinator in ensuring compliance with applicable compliance requirements as 
stipulated in the MOUs/contractual agreements with BMPs/SPs/PFOs/FSCs/4P partners etc. The project’s effectiveness 
in terms of compliance and results delivery largely depends on the work of B&F Coordinators.  
 Role and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Facilitate PFOs/FSCs in signing MOUs with PMU for project implementation 
Facilitate PFOs in selecting HR for professional management—including FM staff based on the criteria 
established by PMU 
Organize training for the staff at PFOs/FSCs focusing on core compliance/reporting requirements 
Facilitate  PFOs  in  the  opening  of  account,  and  the  maintaining  of  up-to-date  books  of  accounts  as 
specified in the MOUs.  
Facilitate PFOs in mobilizing farmers’ share to implement business plans 
Support PFOs in collect funds from members to meet the requirements of MOUs. 
Conduct due diligence/post qualification assessment of private partners selected for 4Ps arrangements 
based on the guidelines established for this purpose. 
viii. 
Promote basic FM/economics literacy among farmers involved in project implementation. 
ix.  Maintain liaison with service providers to ensure they are complying with internal controls/compliance 
requirements (set out in this manual later) stipulated in PMU’s contract agreements with them.  
126 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
Facilitate PFOs/others involved  in microfinancing process in complying with the  criteria of age group, 
social status, amount of each loan, recovery time etc.in the process; 
Facilitate  PFOs/others  involved  in  microfinancing  in  robust  documentation  of  the  microfinance 
operations etc. 
Submit monthly report to PMU on issues and challenges as well as possible practical solutions to move 
forward.  
The  Finance  Manager  will  distribute  work  between  the  B&F  Officer,  Accounts  Officer,  and  B&F 
Coordinators based in RCUs following the principles of internal controls outlined in the relevant section 
of the manual to get the best value out of them.   
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
Master level educational attainment in finance, MBA, ACCA, CA (preferred) or any other related discipline, minimum 5 
years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor funded project(s), familiarity with Government financial 
regulations and IFAD financial management guidelines, and sound understanding of the community procurement and 
financial management of community driven sub-projects implementation . 
127 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Accounts Officer, PMU 
Assignment Title  
Accounts Officer, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Whole of province 
Rural Economic Transformation Project, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Employment  and 
Agribusiness  Promotion,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow  for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The Accounts Officer shall report to FM and be responsible for accounting function—using accounting software.  The 
position shall ensure transparency, accountability, and compliance in recording and reporting of project transactions.   
 Role and responsibilities: 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
 Ensure  compliance  with  internal  control  framework  (Operations  Manual,  Financial  Management 
Manual,  SOPs  and  IFAD’s  fiduciary  guidelines  etc.)  and  government  rules  and  procedures  while 
processing payments. 
Analyze, plan, design, implement, and monitor a system to augment internal controls in line with best 
practices in the process of payment and expenditure management. 
Apply  pre-audit  checks  on  all  payments  before  payment  from  the  assignment  account(s)  including 
budget  availability,  sanction  of  competent authority and compliance  with  applicable financial rules  & 
regulations.  
Ensure  that No Objection is obtained  from  IFAD  for every  prior review  activity before  processing any 
payment. 
Ensure that only eligible  payments are submitted to FM for seeking PD’s approval and drawing funds 
from the assignment account. 
xix.  Manage  financial aspects of the  contracts under  implementation,  including  payment terms, purchase 
orders and variation orders. 
xx. 
Record all transactions timely and accurately in the books of accounts (both in Pak Rupees and US$) and 
ensure that no expenditure remained unaccounted. 
xxi.  Maintain accounts on cash basis as per government accounting procedure; 
128 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xxii.  Maintain up-to-date maintenance of adequate registers, books of accounts and records in appropriate 
order and format to meet the government and donors’ requirements and to facilitate classification and 
analyzing the financial information for monitoring the projects progress. 
xxiii. 
Prepare supplementary record which provides timely and up-to-date financial information of civil works 
and consultancies. 
xxiv.  Maintain  imprest  of  petty  cash  and  ensure  maintenance  of  separate  petty  cash  book  and  petty  cash 
vouchers and compliance with established procedures. 
Verify vehicles log books & compare with the fuel consumption reports 
Tax Withholding on each payment 
xxv. 
xxvi. 
xxvii. 
Data entry into accounting software 
xxviii. 
xxix. 
xxx. 
xxxi. 
xxxii. 
Prepare monthly bank reconciliation statements of assignment account(s) both in Pak Rupee and US$. 
Reconcile the expenditure on government prescribed format with Accountant General Office on monthly 
basis. 
Prepare and  process monthly payroll and submit to Project Director for approval prior to making any 
payment under salaries. Ensure proper payroll controls are applied and the payments are made directly 
in the Bank accounts. 
Ensure that the fixed assets records are maintained for both the projects identifying location and user of 
each asset and arrange for the annual and periodical inventory of the assets and updating of the records. 
Ensure safe custody of all financial records for review by Bank Missions, third party monitoring agents; 
and external & internal auditors. 
xxxiii.  Maintenance of filing system ensuring safekeeping of confidential material as per the guidelines given in 
this manual 
xxxiv. 
xxxv. 
xxxvi. 
xxxvii. 
xxxviii. 
xxxix. 
xl. 
xli. 
xlii. 
Custodian for management of office stationery supplies including maintenance of stock list of stationery 
and supplies and maintain log book. 
To maintain daily cash book & cash flow management. 
Facilitate PFOs/FSCs in signing MOUs with PMU for project implementation 
Facilitate PFOs in selecting HR for professional management—including FM staff based on the criteria 
established by PMU 
Organize training for the staff at PFOs/FSCs focusing on core compliance/reporting requirements 
Facilitate  PFOs  in  the  opening  of  account,  and  the  maintaining  of  up-to-date  books  of  accounts  as 
specified in the MOUs.  
Facilitate PFOs in mobilizing farmers’ share to implement business plans 
Support PFOs in collect funds from members to meet the requirements of MOUs. 
Conduct due diligence/post qualification assessment of private partners selected for 4Ps arrangements 
based on the guidelines established for this purpose. 
xliii. 
Promote basic FM/economics literacy among farmers involved in project implementation. 
129 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xliv.  Maintain liaison with service providers to ensure they are complying with internal controls/compliance 
requirements (set out in this manual later) stipulated in PMU’s contract agreements with them.  
xlv. 
xlvi. 
xlvii. 
xlviii. 
Facilitate PFOs/others involved  in microfinancing process in complying with the  criteria of age group, 
social status, amount of each loan, recovery time etc.in the process; 
Facilitate  PFOs/others  involved  in  microfinancing  in  robust  documentation  of  the  microfinance 
operations etc. 
Submit monthly report to PMU on issues and challenges as well as possible practical solutions to move 
forward.  
The  Finance  Manager  will  distribute  work  between  the  B&F  Officer,  Accounts  Officer,  and  B&F 
Coordinators based in RCUs following the principles of internal controls outlined in the relevant section 
of the manual to get the best value out of them.   
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
Master level educational attainment in finance, MBA, ACCA, CA (preferred) or any other related discipline, minimum 5 
years’ experience at similar level, having managed donor funded project(s), familiarity with Government financial 
regulations and IFAD financial management guidelines, and sound understanding of the community procurement and 
financial management of community driven sub-projects implementation . 
560.  
130 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Procurement Specialist, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Assignment Title  
Procurement Specialist, PMU 
Geographic Coverage  
Whole of province 
Project  
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Office  
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Duration  
Project life 
Expected Start Date  
To be inserted later 
Expected End Date 
To be inserted later 
Location  
Peshawar 
Introduction to Assignment  
The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is financing the USD 185 million Rural Employment and 
Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP).  The development objective is improved rural income and 
employment through high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. The project has three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) Development, Farm Service Centres (FSCs) , Support to Agriculture Department, (2) Skills 
and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to 
TEVTA), (3) Programme Management and Policy Support. The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will 
be managed through a provincial project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5) regional offices to allow for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The Procurement Specialist will report to Project Director and will also support and oversee procurement across all 
components and sub-components. He/She will be overall responsible for the procurement of goods, works and 
services and ensure compliance with KP-PPRA/PPRA Rules and Regulations and ensure due diligence to comply with 
IFAD Procurement Handbook and Guidelines 
Role and responsibilities: 
a)  Work closely with Government Line Departments (P&DD, Agriculture and Rural Development Department) to 
develop quarterly/annually procurement plans to ensure timely availability of the products for project activities  
b)  Preparation of Project’s Annual Procurement Plans, as part of Project’s AWP/B, for approval of Project Steering 
Committee and IFAD No Objection.  
c)  Ensure that goods, works and services financed have been procured in accordance with the loan agreement and 
the IFAD Procurement guidelines; 
d)  Installation  of  appropriate  procurement  systems  and  procedures  for  effective  planning  and  monitoring  of 
procurements under the project; 
e)  Communicate to all implementing entities and service providers their responsibilities and requirements with 
respect to procurement, according to guidelines with prevailing government practices as well as IFAD. 
f)  Conducts  entire  cycle  of  a  procurement  including  procurement  packaging,  project’s  general  procurement 
notices (GPN), maintenance of the Register of Expression of Interest, analysis of bids, preparation of purchase 
orders etc. 
g)  Ensuring the timely inventory coding and safe keeping of the goods purchased.  
131 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
h)  When the prior review of the bidding or proposal document is required, submits the document through the 
Project Director to IFAD for its review and ‘No Objection’.  
i)  Ensure  that  all  the  due  tendering  processes  are  adhered  to:  sufficient  publications,  strict  adherence  to 
deadlines, transparency in communications, publication of bid results, etc.; 
j)  Train staff to prepare and update the Annual Procurement Plan (including procurement method, types/kinds, 
quantity, value, delivery requirements, sources, etc.); 
k)  Prepare Procurement Notices, Expressions of Interest, Request for Quotations, Terms of References, Contract 
Agreements for Goods, Works and Services and have them published locally (Newspapers, websites) and were 
appropriate internationally, 
l)  Preparing Bid documents (Request for Proposals) for the procurement of goods, works and services; 
m) Review  solicited  and  unsolicited  offers  and  quotations  received  to  verify  goods,  quantities  and  services  are 
reasonable and correct and comply with applicable IFAD Regulations; 
n)  Resolves problems and protests concerning bid solicitations, contract awards or contract performance as the 
need arises. Addresses unauthorized purchases. Convey decisions both verbally and in writing referencing law 
and policy. 
o)  Ensure IFAD acceptable record keeping in procurement; 
p)  Prepare bi-annually progress reports with implementation of the procurement plan, and regularly inform the 
PD of problems and make proposals to overcome bottlenecks;  
q)  Ensure that all contracts are entered in IFAD online IFAD Client Portal (ICP-CM) System and update on a regularly 
basis. 
r)  Track and evaluate vendor performance and improvements related to pricing, contractual terms, and/or scope 
of services.  
s)  Supervise the procurement products including materials, promotional items, grants goods, etc.  
t)  Organize a database of suppliers and contractors and maintain a sound procurement filing system containing all 
procurement records for further review by the Fund and auditors. 
u)  Review all contracts (for product and/or service procurements) to ensure quality standards are met, prior to 
submitting for review and approval.  
v)  Must  have  excellent  experiences  of  procurements/contractual  agreements,  compliance  to  the  donor’s 
requirement.  
w)  Outsourcing (supplies and services), both from local and international markets.  
x)  Work with suppliers/agencies in the selection of the most qualified and cost-effective vendors 
y)  Any other task assigned by the PD. 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
A Master’s degree in (Supply Chain Management, Accounting, Finance or Business Administration Law, Procurement, 
Economics), experience of working with national and international organization with similar tasks (minimum 5 years), 
proficiency in computer skills, and minimum 15 years of experience in a similar role in project of comparable size and 
complexity.  
132 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TORs: Contract Management Officer, PMU 
Assignment  Details 
Contract Management Officer, PMU 
Whole of province 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
Assignment Title  
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Employment  and 
Agribusiness  Promotion,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
(3)  Programme  Management  and  Policy  Support. The  project  will  cover  all  35  districts  of  the  province  and  will  be 
managed  through  a provincial  project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and five (5)  regional  offices to allow  for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. 
Scope of Work:  
The  Contract  Management  Officer  will  directly  report  to  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  will  assist  the  Project 
Management Unit (PMU) for the implementation of procurement activities of the project and to ensure compliance with 
KP-PPRA/PPRA  Rules  and  Regulations  and  ensure  due  diligence  to  comply  with  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook  and 
Guidelines.  He/She  will  perform  the  following  duties  and  responsibilities  to  support  the  PMU  in  the  successful 
implementation of KP-RETP Project activities: 
Role and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Ensure that all contracts of goods, works and services are entered in IFAD online IFAD Client Portal (ICP-CM) 
System;  
Regularly monitor and update the contracts data and share reports with PS/PD for necessary action;  
Reviewing performance data of services received against agreements and identifying areas of improvement; 
Ensure  that  the  contract  management  for  goods,  works  and  consultancy  services  contracts  are  timely 
deliveries and compliance to provisions in contracts by all contracting parties; 
Act as the primary point of contact for their services within the contract management functions; 
Performance and activity reporting including on contract delivery targets,  
Developing excellent relationships with customers and clients (business partnering), contract benchmarking, 
contract analysis and dispute resolution. 
Support the Procurement Specialist to manage the PMU’s procurement workload on a required basis; 
Enter data of all contracts in Procurement Tracking System (PTS) and monitor activities accordingly and advice 
technical component staff; 
x.  Manage  all  bidding  and  contract  award  processes  for  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  in 
accordance with the procurement plan and in conformity with applicable guidelines and regulations of IFAD and 
GoKP. 
Assist the PS in the preparation of the annual procurement plan with corresponding work plans and schedules; 
xi. 
133 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
Assist PS to organize a database of suppliers and contractors and maintain a sound procurement filing system 
containing all procurement records for further review by the Fund and auditors.  
Assist the PS on a required basis in actual operational procurement activities including preparation of the bidding 
documents,  request  for  quotations,  bid  evaluation  process,  preparation  of  evaluation  reports  and  drafting 
contract agreements, etc. 
Support the capacity building efforts of the project by sharing knowledge on procurement of works and services; 
Carry out any other procurement support-related periodic duties that may be assigned by the Supervisor, on a 
required basis. 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
A Master’s degree in (Supply Chain Management, Accounting, Finance or Business Administration Law, Procurement, 
Economics), experience of working with national and international organization with similar tasks (minimum 3 years), 
proficiency in computer skills, and minimum 10 years of experience in a similar role in project of comparable size and 
complexity.  
134 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TOR: M&E and Knowledge Management Manager 
Assignment  Details 
Assignment Title  
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
M&E Knowledge Management Manager 
Whole of province 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
Peshawar 
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Introduction to Assignment  
The  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD)  is  financing  the  USD  185  million  Rural  Employment  and 
Agribusiness  Promotion,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhua  (KP-RETP).    The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment  through  high  value  agriculture  in  a  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  manner.  The  project  has  three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-Producer 
Partnerships  (4P)  Development,  Farm  Service  Centres  (FSCs)  ,  Support  to  Agriculture  Department,  (2)  Skills  and 
Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to TEVTA), 
Support.  
(3) 
Management 
Programme 
Policy 
and 
The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will be managed through a provincial project management unit 
(PMU) at Peshawar and 4 regional offices to allow for coverage of all agro-ecological zones. Women and youth will be 
particularly  targeted  with  specific  interventions  aiming  at  economic  empowerment.  Youth  and  nutrition  will  be 
mainstreamed with a focus on women as secondary targeting criteria. KP-RETP will have a 50% quota objective for youth 
and 25% for women beneficiaries in all the project activities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child 
nutrition information. Around 785’000 households (4.35 million persons) will benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP 
interventions through market oriented 550 PFOs, around 20 4Ps and 35 FSCs.  
Scope of Work:  
The  position  will  report  to  the  PD  and  the  incumbent  shall  work  very  closely  with  the  other  managers  to  establish, 
coordinate for, and effectively run M&E system. Learning and communication systems shall be integral part of the M&E 
system at KP-RETP Project. The M&E system will link five functions: output and outcome M&E, IFAD Results and Impact 
Management System (RIMS), M&E, learning and adaptation for continuous improvement of performance; internal (PCU) 
and external (stakeholders) communication; innovation and experimentation; and information management 
Role and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Developing a simple reporting system for the monitoring of programme activities and preparing regular 
reports on implementation progress, performance and impact of operations;   
Set up term of reference and conduct studies to assess the impact of the programme  
Organization of training on M&E for members of the PCU, implementing partners and counties, and providing 
technical backstopping to implementing agencies for preparing the AWPBs and for compliance with reporting 
requirements;   
Establishment of GIS mapping of each site and a Programme Baseline Survey.  
Development and implementation of the programme M&E and Learning  
Development of Communication System and Strategy;   
Develop associated Management Information System for managing data and information for overall 
monitoring, and for the collection and analysis of data on programme achievements and impact, based on a 
135 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
set of gender disaggregated indicators in line with the programme logical framework and stakeholders’ 
information needs;   
Organization and supervision of focused baseline surveys at the beginning of the programme;   
Coordinating the preparation and monitoring the implementation of the AWPB;   
Ensuring that all participating institutions keep records on their activities and feed this information into the 
Programme Learning System;   
Ensuring REGULAR REPORTING (monthly, quarterly, six-monthly and annual)  
Media and Communication   
Support advocacy efforts through providing evidence of programme impact gathered  
 through the M&E system;  
Develop various “documentaries” / case studies, etc, at the beginning, and till end of the Programme to 
document the change and share it with wider stakeholders and communities.    
Engaging media personnel for airing ETI achievements with the public.  
Knowledge Management  
Develop and implement processes and guidelines for systematic capture of knowledge, good practices and 
innovation, and the sharing and use of same to improve programme implementation, including in the 
development of the AWPB;   
Provide assistance/guidance in implementing the Programme Learning System;   
Coordinate surveys and case studies to assess achievements and outcomes of KCEP activities;   
Develop a multi-stakeholder communication strategy along the seasonal performance of the programme 
including a portal for web-based feedback of beneficiaries, private sector partners and county administrations   
Coordinate the dissemination of the findings from the impact assessment studies.   
Foster partnerships for broader knowledge-sharing and learning;   
Oversee communication support to awareness raising and sensitization of programme participants;   
Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB and progress reports 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
The candidate should have Master degree or above in social sciences, agriculture and economics with at least 8 - 10 years’ 
experience  in  rural  development.  Experience  in  project  management,  business  development  using  participatory 
approaches,  implementation  and  project  reporting  required.  Good  writing  and  communication  skills  in  English  are 
required while work in KP, newly merged districts and fluency in Pashto languages are desired. 
136 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TOR: Gender/Nutrition/Climate Change Specialist 
Assignment Title  
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Project Office  
Duration  
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Assignment  Details 
Gender/Nutrition/Climate Change Specialist 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province including newly merged districts 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
To be inserted later 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
The candidate should have Master degree or above in social sciences, agriculture and economics with at least 8 - 10 
years experience in rural development. Experience in project management, business development using participatory 
approaches, implementation and project reporting required. Good writing and communication skills in English are 
required while work in KP, newly merged districts and fluency in Pashto languages are desired. 
The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is financing the USD 185 million Rural Employment and 
Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP). The development objective is improved rural income and 
employment through high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. The project has three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) Development, Farm Service Centers (FSCs), Support to Agriculture Department, (2) Skills 
and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to 
TEVTA), (3) Programme Management and Policy Support. The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will 
be managed through a provincial project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and 5 regional offices to allow for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific interventions aiming 
at economic empowerment. Youth and nutrition will be mainstreamed with a focus on women as secondary targeting 
criteria. KP-RETP Project will have a 50% quota objective for youth and 25% for women beneficiaries in all the project 
activities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child nutrition information. Around 785’000 households 
(4.35 million persons) will benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP interventions through market oriented 550 PFOs, 
around 20 4Ps and 35 FSCs.  
Scope of Work. The KP-RETP Project emphasizes gender, nutrition, and climate resilience in all sub-projects to avoid any 
adverse impacts on people, health and other resources. The province has very high poverty rate and the situation for 
women is worse in the newly merged districts. KP has different agro-ecological zones and will require different mitigation 
measures depending upon the nature of interventions. Risk assessment of sub-projects proposed by PFOs, 4Ps and FSCs 
will be examined from the perspectives of gender, nutrition and climate change aspects and suitable mitigation actions 
mainstreamed into panned activities to ensure compliance with IFAD’s requirements. Classification and categorization of 
the sub-projects will be based on IFAD guidelines while implementation and compliance will be the responsibility of PMU, 
regional offices and implementing partners. Capacity building and training of the staff of Business Mobilization Partners 
(BMPs/SPs) will be conducted to ensure they understand gender, nutrition, and climate change related requirements and 
ensure sufficient appropriate mitigation is built in project activities to comply with applicable requirements.   
Role and responsibilities. The Specialist will  carry out a rapid assessment of the proposed interventions as per  given 
template to advise PMU/BMP/SPs whether to proceed further with sub-projects or not in view of the relationship of the 
proposed sub-projects with these broad cross-cutting parameters.   
137 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
A  detailed  review  will  follow  to  see  whether  the  relevant  risks  have  been  appropriately  assessed  according  to  IFAD 
guidelines and then guide and advise on proper implementation. Appropriate mitigation measures will be evaluated and 
improvements suggested, if any. Assisting BMPs/SPs for integrating these aspects in the development of their business 
plans and preparation of work plans with given targets and schedules are part of the job.  
The Specialist will assess BMPs/SPs capacity building needs and will also assist in organizing the required trainings. The 
required documentation on Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) with details of mitigation measures, responsibilities and cost estimates should be 
prepared and implemented. The Specialist will ensure that implementation mechanism has fixed responsibilities for full 
compliance.  Regular monitoring of ongoing activities with progress reports preparation and engagement with 
concerned communities are included in the role and responsibilities.to Assignment 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
The candidate should have Master degree or above in social sciences, agriculture and economics with at least 8 - 10 
years experience in rural development. Experience in project management, business development using participatory 
approaches, implementation and project reporting required. Good writing and communication skills in English are 
required while work in KP, newly merged districts and fluency in Pashto languages are desired. 
138 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TOR: Social Inclusion & Employment Policy Specialist  
Assignment  Details 
Assignment Title  
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Social Inclusion & Employment Policy Specialist 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province including newly merged districts 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Office  
Duration  
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
To be inserted later 
Background to the project 
The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is financing the USD 185 million Rural Employment and 
Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP). The development objective is improved rural income and 
employment through high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. The project has three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) Development, Farm Service Centers (FSCs), Support to Agriculture Department, (2) Skills 
and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to 
TEVTA), (3) Programme Management and Policy Support. The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will 
be managed through a provincial project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and 5 regional offices to allow for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific interventions aiming 
at economic empowerment. Youth and nutrition will be mainstreamed with a focus on women as secondary targeting 
criteria. KP-RETP Project will have a 50% quota objective for youth and 25% for women beneficiaries in all the project 
activities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child nutrition information. Around 785’000 households 
(4.35 million persons) will benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP interventions through market oriented 550 PFOs, 
around 20 4Ps and 35 FSCs.  
Scope of Work. The KP-RETP emphasizes social inclusion, youth employment and nutrition improvement of mothers 
and children in project activities for easy access to business and skills development and income generation for 
improved livelihood. The Project has specially targeted youth and women among beneficiaries for economic 
empowerment. The proposed position will help PMU assess, plan, implement and monitor the social inclusion, youth 
employment and nutrition related activities of the project.   
Role and responsibilities.  
i 
Carry out relevant assessments of employment problems in specific segments and activities of the 
agribusiness labour markets, in rural areas and seek solutions for youth employment. 
ii  Oversee youth empowerment, entrepreneurship and employment analysis in the Rural Employment and 
Agribusiness Promotion-Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 
iii  Promote linkages with other relevant players in the labour market such as key government departments, 
private sector actors (promotors), non-governmental and international organizations to increase youth 
employment opportunities. 
iv  Contribute to action-based learning which leads to positive youth engagement, social inclusion and best 
practices in nutrition awareness in the project 
v  Ensure technical quality in implementation of the project in promotion of rural youth employment, social 
inclusion and good nutrition. 
vi  Ensure the project monitoring and evaluation system captures good quality data on progress of 
implementation relative to youth employment, social inclusion and nutrition. 
139 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
The candidate should have Master degree or above in social sciences, agriculture and economics with at least 8 - 10 
years experience in rural development. Experience in project management, business development using participatory 
approaches, implementation and project reporting required. Good writing and communication skills in English are 
required while work in KP, newly merged districts and fluency in Pashto languages are desired. 
140 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
TOR: Agri-business and Agri-Skills Manager, PMU  
Assignment  Details 
Assignment Title  
Geographic Coverage  
Project  
Agri-business and Agri-Skills Manager, PMU  
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province including newly merged districts 
Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP) 
Project Office  
Duration  
Expected Start Date  
Expected End Date 
Location  
Project Management Unit, Peshawar 
Project life 
To be inserted later 
Background to the project  
The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is financing the USD 185 million Rural Employment and 
Agribusiness Promotion, Khyber Pakhtunkhua (KP-RETP). The development objective is improved rural income and 
employment through high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. The project has three 
components: (1) Agribusiness Development, through Professional Farmers Organizations (PFOs), Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) Development, Farm Service Centers (FSCs), Support to Agriculture Department, (2) Skills 
and Employment Promotion (Skills Development, start-up capital; Public –Private internship programme, support to 
TEVTA), (3) Programme Management and Policy Support. The project will cover all 35 districts of the province and will 
be managed through a provincial project management unit (PMU) at Peshawar and 5 regional offices to allow for 
coverage of all agro-ecological zones. Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific interventions aiming 
at economic empowerment. Youth and nutrition will be mainstreamed with a focus on women as secondary targeting 
criteria. KP-RETP will have a 50% quota objective for youth and 25% for women beneficiaries in all the project 
activities. Women will be especially targeted for maternal and child nutrition information. Around 785’000 households 
(4.35 million persons) will benefit directly or indirectly from KP-RETP interventions through market oriented 550 PFOs, 
around 20 4Ps and 35 FSCs.  
Scope of Work.  
Agri-Business Manager will lead the development of agribusiness partnerships and facilitate the programme’s PFOs, 
FSCs and private sector alliance activities by playing a catalytic role in brokering and negotiations of such partnerships 
with stakeholders. He/She is responsible for the overall operation and management of component 1 and to closely 
with work with the assigned service providers to ensure sound and timely implementation and coordination of the 
programme planned tasks to achieve the overall development goals of the KP-RETP. He/she is responsible to provide 
technical leadership and strategic direction towards agribusiness development activities and will play a key role in 
extension/R&D related work through the coordination with the Provincial Government. He/She serves under the direct 
supervision of the Program Director. 
Role and responsibilities.  
I. 
II. 
III. 
Lead negotiations with participatory companies and related FSCs in developing pro-poor win-win public-private 
producer partnerships (4Ps) and establishment of multipurpose PFOs for the better interest of the rural poor 
farmers along with programme objectives, 
Liaise with private sector, PFOs, FSCs and related Provincial Government Institutes to ensure partnered market 
linkages  are  sustained  for  the  betterment  of  all  parties  concerned  in  the  value  chain  specifically  rural  poor 
farmers and farmer groups. 
Build  effective  partnerships  with  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders  in  private-public  partnership  development 
including  government  and  non-governmental  institutions,  civil  society  organizations,  research  organizations, 
academia and the private sector to overcome possible barriers in project development and implementation and 
to develop an exit strategy by the time of program completion. 
141 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
VII. 
VIII. 
V. 
VI. 
IV.  Master IFAD key documents such as FA, PDR, LFA and PIM etc., in connection with business development and 
implementation and on operational activities and is responsible for maintaining updated PIM for the purpose 
of Agribusiness development work. 
Guide /assist participatory companies/service providers in developing business proposals and evaluation of 4P 
business plans with the assistance of service providers and in-house consultants and ensure business proposals 
are in-line with program objectives while ensuring expected out come through the proposals. 
Liase  with  Monitoring and Evaluation/Knowledge  Management staff in  developing  monitoring tools to  track 
output and outcome indicators in the LFA through the activities related to 4P projects. 
Provide PMU staff, 4P partners, PFO smanagement, FSCs management with up-to-date professional advice on 
business  operations,  compiling  management  information  and  agricultural  services  and  to  attend  overall 
strategic issues and provide the strategic direction of the development and implementation of partnerships. 
Identify needs of  training for  Agribusiness  staff, partners  and  personal associated  with  support services  and 
ensure  appropriate  skills  for  successful  implementation  of  program  activities  are  transferred  to  all  through 
training and awareness programes.  
Directly involved in preparing AWPB, attending to and related follow up activities and providing necessary inputs 
for updating AWPB and ensure targets are achieved with quality and quantity. 
Lead the business proposal approval process from the stage of ‘business concept note’ to PSC/IFAD approval 
and successful implementation.  
Ensure submission of relevant information required for drafting contract agreements. 
Prepare necessary guidelines for programme implementation including Agri-Business Development to ensure 
required management and progress reports are submitted timely to PD and other authorities. 
Coordinating  the  selection  of  service  providers  for  services  required  by  the  Business  Development  Unit  and 
ensure that their work programes are submitted, supervised and completed timely and effectively and provide 
recommendations for management of contracts of the service providers engaged. 
Undertake regular support visits to programme districts to assist programme delivery, identify gaps and support 
needs to ensure minimum standards are met,  
Engage with policy related engagement with related staff and assist Program Director.  
Attend to administration and management work related to the Business development Unit/Componet 1.  
Any other related duties assigned by the PD. 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
Qualification, Skills and Experience Required.  
The candidate should have Master degree or above in Agriculture and economics/Business management with at least 8 
- 10 years’ experience in rural development. Experience in project management, business development using 
participatory approaches, implementation and project reporting required. Good writing and communication skills in 
English are required while work in KP, newly merged districts and fluency in Pashto languages are desired. 
142 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Introduction and background 
Annexure-2: Outline of Diagnostic Study 
1.  Executive Summary 
2. 
3.  Sector overview, constraints and opportunities 
4.  Methodology, approach, sampling framework and prioritization criteria 
5.  Study Findings and Discussions 
5.1.  Cluster Profile: overview of cluster selection, agro-climatic conditions, cropping pattern, geographic profile, status 
of natural resources, total current volumes of trade, market channels and its shares, growth trends for the last 5 
years and benchmarking (yield, profits, quality, post-harvest loses, value addition/transformation rates etc.) 
5.2. Village Profile: Geographic profile, socio-political background, major agricultural crops, agricultural productivity, 
farmers and land details, secondary data on production, major market yards, processing facilities available 
5.3.  Farmers’ organization/4Ps/FSC potential 
6.  Value-Chain Analysis: value chain mapping and analysis, function and activities (current and missing), value added at 
each node/economics at different levels of value chain, service provision and benchmarking within country and within 
region – map of transformed value chain. 
7.  Rapid market appraisal and mapping of markets 
8.  Potential and opportunities: Inputs side, financial services, marketing services, insurance services, access to 
government programs, watershed programs  
9.  Key Conclusions and Recommendations 
10.  Action Plan  
Annexure:  
Questionnaires, checklist, details about government programs 
Sector specific data at provincial and cluster level 
Summary of Rapid Market Appraisal 
143 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-3: Detailed checklist of factors for baseline study 
1.  Methodology and Analytical Framework/Design 
2.  Sampling size and technique 
3.  Database Development 
a)  General Information – unique identification number (CNIC) and contact mobile phone numbers (at least 2 contact 
numbers per HH), demographics (disaggregated data), household size, members and details of occupation and 
incomes, dietary diversity/nutrition, food security etc. 
b)  Economics of Agriculture – Costing, input and output ratios, yields and current productivity  
c)  Production – Quality and quantity of inputs, technological levels, input suppliers and vendors, seasonality of 
production, availability and tied sales  
d)  Financial Aspects – Sources, terms and conditions, interest and existing outstanding, access to government 
programs  
e)  Risk Aspects – Historical risks, computation of losses due to risk, coping mechanisms  
f)  Marketing Aspects – Channels of marketing, margins and costs at various levels, quality aspects, price sensitivity, 
seasonality of markets, alternate market structure  
g)  Best Practices  
h)  Constraints and Challenges  
i)  Prospects and Opportunities  
144 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-4: Business Planning Format 
1.  Executive Summery 
2. 
Introduction 
  Overall snapshot of the proposed intervention 
  Overall introduction to the project (Details of selected 
village/district, demography, household details, existing value 
chains, proposed intervention and outcomes etc. 
3.  Brief on Cooperative Society 
4.  Proposed Intervention (Business) 
5.  Technical Feasibility and Plan 
6.  Market Assessment and strategy 
7. 
Institutional Support 
 
 
 
 
Current business activities and performance 
  Details of Structure and registration 
 
  Details of selected area & value chain with specific details. 
  Market details/statistics 
 
Project activities (Cultivation, value addition, training and 
procurement etc.) 
Technical viability of the business model 
Key technical requirements (technology, skills and inputs etc.)  
Technical layout and production/processing plan 
Compliance to standards (social, environment, climate change 
and health safety – SECAP) 
 
Existing scenario, product standards and practices. 
  Market and Marketing Proposed for the business model 
  Marketing Plan 
 
Role of banks/PFIs, Government departments and private 
sector 
Perceived risk and mitigation plan considering probability of 
occurrence and severity of the impact. 
8.  Risk Analysis 
 
9.  Youth, Gender & Nutrition inclusion 
  Details on how the proposed intervention supports youth and 
10.  Proposed Financials 
11.   Exit Strategy 
12.  Audit & Accountability 
13.  Annexures and supporting documents 
 
promote gender equality and nutrition sensitivity. 
Project contribution summery considering FPO and project 
investment 
  Overall cash flow summery with financial indicators (Ex: FIRR, 
NPV and payback period etc.) 
Sensitivity analysis 
 
  Details on project sustainability and the continuation after 
 
project completion. 
Internal & external governance mechanism of the FPO and 
accountability. 
SWOT analysis 
  Details worksheet of financial analysis 
 
  Activity plan 
 
Technical manual 
 
Compliance note for SECAP 
  Monitoring & Evaluation plan 
 
 
Fund disbursement plan with milestones 
Coop registration & other details (BODs/Cabinet members 
details) 
TORs applicable for professional staff to be recruited. 
 
145 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-5: FPO Institutional maturity index computation 
CATEGORY 
INDICATOR 
UNIT 
1 
Financial & Business 
Efficiency 
Total annual sales  
Gross margin (Direct Income {income from direct sales} – Direct Costs)  
Net profit  
Current ratio (Current assets to Current liabilities)  
Debt - equity Ratio  
Ratio of grants to turnover  
Break-even sales  
Operational margin (sale+ closing stock-opening stock purchases- direct cost)  
Inventory turnover ratio  
Operational self sufficiency  
Financial self sufficiency  
Debt service coverage  
Ratio of member realization (wages + purchase price + bonus, paid to members) 
to total turnover  
Average per member realization  
Net profit per member  
Per member turnover  
2  Members Economics 
Non-member procurement  
Income (realization-cost at member level) from the enterprise to member to 
total income of member  
Total members to total potential members  
Average member procurement to average member production  
OPTIONAL INDICATORS FOR ALL ENTERPRISES 
3 
Institutional 
Membership of the enterprise  
Active members to total members  
Attendance in board meeting  
Members attending General Body meeting  
Legal compliances met to total number of legal compliances prescribed  
4 
Sustainability 
5 
Social Indicators 
Compliance with organic certification/fair trade  
Total reserves created  
Marginalized communities covered to total members of enterprise (caste)  
Poor households to total members of enterprise (Economic marginalization)  
Increased availability of disposable income with members  
Members covered with insurance - life/health/accident  
in PKR 
in PKR 
in PKR 
Ratio  
Ratio  
Ratio  
in PKR 
in PKR 
Ratio  
%  
%  
Ratio  
Ratio  
Numbers 
in PKR 
in PKR 
%  
%  
%  
in PKR and 
Qty  
Number  
%  
%  
%  
%  
Yes/No  
in PKR 
%  
%  
%  
%  
146 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-6: Template for Expression of Interest (EOI/Concept Note) Stage 
1. Applicant Details 
Full Legal Name 
Company registration 
number (where 
applicable 
Legal Structure 
Property Rights 
Type of Business 
Operation 
Contact person 
Please select the most appropriate alternative that applies to your organization with an 
“X” from the following, and provide particular information where requested. 
Public Quoted Limited Liability Company 
Public unquoted Limited Liability Company 
Private Limited Liability Company 
Company Limited by Guarantee 
Company Limited by Association 
Co-operative Society 
Farmer Based Organization (‘Societies’) 
Partnership; No. of Partners:  
Sole-proprietorship  
Other (Please specify)  
Please select the most appropriate alternatives that applies to your organization with an 
“X” from the following: 
Land 
Buildings 
Plant/Machinery 
 Rented 
 Rented 
 Owned 
 Owned 
 Leased 
 Leased 
  Leased 
 Rented 
 Owned 
If property is leased or rented: 
Period of lease/rent contract: 
If property is leased: 
Name of the financial institution/s:  
Please select the most appropriate alternative that applies to your organization from the 
following: 
 Manufacturing 
 Services 
 Processing/Packaging 
 Distribution 
 Other.  Please specify: ................................................................................ 
Please specify the products manufactured / services offered /items processed or packed / 
distributed:  
147 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Gender (for Individual 
applicants) 
Age (for Individual 
applicants) 
Official (registered) 
address 
Postal address (for 
correspondence) 
Telephone number 
Email address 
Type of  
business 
Year operations started 
Number of staff  
Management and 
organization capacity 
Clearly describe the 
management, 
organizational and 
financial capability you 
have to implement this 
project.   
2. Enterprise/Individual Operation or Activity Details 
Title of the proposal:   
Estimated new 
employment 
opportunities: 
Problem Definition: Clearly describe the specific problem your project is trying to address. Explain how 
solving/alleviating this problem will increase the income of smallholder by minimum 30% from the current situation 
and your income. (Maximum 300 characters).  
Describe your project idea to address the problem stated above. Please detail the specific objective(s) of this project, 
including targeted beneficiaries and/or area that you plan to reach during implementation.  (Maximum 500 
characters). 
Project Implementation: How will you implement your project idea? Describe the concrete steps or major activities 
that the project will undertake to meet your objective(s). Include the length and scope of each major activity. Explain 
the status of the idea: Is this a brand-new idea or has the idea already been tested or piloted? Has a feasibility study 
been conducted? (Maximum 700 characters). 
Marketing & Distribution: Describe current status on target commodity in market and potential towards local and 
export market. Provide details of an end market analysis conducted so far? (Context, channels, customers, 
competitors, communication and choices). 
Results: Please state the tangible expected results of your project and its direct impact on improving outcomes for the 
targeted beneficiaries/area. Provide estimates of the number of farmers that your project will benefit. (Maximum 300 
characters). 
Measurability: Describe the specific method(s) and indicators that will be used to measure project success and 
implementation. Indicators should demonstrate that project objective(s) described above. (Maximum 300 characters). 
148 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Sustainability (Organizational and Financial): What characteristics of project will ensure that it is sustainable? Describe 
any major challenges that project faces and how it will be overcome. (Maximum 300 characters).  
Proposed Investment/ Budget (clearly identifying the items or activity being financed by the Private sector, Producers 
and the KP-RETP project).  
Note: The KP-RETP can partially finance on-farm investment for producers, market linkage or primary processing. 
Checkbox 
For KP-RETP use only: 
Date application received: 
Name and signatures of the receiving official: 
Checklist - EOI Submission & Eligibility 
S. No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
Required Documents 
EOI submission cover letter 
EOI submission form  
Copy of registration certificate (number of years since registration should not be less than 
2 years) 
Detailed profile of the applicant organization along with the details of agribusiness 
activities together with contact details of all major agribusiness suppliers/producers and 
customers during the last three years 
Last two years audited financial statements (must have unqualified opinion of the 
auditors) 
Bank statement for last one year 
List of board members (if any) and key management together with qualifications thereof 
Company organogram 
Particulars of physical address in Pakistan or abroad (In case of a multinational company) 
with contacts in full details 
Tax liability and adherence 
Proposed investment plan 
Time frame of implementation and proposed fund requirement plan 
Tentative list of target provinces together with target number of farmers with which the 
company intends to establish partnership. 
Proof of working with smallholder farmers in past with success 
Recommendation 
Any additional document attached, please specify 
For KP-RETP use only: 
All the required documents are attached: Yes 
Comments: _________________________________________________________________ 
Name, designation and signatures of reviewing officer: _______________________  
Date: ________ 
 No 
149 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-7: Template for proposal development 
Executive Summary  
A typical business plan begins with an executive summary that is prepared after the plan is written. The purpose is to 
communicate the plan in a convincing way to important audiences. Summary of project objectives, outputs, outcomes, 
budget and financial viability need to be included. 
Introduction/background of the promotor  
A summary of the business activities of the company/FO (Promotor), history and the position in the marketplace should 
be provided here. This part gives an overview of the promotor, its vision and objectives, including the following 
elements: 
1.  Presentation of the promotors 
Creation date, geographic area, number of members (FO), types of commodities/products, plot size operated 
by each farmer member, number of staff (Company), ongoing services provided by the promotor, property, 
equipment and infrastructure.  
2.  Focus and overview of the business the promotor is aiming to develop within its business plan. 
3.  Vision and mission  
The vision is what the promotor aspires to and what it will concentrate its energies and resources on to make 
the business profitable. The mission is to be achieved through the objectives of the promoters’ business plan. 
4.  Objectives/goals  
This section includes production and/or financial-related objectives specific to the plan. Objectives should be 
SMART (Specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time bound) 
Market & Supply Analysis  
1.  Brief introduction on the current market for the product that the promotor is focusing on in the 
country/region/sub region: current marketing and pricing systems, potential buyers of produce. 
2.  Brief introduction on the type of product targeted by the promotor (conventional sector, organic, fair trade, 
raw, processed, etc.). 
3.  Areas to improve efficiency of marketing system: what are the potential areas where the promotor could 
improve efficiency and reduce the costs of the current marketing system (transport, processing, etc.)? 
4.  Possibility of market development: what is the potential for the development of new markets? Is there 
potential for the promotor to directly market produce nationally, internationally, etc.? If there is, would this be 
a more profitable option?  
5.  Current produce volumes and prices from potential membership/dealership or contract farmers: what prices 
are members/contract farmers/dealers receiving for produce, who they sell produce to (in case of FO), what 
are transport arrangements etc. 
6.  Current buyers of crops/finished products produced by potential members/processor/company: who are the 
key buyers of produce/finished products, what are the ‘links in the chain’ after the initial purchase is made. 
7.  Current volume of input purchase, current suppliers of inputs, prices of inputs, input supply marketing 
channels. 
8.  Current assets and equipment (warehouses, production and/or processing equipment belongs to the 
promotor). 
9.  Characterization of the FO/company business partnerships with buyers, types of contracts, price, quantity, etc. 
10.  Differences between sales through the FO and sales without involvement of the FO (prices, terms and 
conditions, etc.). 
11.  SWOT analysis of the ongoing capacities of the FO/company (diagnostic elements) to manage its economic 
services in relation to the planned business in terms of; 
Production 
Processing of products 
 
 
  Marketing 
 
Export 
 
Certification 
 
Financial management 
150 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
  Administration 
  Management 
Important: Most recent statistics need to be included with source of data. 
Value Chain Analysis:  
Comprehensive value chain analysis need to be included (Diagram) considering all actors and their role. In addition, 
identify the positives/gaps/loopholes at each stage and influencers accordingly (Table). 
Function/VC Layers 
Actors 
Supports/Discourages 
Influencers 
Proposed Partnership 
1.  Project goals & objectives 
Goals are high level statements that provide overall context for what the partnership is trying to achieve, and 
should align to SAPP/IFAD goals. Objectives are lower level statements that describe the specific, tangible products 
and deliverables that the partnership will deliver within a time frame. 
2.  Problem Identification 
Problem Statement/Partnership Rationale is a brief analysis or summary of the problems identified relating to the 
partnership or issue to be addressed by the intervention. It has to be precise and point-to-point basis. 
3.  Project Solution for the problem 
This related to the problem identification and should highlight how the intervention can address the identified 
problem. 
4.  Project outputs 
This section should present the desired outputs expected through the partnership and should be measurable.  
5.  Project Beneficiaries 
The target group should comprise of smallholder farmers (with land holdings below 2 Ac and rely on agriculture for 
at least 50% of their household income), with special focus on women and landless, especially the youth. However, 
to provide assurance for steady and adequate supply to reach the demand, 20% could be accommodate from the 
upper bracket of the poor to have sustainable value chains. Further, indirect beneficiaries need to be specified with 
their specific roles in the partnership. 
6.  Project geographical coverage 
The programme is entitled for national coverage, though special attention and preference would need to be given 
to low income districts and where Agri-production potential is high. Please include Provinces, Districts and DS 
Divisions accordingly. 
7.  Project overall benefits  
This should emphasize the overall benefits to smallholder beneficiaries, promotor and country as a whole. 
Proposed activities and investment 
1.  Cost table: Contribution from each partner of the partnership (Promotor, KP-RETP, Farmers etc.). 
2.  Activity plan: Time line to implement proposed activities. Ideally through a gunnett chart.  
3.  Fund requirement plan: This should be aligned with activity plan. 
4.  Extension service plan: In this section, it is expected to highlight how promotor is planning to monitor and 
support beneficiaries during the implementation of the project. (Ex: How many staff, number of visits per 
beneficiary/month etc.) 
5.  Monitoring & evaluation plan: This should explain how promoter would monitor and evaluate the 
implementation of the partnership together with PMU. This could be through PMU staff (Field officer) or with 
the support of government officers as well.  
Financial analysis  
1.  Financial assumptions with and without additional investment 
2.  Financing requirement for production. 
151 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
3.  Valuation of business (evaluation of in-kind contribution)  
4.  Calculation of net present value and internal rate of return  
5.  Financing plan and cash flow estimation. 
6.  Sensitivity analysis (If needed) 
Important: Financial analysis should be done for sub models separately and entire project as a whole as well.  
Risks analysis 
Categorize risk factors (See the below chart) involve in the proposed project according to probability of occurrence and 
the severity (Impact) with a scale to be included in the matrix as given below. The risk mitigation step involves 
development of mitigation plans designed to manage, eliminate, or reduce risk to an acceptable level. Once a plan is 
implemented, it is continually monitored to assess its efficacy with the intent of revising the course-of-action if needed. 
`
Gender equity and social inclusion strategies 
This sector should include how to transform and distribute of opportunities, choices and resources available to women 
and men so that they have equal power to shape their lives and participate in the process of value chain and the 
proposed partnership.  
Further, social inclusion refers to the process of improving the conditions of disadvantaged individuals and groups - such 
as youth, victims of natural disasters, indigenous peoples, or other vulnerable communities to be included in the 
partnership.  
152 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexure-8: Scope of work and Evaluation Criteria 
General 
 
To evaluate the submitted proposals by proponents under border criteria given below, highlighting the feasibility of 
implementing of the partnership. 
o  Overall concept 
o 
Social feasibility 
o 
Legal & environmental feasibility 
o  Marketing & technical feasibility 
o  Economic & financial feasibility 
o  Management & schedule feasibility 
o  Overall sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
Carry out the feasibility at the ground level to support the evaluation pointing out practical scenarios which prevails 
in current context. 
To  provide  recommendations  to  program  management  with  justifications  highlighting  the  feasibility  of  the 
partnership to be implemented and to suggest improvements, corrective actions to fine tune the proposals. 
To  scrutinize  the  items  included  in  investment  plans  of  the  proposals  including  capital  assets  (equipment, 
machineries  and  construction  work  etc.)  and  working  capital  (seeds,  fertilizer,  agrochemicals  etc.)  under  below 
criteria; 
Suitability 
o  Value for money (cost) 
o  Quality 
o 
o  Comparison with alternatives 
o  Availability 
o  Efficiency & effectiveness 
To  assist and advice proponents  to resolve  any  policy, legal,  environmental  matters  which  may arise during  the 
implementation.  
Coordinate  and  interact  with  relevant  staff  of  program  management  unit  (PMU)  and  proponent  to  conduct  the 
evaluation successfully. 
  Review the internal appraisal compiled by the PMU and provide recommendations to program management to fine 
tune it. 
Committee Team Leader 
  Organize and lead the overall evaluation. Provide oversight to the evaluation throughout the entire evaluation cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
Be the point person to liaise with program management. 
Ensure  a  thorough  review  and  analysis  of  the  proposal  and  other  available  secondary  data  by  the  appropriate 
committee members. 
Lead the selection of a purposively selected sample of implementation sites and outputs for proposed intervention. 
Ensure the final report is logical and presented in a way that clearly separates the evidence collected, conclusions, 
and recommendations in different sections of the report, and that conclusions and recommendations are based on 
the evidence presented in the report and adequately supported by information gathered through the evaluation. 
Serve as a technical specialist for a specified sector (optional) as long as it does not affect her/his performance in 
his/her primary committee leadership role. 
Coordinate  and  interact  with  relevant  staff  of  program  management  unit  (PMU)  and  proponent  to  conduct  the 
evaluation successfully. 
Technical/subject related specialists 
 
 
 
Interact with committee to provide expertise & insights on relevant fields to conduct the evaluation successfully. 
Provide  primary  and  secondary  data  on  relevant  specialized  field  to  support  the  evaluation  conducted  by  the 
committee. 
Link  committee  with  relevant  specialized  field  institutes/organizations  to  get  relevant  information  or  any  other 
specific requirement arise during the evaluation.  
  Assist and  guide the  proponent to  enhance the  proposal with  the expertise in  specialized technical  areas of the 
proposed intervention. 
153 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Annexire- 9:  Score card (Business Proposal Evaluation Committee) 
Category 
Concept 
Relevance for national priority 
National contribution (Import substitution/export 
oriented) 
Geographical coverage (Rural/urban) 
Viability of the partnership in long run 
Overall perception towards the beneficiary 
commodity/produce 
Total (Out of 25) 
Social Feasibility 
Impact on rural livelihood system, vulnerability 
and resilience  
Woman/youth participation & gender aspects 
Impact on cultural norms & beliefs in project 
locations 
Existence of active farmer groups/societies  
Existence and operation of established social 
enterprises 
Willingness to act/form as a community/group to 
share mutual benefits 
Impact on direct & indirect employment 
generation 
Nutrition focused/sensitivity aspects 
Total (Out of 40) 
Legal & Environmental Feasibility 
Impact on overall protection of public & 
environmental health  
Impact on effective reduction of hazardous waste 
toxicity, mobility & volume  
Impact of the project on the environment and the 
approval of the concerned institutions for license. 
(Statutory compliance) 
Impact on national heritage, protected areas & 
natural resources. 
Approval of relevant authorities/legal bodies for 
implementation 
Public opinion (General perception of the 
community) 
Incorporation of climate resilience practices 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1  Remarks 
154 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Category 
Total (Out of 35) 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1  Remarks 
Marketing & Technical Feasibility 
Ability of promoter to convert farmer produce to 
end products with desired technology 
Ability of promoter company to 
transfer/disseminate appropriate technology to 
beneficiaries. 
Accessibility to raw materials and their 
quality/price 
Availability of markets for outputs/end products 
and the expected prices for these outputs. 
Availability of various services related to the 
project (i.e., extension) 
Availability of land/water/roads and other 
infrastructure to the project 
The costs of transporting inputs and outputs to 
the project's location (i.e., the distance from the 
markets) 
Total (Out of 35) 
Economic & Financial Feasibility 
Total estimated cost of the project. 
Financing of the project in terms of capital 
structure, debt to equity ratio and promoter's 
share of total cost. 
Existing investment by the promoter in any other 
partnerships. 
Projected cash flow and profitability of 
beneficiaries (NPV & IRR) 
Availability/willingness of banking partner for 
credit facilities 
Ability of beneficiaries to contribute to total 
investment (Working capital) 
Willingness of beneficiaries to obtain credit 
facility through a bank 
Total (Out of 35) 
Management & Schedule Feasibility 
Managerial capability of promoter company 
(Proper down the line structure and availability of 
staff at ground level). 
Past experience in value chain development 
partnerships in relation to donor funded projects.  
155 
Project Implementation Manual 
Pakistan – Khyber Pakhtunkhwa-Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Category 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1  Remarks 
Past experience in successful agribusiness venture 
and reputation 
Profitability and liquidity of the promoter 
company. 
Overall feasibility of completing the project within 
stipulated action plan proposed by the promoter 
company 
Overall commitment and interest towards the 
partnership 
Total (Out of 30) 
Overall  
Additional Comments: 
Name of the committee member:  
Total Score (Out of 200):  
156 
Annexure-10: Business Planning Guidelines for NFSC 
1.  Executive Summary 
2. 
Introduction 
3.  District Context 
4.  Strategic Orientation 
5.  Product and Service Model 
6. 
Institutional Structure 
7.  Procurement Plan 
8.  Storage and Processing 
9.  Financial Resources Plan 
10.  Marketing Plan 
11.  Benefits of NFSC 
12.  Operation & Activity Plan 
13.  Risks and Risk Management Plan 
14.  Linkages and Convergence Plan 
15.  Financial  projection  as  per  product 
costing 
 
 
Snapshot of the overall business plan and the execution. 
Introduction  to the FSC  (Existing setup  and operation, 
proposed intervention and expected outcome. 
  Demand assessment of seeds, fertilizer, agro-chemicals, 
machinery etc. based on the number of PFOs, members, 
plot size, cropping pattern, farming system etc.    
  Mission,  vision,  objectives  and  goals,  key  measurable 
indicators. 
Products and services, terms and conditions. 
 
  Membership,  governance,  operational  staff,  terms  of 
measurement, 
performance 
engagement, 
remuneration and other important details. 
Procurement points, time, pricing mechanisms, 
viability of procurement points, staffing for 
procurement, storage and transportation 
Processing  facilities,  machinery  and  plant  erection, 
capacities, safeguards 
Finances required, fixed investment and working capital 
requirements,  sources,  terms  of  borrowings,  member 
own funds, project contribution.   
Channels,  brands,  consumer  feedback,  key  products, 
marketing strategy 
 
 
 
 
risk  and  mitigation  plan  considering 
  NFSC level benefits computation and projections 
 
Proposed activity and fund disbursement plan 
 
Perceived 
probability of occurrence and severity of the impact. 
 
Plan for institutional linkages and responsibilities 
  Assumptions,  Projected  balance  sheet,  Profit  and  loss 
account,  cash  flow  projections,  breakeven  point,  IRR 
and NPV calculation.    
157 
Annexure-11Indicative list of sector-wise training under component-2 
Sr. No 
Sector 
Trade 
      1           MASONRY 
      2          
CARPENTER  
      3          
STEEL FIXER 
      4          
TILE FIXER 
      5          
BUILDING ELECTRICIAN  
CONSTRUCTION 
      6           WELDING   
      7          
PLUMBING   
      8          
ROOF CEILING 
      9          
AC & REFRIGERATOR MECHANIC   
   10          
RECEPTIONIST 
   11          
COOKING/CHEF  
   12          
BAKERY PRODUCTS  
   13           WAITERING SERVICES 
   14           MEDICAL STORE ATTENDANT 
HOSPITALITY 
   15          
DISPENSER TRAINING 
HEALTH CARE 
   16          
LAB ATTENDANT 
   17          
AUTO MECHANIC  
   18          
AUTO ELECTRICIAN  
   19          
CAR AC REPAIRING  
   20          
TRACTOR REPAIRING /PETER ENGINE REPAIRING  
   21          
DENTING AND PAINTING  
   22           MOTOR CYCLE REPAIRING  
   23          
HEAVY MACHINERY OPERATION 
   24          
HOME APPLIANCES REPAIR 
   25           MOBILE PHONE REPAIRING  
   26          
CAR DRIVING 
   27          
TAILORING  
   28          
HAND & MACHINE EMBROIDERY  
   29          
BABY GARMENTS  
   30          
APPLIQUE WORK & RILLI MAKING 
   31          
ADDA WORK 
   32          
CHESTER MAKING 
AUTMOBILE THEME 
GARMENTS 
158 
   33          
BLOCK PRINTING  
   34          
COMPUTER HARDWARE 
   35          
COMPUTER SOFTWARE 
   36           MOBILE PHONE APP DEVELOPMENT 
   37          
SOFTWARE DEVELOPER 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
   38          
GRAPHIC DESIGNING   
   39          
AUTO CAD 
   40           WEB DESIGNING  
   41          
LEATHER WORK AND HANDICRAFTS 
   42          
HAND BAG MAKING 
   43          
JEWELRY MAKING 
   44          
HAND KNITTING WORK 
   45          
BLUE POTTERY 
   46          
CERAMICS / KASHIGARI / BLUE POTTERY (OLD MULTANI 
CULTURE ART)  
   47          
HANDY CRAFT  
   48          
BEAUTICIAN 
   49          
HAIR DRESSER 
ARTS AND CRAFTS 
PARLOR MANAGEMENT 
159 
Annexure-12: TORs for the Vocational/Entrepreneurship Training Service Provider 
The  Vocational/Entrepreneurial  Training  Organization  (VOETO)  should  be  experienced  in  social  mobilisation  and  have  a 
minimum of five years’ experience of delivering vocational training and in house capacity and human resources for providing 
services  in  the  region.  The  VOETO  should  have  the  capacity  to  engage  with  local  communities  for  the  identification  of 
vocational training needs of the household in BISP-PSC band of 0-34 and assess the capacity of the participants to utilize the 
training. It should have the capacity to be gender sensitive and have women staff on its team in order to gain the confidence 
of women trainees and ensure the provision of training at local level in an environment which are appropriate, safe and 
secure for women trainees.  
The VOETO should have presence in the region/division of the province for which it is being considered.  The VOETO will 
work  closely  with  PMU  and KP-TEVTA  and  will  ensure  effective  coordination  of  its  staff  with  that  of  the  PMU  and other 
implementation partners regular basis. 
The VOETO should be able to design training courses that are tailored to the needs of the target group in terms of timings, 
content, methodology, duration, location, utility and delivery strategy as per the parameters of the project design. VOETO 
should have the in-house capacity to deliver the training directly in a cost-effective manner.  It should have the capacity to 
provide  support  to  trainees  in  obtaining  employment  or  establishing  their  own  enterprise/business  with  backward  and 
forward linkages with markets. It should develop an MIS for monitoring and evaluation of the Programme.  It should have 
the  capacity  to  critically  evaluate  its  training  and  provide  regular  progress  reports  and  information  on  both  output  and 
outcome indicators. 
The VOETO should be able to institute a system which provides feedback from graduates on the overall impact of the training 
on employability, productivity and increase in incomes. 
Duties and Responsibilities 
Ensure selection of trainees as per the criteria outlined in the project design for all types of trainings whether conducted by 
VOETO  or  KP-TEVTA.  The  VOETO  will  be  responsible  for  design,  implementation  of  training,  evaluation  and  tracking  of 
employment status of candidates. The VOETO will also provide business incubation services for self-employed in the form of 
hand holding in the initial stages.  
The Terms of Reference for the VOETO will be as follows: 
i.  Work  plan  &  Budget:  The  VOETO  will  provide  the  PMU  with  a  budget,  detailed  workplan  and  description  of 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
deliverables including approach and methodology for the three year period. 
Training Needs Assessment: The VOETO will conduct a training needs assessment for the indicated trades in which 
men  and  women  require  training  to  for  remunerative  employment  and  sustainable  livelihood  through  self-
employment/enterprise development. The needs identification will focus especially on women as 50 per cent of the 
beneficiaries of vocational training are women. 
 Orientation on Selection of Trainees: The VOETO will provide COs with a briefing on purpose, activities and criteria 
for selection of candidates through an orientation. 
Screening & Selection of Participants: VOETO will be responsible for finalizing the list of participants of vocational 
training after screening of the selected candidates on the basis of interest, qualification and potential, for all types 
of training whether delivered directly or through KP-TEVTA. 
Design and Delivery of Training Courses: VOETO will design training courses that are tailored to the needs of the 
target group identified in terms of timings, content and methodology for the directly delivered trainings.   
Local Training Teams: The VOETO will use local training teams to ensure access of women. 
Start up Support: VOETO will provide start up support either in kind or in the form of capital, as appropriate to the 
trade, for the self-employed beneficiaries from project resources and/or through linkages with banks for accessing 
the government youth development fund for enterprise development.  
Support in Linkages with Agribusiness Component and Markets: The VOETO will support backwards and forwards 
linkages with Agribusiness component of the project which is expected to generate demand for jobs and services and 
markets both for selection of trainees and placements. 
Identification  of  Public  and  Private  Organisations  for  Graduate  Internship  Programme:    The  VOETO  will  identify 
potential  public  and  private  organisation  for  placement  of  graduate  interns.  The  VOETO  will  have  the  overall 
implementation responsibility including, oversight, monitoring and reporting.  
160 
x. 
xi. 
Design and maintenance of MIS: The VOETO will design and maintain an MIS which will provide sex-disaggregated 
data  and  include  identity  card  numbers,  income  profile,  business  activity  undertaken  etc.  The  system  would  be 
integrated with the PMU M&E system. 
Evaluations and Impact Assessments: VOETO will conduct periodic studies for relevance, effectiveness and economic 
and social impacts. 
Reporting Requirements 
 The VOETO will submit the following reports to the PMU: 
a)  An inception report on the on the need for vocational skills undertaken in the region.  
b)  Monthly reports on activities undertaken (number of trainees identified and assessed, number of trainees 
selected  for  KP-TEVTA  and  self-delivery  trainings,  number  of  trainings  conducted,  number  of  persons 
trained by trade and gender, market linkages developed, etc). 
c)  Quarterly reports consolidating the monthly reports on activities undertaken key achievements and lessons 
learnt. 
d)  Yearly reports on activities undertaken key achievements and lessons learnt. 
e)  End of the project report on activities undertaken key achievements and lessons learnt.  
f)  Periodic evaluation and impact assessment report. 
161 
Annexure-13: Guidelines for Managing Social, Environmental and Climate Risks in 
Implementation  
The  ESMP  provides  guidelines  for  the  management  of  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts  together  with  climate 
change aspects of the project interventions. The ESMP identifies parties responsible for monitoring actions, and any training 
or capacity building needs, Mitigation measures have been identified to reduce present and potential impacts associated 
with the proposed activities. Social mitigation includes the measures creating awareness and proper mobilization, proper 
participation of members in the planning and implementation of activities, inclusion of women etc to mitigate effects of local 
disagreements and conflicts. Physical mitigation includes measures that address impacts to the physical environment, such 
as biological communities, vegetation, water resources, air quality and others. 
The project does not involve infrastructure and other civil works development, however, there are chances that the FPOs 
might go for establishing fruit, vegetable or dairy processing units at local level. Generally, fruit processing (canning, drying, 
freezing, and preparation of juices, jams, and jellies) steps include preparation of the raw material (cleaning, trimming, and 
peeling  followed  by  cooking,  canning,  or  freezing.  Plant  operation  is  often  seasonal  and  typically  generates  volumes  of 
effluents and solid waste. The effluents contain high organic loads, cleansing and blanching agents, salt, and suspended solids 
such as fibers and soil particles. They may also contain pesticide residues washed from the raw materials. The main solid 
wastes are organic materials, including discarded fruits. Odor problems can occur with poor management of solid wastes 
and effluents. 
Environmental impacts associated with a dairy processing unit are generation of waste and wastewater. Once started, it is a 
regular  full  time  activity  to  be  monitored  regularly  to  avoid  environmental  impacts.  Wastewater  and  packaging  material 
waster are generated  that need to disposed-off properly to  avoid any contamination especially water resources.  Quality 
control mechanisms to be in place from processing to storage and to consumer.  
 Details of the ESMP and mitigation measures are provided in the Table below. 
Table. Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Assessment and Mitigation 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
Social Mobilization 
and Development 
(such as 
participatory 
planning, selection 
of target area and 
intervention, agri-
business 
development 
Social: 
Social: 
  Clear mechanism for social 
mobilization based on 
predetermined criteria for 
selection of members  
  Community participatory 
planning is not institutionalized/ 
defined  
  Limited awareness of the 
community about the project 
goals and objectives  
  Limited scope for gender based 
community development 
  Poor strategies for involvement 
of women 
  Well-defined community mobilization and 
development mechanism will be ensured  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be 
ensured) 
  Community organizations will ensure coordination 
with local government department 
  Role of and access to various community 
development facilities will be made clear to the 
community through consultations, meetings and 
seminars 
  Technical and business support will be provided to 
cooperatives including business plan development  
 Clarity about the role and responsibilities made  
162 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Lack of awareness about Farm 
Services Centres and limited 
accessibility to cooperatives  
  Lack of clarity about the role and 
responsibility of FOs 
Environmental and Climate: 
Establishment and 
Operation of PMU 
and Regional offices  
Environmental and Climate: 
Office establishment 
  Location; Easily accessible to all   
  Noise and dust pollution during 
construction 
  Labour and staff protection and 
safety at risk 
  Disposal of debris and other 
solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution due to 
due to operation of generators) 
  Adverse effect on plants and 
shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and movement 
may adversely affect movement 
of pedestrians, animals, and 
birds 
Inadequate solid waste disposal  
 
  Poor sewerage and drainage 
system 
Social: 
  Location and accessibility 
  Community access to 
PMU/regional offices is not 
available or limited 
  Unavailability of Community 
complaint mechanism at 
PMU/Regional offices 
  Lack of mechanisms for 
participatory planning 
(particularly involvement of 
women) 
  Ensure easy access with transport availability and 
on main road 
  Measures taken to avoid noise and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety measures taken care 
of 
  Good quality and well-maintained generators 
installed 
  Smooth and calm operations of office.to avoid 
inconvenience to neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid waste material will be 
ensured 
  Proper sewerage and drainage will be ensured 
Social: 
  Ensure easy access with transport availability and 
on main road 
  Easy community access to PMU/Regional ensured 
with phone and email address widely circulated 
and displayed in PFOs offices, 
  Participatory planning and design to be considered 
a pre-requisite (particularly participation of 
women will be ensured) 
  Adequate complaint registration and redressal 
mechanism to be operationalized 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Noise and dust pollution during 
construction 
  Measures taken to avoid noise and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety measures ensured 
  Good quality and well-maintained generators 
installed 
163 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Labour and staff protection and 
  Smooth and calm operations of office.to avoid 
safety at risk 
  Disposal of debris and other 
solid waste  
inconvenience to neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid waste material will be 
  Noise and air pollution due to 
ensured 
due to operation of generators) 
  Proper sewerage and drainage will be ensured 
  Adverse effect on plants and 
shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and movement 
may adversely affect movement 
of pedestrians, animals, and 
birds 
Inadequate solid waste disposal  
 
  Poor sewerage and drainage 
system 
Climate smart 
technologies—HIES, 
raised beds, land 
levelling, tunnels, 
etc. drought 
resistant varieties 
Social: 
  Lack of knowledge and 
information about new 
technologies 
  Selection of appropriate 
technology 
  Use of selected technology 
Environment: 
  Air, water and noise pollution 
  Oils, grease pour and spill around 
  Parking 
  Use of new varieties of fruits, 
vegetables and other seeds. 
Social: 
  PFOs will organize awareness campaigns about the 
benefits of such technologies. 
  PFOs and project staff will help select the right 
technology for the right interventions 
  Proper trainings will be organized on the use and 
maintenance of the proposed technologies and 
interventions. 
Environment: 
  Machinery will be properly used and maintained to 
avoid and minimize any pollution 
  Ensure proper packing and handling of oils and 
lubricants 
  Vehicles and machines will be properly parked under 
designated sheds 
  Certified varieties and seeds will be recommended 
and used under PFO and project staff/service 
provider guidance. 
Vocational and skill 
development 
trainings  
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of candidates, courses, 
training institutes 
  Gender parity 
 
Incentives and facilities for 
deserving candidates 
  Number of trainees per class 
  Location of and accessibility to 
selected training centre 
  Language of trainings  
  Familiarity with the 
machine/equipment and its use  
  Criteria developed for selection of providing the 
right and required training to the right persons in 
the right institute for getting the employment.  
  Equal opportunity provided to the women 
candidates in the selected field 
  Appropriate number of students per class to receive 
proper attention and time during lectures and 
practical 
  Poor and deserving candidates, especially women, 
should be provided with incentives and facilities 
164 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Preferably local language or Urdu will be used for 
lectures and teaching material. 
  Centres should be easily accessible with public 
transport 
  Special lectures on the use of machine and 
equipment with emphasis on precautions. 
Environment 
  Ensure selection of centres with proper facilities 
  Ensure required facilities for women 
  Ensure all tools, equipment, electronic and 
mechanical devices are available 
Environment 
  Class rooms with adequate space 
and facilities for the trainees 
  Proper seating and audio-visual 
facilities  
  Separate wash rooms and other 
facilities for women 
  Availability of all equipment, tools 
and material for training 
Fruit 
/vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of site 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect neighbourhood 
environment during construction 
period 
  Mechanism for members’ access 
to various details and facilities   
  Limited awareness of member 
about design and other details  
  Lack of mechanisms for 
participatory planning (particularly 
involvement of women) 
  Access  of  and  inclusion  of  poor, 
marginalized and vulnerable  
  Local privacy and gender elements 
  Local 
gender, 
community, 
stakeholder 
neighbourhood  & 
participation  
  Participatory and consensus approach for site 
selection 
  Adequate project construction planning and 
scheduling will ensure no adverse impacts on the 
neighbourhood 
  Ensure access to information and all details  
  Access to alternate routes to be ensured during 
construction period    
  Participatory planning and design to be ensured 
(particularly participation of women to be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops and 
meetings 
  Access to various facilities and finances will be made 
clear to members through consultations, meetings 
and seminars and records availability 
  Community  consent  regarding  gender  elements, 
particularly privacy of women shall be addressed  
  Stakeholders 
consultation 
nearby 
communities,  women  shall  be  ensured  and  their 
concerns shall be addressed for sustainability  
including 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Noise, dirt, dust and air pollution 
may raise 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Measures taken to minimize pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety measures ensured 
165 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Labour and staff protection and 
safety at risk 
  Material storage and vehicle 
movement may adversely affect 
movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds 
  Proper storage of material and vehicle maintenance 
and movement ensured to avoid inconvenience. 
  Training on occupational hazards, storage and use of 
chemicals, on maintenance and operation machinery 
and vehicles for involved personnel will be 
organized. 
  Lack of essential facilities for 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
labour and workers   
  Use of chemicals during 
construction and processing of 
products.  
  Improper waste and chemicals 
disposal during construction and 
operation of units 
  Wastewater disposal 
  Inadequate sewerage and 
drainage system 
  Adverse impacts on migratory 
birds movement 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Adequate planning of labour and worker camps with 
WASH, sewerage and drainage system will be 
ensured 
  First aid facilities to be provided at site.  
  Processing units shall not be installed in ecologically 
  Construction of cold storages 
sensitive or protected areas 
(insolation needs) 
  Storage of fruits for processing  
  Health and safety 
  Quality control 
  Waste generated shall be disposed off at suitable 
sites and after treatment to reduce the potential for 
acidification  
  Waste treatment and management plan shall be 
devised and implemented  
  Eco-friendly energy supply shall be preferred.  
  Carbon footprint of the processing unit shall be 
calculated and mitigation measures shall be ensured  
  Use of water in large quantity shall be avoided and 
recycled  
  Processing units shall have proper health & safety 
arrangements for workers 
  Ensure quality standards of the product  
166 
Annexure-14: Annual Work Plan/Budget Format 
l
i
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
f
f
a
t
S
/
t
i
n
U
Im ple m entation targe ts 
i
t Apprais
n
al (Total)
U
Revis ed 
(Total)
Planne d 
(Annual)
Original 
Unit 
Cost 
(PKR)
 Re vised    
Unit 
Cost 
(PKR) 
Achieved 
(Cum ulative
)
%
Achieved 
(Annual)
%
Financiers
IFAD
Gov. Be nef
 Spe nt 
(Cum ulativ
e ) 
%
 Spe nt 
(Annual) 
%
Progress as of May 2017
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
:
U
A
A
5
A
E
A
:
A
#
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objective s/Expected 
Re sults
Indicators
Tim etable for 
im plem entation
Project 
Indicators
RIMS 
Indicators
Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 Q 4
AWPB (GLLSP-II) 
Project Goal: Tocontribute to the reduction of 
poverty in Gw adar and Lasbela, by enhancing the 
access of the poor rural men and w omen to 
productive assets, skills, services and technologies 
for productivity enhancement.
Purpose : For each component, a distinct objective 
as per the PDR should be mentioned before giving 
details on it. 
1
Com m unity Mobilization
1.1 (Sub=Com ponent 1)
1.2 ( Sub-Com ponent 2)
1.3  (Sub-Com ponent 3) etc.
2
Fishe ries 
2.1  (Sub-Com ponent 1)
2.2 (Sub=Com ponent 2)
2.3( Sub-Com ponent 3)
3
C&W Work s
3.1  (Sub-Com ponent 1)
3.2 (Sub=Com ponent 2)
3.3 (Sub-Com ponent 3)
4
Proje ct Managem ent & Policy 
Support
4.1  (Sub-Com ponent 1)
4.2 (Sub=Com ponent 2)
4.3 (Sub-Com ponent 3)
The AWP/B will provide details of activities under each sub-component along with requisite 
information for monitoring.  
Total
167 
Annexure-15: Measuring Progress against the AWP/B 
Period:  
[Insert date: dd-m-yy] to 
[Insert date: dd-m-yy]  Cumulative 
AWP&B 
Actual 
Actual 
% 
Appraisal 
Target 
% 
Component/Outcome 
Sub-component or Output 
Component 1 /Outcome 
Indicator 
  Sub-component / 
Output 
Unit 
  Sub-component / 
Output 
  Sub-component / 
Output 
Component 2 / Outcome 
Component 3 / Outcome 
Component 4 / Outcome 
168 
Annexure-16: Steps in the opening of Assignment Account/Designated Account 
Designated Accounts/Foreign Aid Assignment Accounts/Revolving Fund Accounts (RFAs) are opened 
and maintained at National Bank of Pakistan with the approval of Finance Department and Accountant 
General (AG). This account is opened for foreign aided projects and is non-lapsable but requires re-
authorization at the start of each fiscal year. Foreign Aid Assignment Accounts are governed through 
detailed executive notifications (accounting procedures) issued by the Finance Division from time to 
time – the latest notification was issued in August 2013 for the revision of the procedures. Following is 
the process for opening of RFA: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Step 
Check, if the ADP of GOKP contains budget allocation. If not 
then initiate the process for allocation of budget through 
Technical Supplementary Grant via Finance Department. 
Send a request to the Administrative Secretary of the 
relevant government’s department for opening of 
respective RFA. The request will contain information such 
as account name, bank branch from where it will operate, 
authorized signatories and specimen signatures, budget 
head from which the allocation of funds will be made 
available, and any other condition for operation of the 
account; 
The relevant Department Administrative 
Secretary/Principal Accounting Officer will approve the 
request for opening of RFA for onward submission to the 
FD for issuance of Sanction. The request will include: Copy 
of PC I, Copy of Grant Agreement, Form A called the 
Sanction for opening of Assignment Account (contains the 
name of authorized officers and their specimen Signatures).  
The Finance Department will give sanction for the opening 
of RFA and addressed to Accountant General’s for the 
issuance of authority to the designated branch of the 
National Bank of Pakistan (NBP). The authorization letter 
will be issued directly to NBP by the AG. 
The Accountant General’s Office shall issue authority 
directly to NBP for opening of RFA and copy forwarded to 
line department. The authority letter contains: Account 
Title, the bank branch from where it shall operate; 
Authorized cheque signatories and specimen signatures. 
Budget head from which the allocation of funds will be 
made. 
Responsibility 
Project Director or 
authorized officer 
of DA’s in line 
department. 
Project Director or 
authorized officer 
of DA’s in line 
department. 
Timeline 
Upon 
signing of 
Grant 
Agreement 
Upon 
signing of 
Grant 
Agreement 
Administrative 
Secretary 
1 week 
Secretary Finance 
1 week 
AG 
1 week 
169 
6 
7 
Send copy of grant agreement, sanction of FD and 
authority of AG to the SBP through NBP for grant of NOC 
for opening of RFA. 
Submit an application to NBP for the opening of RFA along 
with the sanctions/approvals of FD/State Bank and AG. The 
application will also include: Account opening form (duly 
completed signed and stamped), the specimen signature 
card, the CNIC of authorized signatories. 
1 week 
1 week 
Project Director or 
authorized officer 
of DA’s in line 
department. 
Project Director or 
authorized officer 
of DA’s in line 
department. 
8  NBP will issue a cheque book for withdrawing of 
NBP 
1 week 
grant/funds from the RFA. 
Steps in Annual Revalidation/ Re-authorization of RFA 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Step 
During first week of July each year, a request is sent to the 
Administrative Secretary of department for re-
authorization of respective RFA. The request will contain 
information such as account title & number, bank branch, 
authorized signatories for re-authorization/ revalidation of 
the RFA, which ceases to be operated on 30Th June every 
year. 
The relevant Department Administrative 
Secretary/Principal Accounting Officer will approve the 
request for revalidation/ re-authorization of RFA for 
onward submission to the FD for issuance of Sanction. The 
request will include copy of the letter submitted as above.  
The Finance Department will review the request and grant 
sanction for the revalidation/reauthorization of the RFA 
through letter addressed to Accountant General’s for 
issuance of authority to the designated branch of the 
National Bank of Pakistan (NBP).  
The Accountant General’s Office shall issue authority 
directly to NBP for revalidation/reauthorization of RFA and 
copy forwarded to line department. The authority letter 
contains: Account Title, bank branch; authorized cheque 
signatories and specimen signatures. Budget head from 
which the allocation of funds will be made. This 
authorization letter will be issued under SEAL Authority. 
Responsibility 
Project Director or 
authorized officer 
of DA’s in line 
department. 
Timeline 
First week 
of July 
every year 
Administrative 
Secretary 
Secretary Finance 
AG 
Same week 
of receipt of 
above 
request 
letter 
1 week of 
receipt of 
the above 
letter & all 
documents 
 1 week of 
receipt of 
the above 
letter & all 
required 
documents 
Important Instructions for Operating RFA (hereinafter referred as Designated Account)   
  Any changes in the signatories will be approved by the Administrative Secretary of the relevant 
line department and circulated accordingly by the Project Director. 
  All payments, except for an authorized petty-cash to be notified in writing by the Project 
Director to relevant NBP branch, shall be made directly to the recipients through ‘payees 
account only’ cheques after making due deductions. 
170 
  Except for the fund releases from IFAD, no deposits will be made in the Designated Account. 
171 
173 
174 
Annexure-17: Checklist for reviewing withdrawal applications 
FORM 100 - APPLICATION FOR WITHDRAWAL 
1. Sequential numbering of withdrawal application 
2. Withdrawal application amount tallies with sequentially numbered summary sheets 
3. Categories/subcategories charged according to schedule 2 of financing agreement 
4. Percentage of financing applicable for each category or subcategory 
5. Availability of funds in categories and the overall financing amount 
Yes or 
No 
6. Currency of payment 
7. Completeness and accuracy of banking instructions 
8. Complete name and address of correspondent bank 
9. WA is signed by Authorized Representative 
10. Expenditure summary sheet by category attached 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
1. Eligibility of expenditures claimed 
(a) Within SOE financial ceiling 
(b) Expenditures under specific category [ ------------------- ] eligibility 
2. Form 102 supported by signed Form 101 (for items over the financial ceiling) 
DESIGNATED ACCOUNT – REPLENISHMENT REQUESTS 
1. Amount within ceiling figure agreed as a reasonable limit [-- US$ or --]; or per AWP/B period 
2. Amount at least equal to 30 per cent of the advance or 3 months of expenditure; 
3. Amount agreed sufficient to cover a specific reporting period (revolving fund option) 
4. Exchange rate used 
5. Completeness of designated account banking and account details 
6. Enclosed designated account reconciliation and bank statements 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION (attached when/if required) 
1. Copy of contract 
2. Copy of invoice, certified by Project Director 
3. Copy of bank guarantee and performance guarantee (for advance payment) 
4. Copy of delivery receipt 
5. Copy of evidence of payment 
6. Completed Form 101 
7. Completed Form 102 (A or B) including reference to AWPB, name of the supplier, invoice contract number, total contract 
value, date of payment, list of supporting documentation, and payment reference (bank/ cash) 
PROCUREMENT 
1. Copy of ‘no objection(s)’ provided by IFAD (attached) 
2. Copy of Contract Payment Monitoring Form(s) -duly Signed (attached) 
3. Copy of Register of contracts with reference to the procurement plan- duly signed (attached) 
175 
COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITION(S) FOR DISBURSEMENT 
1. In accordance with terms in section E of the Financing Agreement 
2. In accordance with terms in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient 
EXPENDITURE INCURRED/COMMITTED BEFORE PROJECT COMPLETION DATE 
1. Expenditure verified as eligible: 
(a) contract signed before project completion date 
(b) goods delivered before project completion date 
(c) services completed and/or rendered before project completion date 
Notes: Supporting Documentation 
(i) For all cases described in (ii) through (vi) below: 
 The signed contract or confirmed purchase order – showing the specified amount that is due to be paid; 
 The bank guarantee for advance payment, as specified in the contract documents; 
 The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the contract documents; 
 Copies of communications sent by the IFAD country programme manager to the lead project agency providing the ‘no objection’ 
(whether post or prior) to the contract award; and 
 Evidence of payment. 
(ii)  For payment of goods, in addition to (i): 
 Supplier’s invoice, duly certified for payment by the project director – specifying the goods, their quantities, and prices; 
 Bills of lading or similar documents; and 
 As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of goods on delivery). 
(iii)  For payment of consultants’ services and other services, in addition to (i): 
 The supplier’s or consultant’s claim, duly certified for payment by the project director and showing sufficient detail. If such services relate 
to the importation of goods (for example, freight and insurance payments), adequate reference should be given to enable the Fund to relate 
each of these items to specific goods whose cost has been or is to be financed by the financing closing date; and 
 As appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services. If the consultant provided training it should be specified how many 
workshops/people trained together with a list of participants. If the Consultant developed a manual or a study this study should be 
attached or indicated in the certificate, etc. 
(iv)  For progress and retention payments of civil works, in addition to (i): 
 The claim of the contractor, including a financial progress report, stating the work performed and the amount due; 
 A certificate – signed by the project consultants or owner’s representative, if any, or by the borrower’s chief engineering officer or resident 
supervising engineer assigned to the project, to the effect that the work performed is satisfactory and the payment claimed is due in 
accordance with the terms of the contract; and 
 A copy of the contract payment monitoring form. 
(v) For payment of credit lines/grants etc.. in addition to (i): 
 Duly certified financial reports; 
 Copies of the sub-agreements with the MFIs; 
  Approved minutes of the technical committee (if applicable); and/or 
 Payment requests from the MFI and evidence of payment. 
(vi)  For payment of Trips, fuel, stationary and other expenses in addition to (i): 
 Supplier invoices; 
 Evidence of payment; 
 Back to office report; 
 Travel authorization; and/or 
 Expense reports by the traveller (including invoices). 
177 
Annexure-18: Designated Account Reconciliation (Imprest Fund) 
178 
179 
Annexure-19: Sample Financial Statements  
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED June 30, 201X 
                                                                            Ref.Note             20XX         20XX           Cumulative 
180 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) FOR THE YEAR 
ENDED June 30, 201X 
SAMPLE 
                                                                                                                 Ref.Note             20XX         20XX           Cumulative 
# 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Incremental Operating Costs
XXX 
XXX  
XXX XXX  XXX   
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Government Funds 
Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment 
Technical Assistance, Trainings, 
Workshops’ and Studies 
        Support for Adaptive Research 
Support for Knowledge Management and 
         Communication 
Support for Improved Agricultural 
         Extension 
Support for Access to Key Agricultural 
        Inputs 
Salaries and Allowances 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
BALANCE C/F 
4 
XXX 
181 
SAMPLE 
 STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY 
COMPONENT) FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
Balance B/F 
FINANCING 
IFAD Credit 
Initial Deposit 
Replenishments to SA 
IFAD Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Other Donors 
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
PROJECT EXPENDITURES: 
(BY COMPONENT) 
IFAD 
Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management 
Adaptive Research 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
Farmer Adoption of GAPs 
Awareness Raising and Sensitisation 
Access to Key Agricultural Inputs 
Programme Management and Coordination 
Government Funds 
Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management 
Adaptive Research 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
Farmer Adoption of GAPs 
Awareness Raising and Sensitisation 
Access to Key Agricultural Inputs 
Programme Management and Coordination 
Notes 
201X 
201X-1 
Cumulative 
to date 
MWK 
MWK 
MWK 
4 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
5 
6 
7 
8 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  
XXX 
XXX  
XXX  
XXX 
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  
XXX 
XXX  
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  
XXX  
XXX  
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
XXX 
XXX  
BALANCE C/F 
4 
XXX 
XXX  
182 
183 
184 
SAMPLE 
STATEMENT OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
Account No:    
Bank: 
Address:  
Opening Balance 
Notes 
Add: 
IFAD Replenishments: 
Date 
Date 
WA No  XXX 
WA No     XXX  
XXX 
Bank Interests 
Total 
Deduct: 
Transfers to Operating Accounts: 
XXX 
Date 
 XXX  
Date 
XXX 
Bank Charges 
Exchange Rate Difference 
Closing Balance as at 30/06/201X 
(as per Bank Statement) 
USD 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
MWK 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
185 
186 
SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
By Category of Expenditure  
Category Description 
Total 
In USD 
(Equivalent) 
Rejected 
from IFAD 
Net Reimbursed 
2 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
xxxxx 
Xxx 
xxx 
xxxx 
xxxx 
xxx 
xxxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
Note 
Category No. 
Withdrawal 
Application # 
Total 
W/A Pending 
Submission 
Withdrawal 
Application # 
Total 
Category 
Description 
1 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
XXX 
XXX 
XXx 
xxx 
Note: Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical exchange rate of the transfers to the 
Operating Account. Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. This statement should be 
reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments 
187 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
FINANCIAL REPORTING UNDER INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING STANDARDS 
(IPSAS) 
In accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), notes to the financial 
statements of an entity should: 
  Present  any  information  about  the  basis  of  preparation  of  the  financial  statements  and  the 
specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant transactions and other events, 
and 
  Provide  additional  information  which  is  not  presented  on  the  face  of  the  financial 
statements but  is necessary for a  fair presentation of the  entity’s cash  receipts,  cash 
payments, cash balances and other statements as statement of financial position 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
The principle accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out 
below: 
A  Basis  of  Preparation:  The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) with particular emphasis on Cash Basis 
Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
B  Cash Basis of Accounting: The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events 
only when cash is received or paid by the entity. 
C. Foreign Currency Transactions: Foreign currency translation for the income and expenditure 
account  items  are  converted  using  the  actual  historic  exchange  rate  at  the  conversion  from 
designated to local account. Where part of the expenditures has to be met from the proceeds of 
subsequent draw-downs from designated to local account, this is done on First in First out (FIFO) 
basis. All local expenditures paid from the local accounts/currency are translated back to the  USD 
at the actual rate used for the transfer from designated to local account.  Cash balances  held in 
foreign  currency  are  reported  using  the  closing  rate.  Gains/Losses  on  foreign  currency 
transactions/balances are dealt within the Statement of Designated Account Activities 
BUDGET 
The  budget  is  developed  on  the  same  accounting  basis  (cash  basis),  same  classification  and  for  the  same 
period as the financial statements. Material variances (above XXX) have been explained as notes to the financial 
statements 
DIRECT PAYMENTS 
These payments were made directly by IFAD from the Loan/Grant account to the specified 
supplier/service provider in accordance with the terms and conditions of the financing Agreement 
Note: Include here details of direct payments, WA, Date, currency and amount received, amount in local 
currency 
188 
189 
190 
191 
Annexure-20: Guidelines for Interim Financial Reporting  
Annex A: Interim Financial Progress Reports (Minimum requirements/mandatory reports)   
Type of report 
Disclosed Information 
Remarks 
This report discloses: 
- 
how  much  funds    the  project 
has  received  from  different  
financing sources;  
how  these  funds  have  been 
spent by expenditure category 
during the  reporting  period as 
well as cumulative. 
 the  opening  and  closing 
projects cash bank  balances. 
Report 1: 
Sources and 
Uses of Funds 
(all financiers) 
- 
- 
. 
  This report is part of project 
financial statements. 
  The Statement of Sources 
and Uses of funds should 
include payables and 
receivables as well as 
exchange rate differences 
(unrealized) to allow for the 
conversion of opening and 
closing bank  balances to a 
different reporting currency. 
Adding receivables and 
payables makes the report 
fit modified cash and accrual 
basis of accounting 
  Prepared in the 
functional/presentation 
currency of the entity. 
  Only cash Beneficiary 
contribution should be 
reported. Not in-kind 
  Aggregate cash forecasts 
can be added to provide 
information that would 
facilitate disbursement 
planning. 
  Funds provided by other 
donors to programme 
should be included or 
disclosed, even if these are 
provided bilaterally to the 
same programme.  
192 
Report 2: 
Summary of 
Expenditures 
by Loan 
Categories 
and By 
Financiers  
This report discloses how much 
funds the project has received 
from each financier and how 
these sources have been spent 
by project category. This report 
also discloses the hard 
commitments (contracts signed 
but not yet paid) per category and 
financiers 
This report discloses: 
- 
received 
 how  much  funds  the  project 
from  each 
has 
financier ;  
how  these  funds  have  been 
spent  by  project  component 
during the reporting period and 
cumulatively.  
- 
-  The  report  also  compares 
these  figures  with  the  targets 
set  in  the  Annual  Work  plan 
and  Budget  and  the  Project 
design report (PDR). 
This  report  discloses  and  tracks 
the  funds  received  through  the 
Designated account. 
Report 3: 
Financial 
performance 
by financier by 
component 
Report 4: 
Special/Design
ated Account 
Reconciliation 
Statement 
Imprest 
account/revolv
ing fund 
Report 5: 
Statement of 
Expenditures/
This reports discloses the 
disbursed  funds by Withdrawal 
Application and Category. It also 
lists the Withdrawal Applications 
pending submission to IFAD. 
  Variation of this report 
already part of the Project 
financial statements 
(sources and uses of funds) 
  Prepared in the 
functional/presentation 
currency of the entity. 
  Amounts referring to 
Financing Agreement / 
should also be expressed in 
the same currency as the 
expenditures to allow for 
comparison of a  versus 
actual expenditures. 
Only cash Beneficiary 
contribution should be reported. 
Not in-kind
  Variation of this report 
already part of the aide 
memoire (main text and 
table 3b of annex 3) 
  Prepared in the 
 
functional/presentation 
currency of the entity. 
 Amounts referring to AWPB 
and PDR should also be 
expressed in the same 
currency as the 
expenditures to allow for 
comparison of 
design/budget versus actual 
expenditures. 
  Only cash Beneficiary 
contribution should be 
reported. Not in-kind 
  Part of project financial 
statements and submitted 
together with Withdrawal 
Applications SA/DA 
replenishment requests 
  The currency of the 
Designated Account 
reconciliation statement 
should be in the currency of 
the designated account. 
  Normally part of Project 
financial statements. 
  The 
amounts 
of 
should 
the  
be 
statement 
193 
Disbursement 
- Withdrawal 
Application 
Statement 
Disbursement method used for 
each WA is disclosed. 
expressed  in  two  currencies 
the 
- 
the  currency  of 
(for 
Designated  account 
Replenishments)  and 
the 
the  WA  or 
currency  of 
currency 
which 
in 
transactions are  recorded in 
the  accounting 
software 
(Usually local currency)  
  The  expenditures  of 
the  
Disbursement 
statement 
should  be  categorized  by 
Withdrawal  application  and 
disbursement  method.  The 
FMS/Finance  Officer  should 
make  sure 
that  all  WA 
including  direct  payments, 
reimbursements and letter of 
in 
credits  are 
statement.  
included 
This report discloses the 
breakdown of the project's cash 
forecast for the following two 
quarters by financier. The 
breakdown includes opening and 
closing balances of the different 
accounts as well as estimated 
income and from different 
financiers and estimated 
expenditures by category. 
This report summarizes all the 
recommendations made by the 
external auditors of the project, 
the project management's action 
plan to address these 
recommendations and the current 
status of these planned actions.. 
Report 6: 
Project cash 
flow forecast 
Report 7: 
Progress 
report on 
Audit 
recommendati
ons 
  Required by IFAD only on ad 
hoc basis. Should be part of 
the projects monthly internal 
reporting  (for  management 
use) 
  Should  be  Part  of 
the 
external  audit  report  and 
management letter 
194 
Sample Supplementary  Interim Financial Progress Reports (Minimum requirements)   
Sample Optional reports depending on the project’s activities and the project risk 
profile 
Type of report 
Disclosed Information 
Physical and 
Financial 
Progress 
report 
This  report  captures  the  physical 
progress  made  and  links  it  to  the 
cost. The report also compares the 
actual  cost  and  physical  progress 
with targets and cost estimates set 
in the AWPB and the PDR  
Rural finance-
credit line 
report 
Implementing 
Partner 
monitoring  
This 
the 
report  captures  all 
expenditures incurred (micro loans 
&  grants  disbursed)  under  the 
  component/credit 
microfinance 
line category. The report discloses 
the  individual  grants  and  loans 
disbursed  during 
the  reporting 
period  by  financing  source  and  
compares them with the AWPB.  
This report discloses the advances 
paid  to  the  different  implementing 
the 
partners.  It  also  discloses 
the 
justified 
amount 
outstanding 
the 
contract. 
and 
of 
balance 
Training and 
workshop 
monitoring 
report 
This report discloses expenditures 
related to different training events. 
It  also  discloses  the  number  of 
events  held  and  number  of 
participants in each event. 
Project 
Management 
Cost 
report 
discloses 
the 
This 
expenditures 
breakdown 
of 
incurred  within 
project 
the 
management  cost  component/ 
also 
category. 
report 
This 
  Remarks 
  Suitable for civil works such 
as road construction, 
irrigation pipelines, hill lakes 
etc.. 
  Use simplified or proxy 
indicators of physical 
progress, consistent with 
M&E design where possible. 
  For ‘soft’ expenditures output 
indicators may be explored 
when feasible (e.g. number of 
training events held for 
Training expenditures) 
  Suitable for rural finance 
components including loans, 
matching grants, grants etc. 
  Suitable for projects/activities 
implemented  by several 
implementing partners.  
  Suitable for projects/activities 
characterized by training, 
technical assistance and 
capacity building. 
  Appropriate only when such 
expenditure is a significant 
proportion of total financing 
provided. 
561.  
  Usually a variation of this 
report if part of Project 
financial statements and 
should also be examined 
during supervision missions 
195 
per 
compares the actual expenditures 
with  the  AWPB  for  the  reporting 
the  cumulative 
period  and  an 
expenditures against the allocation 
as 
the  PDR/Financing 
agreement. 
This  report  discloses  all  the  fixed 
assets,  their  location,  purchase 
value, 
etc.. 
Maintaining  an  up-to  date  fixed 
asset  register 
important 
Internal  control  element  reducing 
risk of misuse and theft. 
number 
is  an 
tag 
and hence part of the aide 
memoire. 
  Recommended to be part of 
the Project financial 
statements 
Fixed asset 
register  
196 
Annexure-21: TORs of Internal Auditing Firm 
Note: In case an individual consultant is preferred instead of a firm, these TORs shall be modified 
accordingly without chaning the substance of work.  
A. 
Introduction 
International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is a specialized UN Agency to finance agricultural 
development  projects,  primarily  for  food  production  in  the  developing  countries  with  a  focus  on 
eradicating poverty. IFAD provides financing primarily for projects and programmes specifically designed 
to  introduce,  expand  or  improve  food  production  systems  and  to  strengthen  related  policies  and 
institutions.  IFAD  is  funding  several  initiatives  in  Pakistan  in  line  with  its  mission.  The  Khyber 
Pakhtunkhua  Rural  Employment  and  Agribusiness  Promotion  is  being  implemented  for  the  same 
objectives. 
Planning and Development Department, Government of KPK is the Lead Implementing Agency for the 
programme. A Programme Management Unit (PMU) is established under P&D with three (3) satellite 
Regional PMUs for implementation. The RCUs are based in (to be inserted later). Basic information on 
the KP-RETP Project is provided below. 
B.  Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups 
Project Goal. The overall goal of the programme is to contribute to poverty reduction, and to food and 
nutrition  security  of  rural  households.  The  development  objective  is  improved  rural  income  and 
employment through high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. 
Target Area. The project will cover all the 35 districts of the province in a phased manner. The project 
will also create complementarity and synergies with the IFAD financed NPGP and other similar donor 
funded projects.  Coordination among complementary projects and programmes will be facilitated by 
the Project Steering Committee and relevant sections of the planning and development department at 
the  provincial  level.  Coordination  for  complementarities  and  synergies  will  be  the  responsibility  of 
Project Management Unit. 
Target Groups. The primary target groups for the project will consist of the HHs falling in the PSC 0 – 40. 
Women and youth will be particularly targeted with specific interventions aiming at economic and social 
empowerment.  The  project  will  validate  beneficiaries’  data  to  mitigate  exclusion/inclusion  errors 
through service providers/local organizations as appropriate. For gender empowerment, religious and 
community leaders and village elders/jirga will be engaged following the successful approach used for 
this purpose in other projects. Smallholder farmers targeted for the production of high value agriculture 
and livestock will be assisted as members of farmer organizations. 
Project Beneficiaries: Around 440,000 households or around 3.5 million persons will benefit directly or 
indirectly  from  household  level  interventions  including  (i)  economic graduation  and  insertion  (assets 
transfer,  youth 
job  market  readiness/employment  skills  and  vocational  trainings;  productive 
investments - start-up capital) and (ii) market oriented FPOs, and FSCs with market study, business plan, 
professional management, matching grant investments, private partnership, processing development 
and clear break-even point as well as exit strategy. Additionally, the target group (focus on the youth 
and  women)  will  also  benefit  from  capacity  building,  financial  literacy,  trainings  for  climate  risk  and 
resilience, nutrition, asset management for enhancing the effectiveness of the assets, enterprise and 
197 
business development. Investments in PFOs and 4Ps will create additional jobs from which women and 
youth will specifically benefit, especially those trained under component 2. 
Theory of Change. Transfer of productive asset to the poor combined with vocational and managerial 
trainings  and  start-up  capital  establish  enabling  environment  for  graduating  them  out  of  poverty. 
Similarly, organizing very small farmers into market-oriented professional cooperatives as well as 4Ps 
(dairy transformation in particular) puts them on sustainable economic graduation KP-RETP will benefit 
in particular from the tools and methodologies / approaches developed for this purpose. 
C.  Project Components 
The proposed project will have three components: (i) Agribusiness Development (Professional Farmers 
Organizations  and  4P  Development),  (ii)  Economic  Graduation  and  Employment  Promotion  (Assets 
Provision and Skills Development); and, (iii) Programme Management and Policy Support. Component 
1 will create the necessary potential within the repositioned agribusinesses and 4Ps while the asset and 
skills creation will enable poorer households to avail to opportunities of both income and employment. 
Component 1: Agribusiness Development (US$ 77 million) 
This  component  shall  consist  of  two  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents  as  follows:  (i)  Professional 
Farmer Organizations Development and (ii) Agro Value Chain 4Ps with the aim of including farmers in 
value chain process and increasing their incomes. The target population is one that has a Poverty Score 
Card score between 0-40. The project will validate BISP data to ensure that only those who meet the 
PSC criterion are actually targeted. 
i. 
ii. 
Professional  Farmer  Organizations  Development.  The  project  will  develop  550  multi-purpose  restructured 
Professional  Farmer  Organizations  (PFOs)  with  300  -  700  producers  per  organization.  PFOs  shall  be  managed 
professionally  by  qualified  staff  recruited  through  proper  testing.  FPO  shall  be  formally  registered  and  provided 
mentoring over short to medium term. An investment ranging between USD 70,000 and USD 100 000 is estimated 
to be required for each PFO to which 30% will be provided by members of FPOs whereas the remaining 70% will be 
contributed by the project. FPOs will use the funds to lend money to members for inputs/services and also provide 
support  for  improving  the  marketability  of  the  produce  by  aggregation,  grading,  processing,  packaging,  and 
certification—where needed generate best value for farmers. The PFO's net profit will be limited to the operational 
cost recovery to maximize profit for farmers. The average estimated net incremental income generated per farmer 
will be in the rage of USD 1000 – 2,000 per year. The component will also reorganize/modernize 45 Farm Service 
Centers (FSCs) that were established to organize farmers for better access to agriculture inputs and allied services.   
Agro Value Chain 4Ps. The project will establish 15 Producer Public Private Partnerships (4Ps)—each covering an 
estimated  1,000  producers.  For  this  purpose,  well-qualified  and  experienced  private  partner  shall  be  selected 
through  a  competitive  process  for  value  chain  development.  The  project  seeks  to  increase  average  income  of  a 
project beneficiary (farmer) USD 150 equivalent per month. The selected private firms—engaged on a 3-5 years 
contract, shall enable producers to meet the demand characteristics and requirements of the private company. The 
project shall provide financing for investment for this purpose. The 4Ps model will also be developed as a link to the 
PFOs under a contract farming modality. 
Component 2: Economic Graduation and Employment (USD 92.5 million) 
The target population is one that has a Poverty Score Card score between 0-23. The project will validate 
BISP data to ensure that only those who meet the PSC criterion are actually targeted. This component 
will  focus  on  creating  sustainable  livelihoods  for  the  target  beneficiaries.  It  is  estimated  that  about 
25,000 jobs will be created because of project activities involving PFOs, FSCs, and 4Ps. The project will 
work with KP TEVTA and Service Provider to impart target beneficiaries skills-based trainings, mentoring 
and financial assistance to generate self-employment for an estimated 60,000 beneficiaries.   
198 
The  beneficiaries  of  this  component  will  be  women  (50%)  and  youth  (50%)  who  will  undergo  skills 
development trainings at recognized institutes and be facilitated in finding jobs or starting business. An 
Implementing  Partner  shall  be  engaged  competitively  with  accountability  to  ensure  that  70%  of  the 
trainees under the component either find sustainable jobs or start business after six months of training. 
Trainees  that  want  to  start  business  shall  be  provided  some  seed  capital  and  management 
coaching/mentoring.  The  project  will  also  provide  internships  for  graduate  youths  to  facilitate  their 
transitioning to full time jobs subsequently.   
Component 3: Programme Management, Policy and Policy Support (USD 12 million) 
Based on previous good  experience, the project will  be placed under the Planning and Development 
Department. A Project Management Unit will be established at Peshawar and three Regional PMUs will 
also be set up in order to handle the distance / geographic coverage of the project. The PMU will report 
to the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The allocation includes the cost of the PMU and equipment 
(USD 10 million) plus USD 2 million for the policy support and MOU/equipment with the different line 
departments. 
D.  Objective of Assignment 
To  mitigate  fiduciary  risks  associated  with  project  activities  and  to  strengthen  internal  control  processes,  PMU  requires 
services of a Chartered Accountant Firm ("the firm") to conduct periodic Internal Audit of PMU activities for BES Project, 
systems and transactions. 
Purpose  and  Definition  of  Internal  Audit.  Internal  Audit  is  an  independent,  objective  assurance  and  consulting  activity 
designed  to  add  value  and  improve  an  organization's  operations.  Internal  Audit  helps  an  organization  accomplish  its 
objectives by bringing a systematic and disciplined approach to evaluate and improve effectiveness of risk management, 
control, and governance processes. 
Purpose  of  hiring  Internal  Auditor  is  to  help  project  accomplish  its  objectives  by  bringing  a  systematic  and  disciplined 
approach to evaluate and improve effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes. Project perceives 
that Internal Auditor shall: 
  provide assurance that financial and operational risks are understood and appropriately managed; 
  promote establishment of best practices; 
 
identify opportunities for pragmatic efficiency and effectiveness improvements, primarily in internal controls and 
risk analysis; 
  advise on matters regarding internal controls and risk management; 
  evaluate risk management procedures and internal controls; 
  provide comprehensive process assurance services. 
Professional Standards. Internal Auditor shall carry out its responsibilities in accordance with professional standards including 
those issued by Institute of Internal Auditors and International Federation of Accountants, internal auditor carrying out the 
assignment is expected to maintain highest standard of: 
Integrity:  Integrity  of  internal  auditor  exhibits  highest  level  of  professional  objectivity  in  gathering,  evaluating,  and 
communicating  information  about  activity  or  process  being  examined.  Makes  a  balanced  assessment  of  all  relevant 
circumstances and is not unduly influenced by its own interests or by others in forming judgements. 
Confidentiality:  Internal  auditor  respects  value  and  ownership  of  information  received  and  do  not  disclose  information 
without appropriate authority unless there is legal or professional obligation to do so. 
Competence: Internal auditor applies knowledge, skills, and experience needed in performance of assignment. 
199 
Authority  and  Independence:  Internal  Auditor  will  have  full,  free  and  unrestricted  access  to  project's  records,  physical 
properties, personnel and other entities relevant to an area under review. Internal Auditor will have no responsibility for or 
authority over any of activities or operations subject to its review. Internal Auditor shall not perform any operational duties, 
develop and install systems and procedures, initiate or approve accounting transactions, prepare records, or engage in any 
other  activity  which  it  would  normally  review  and  appraise  and  which  could  reasonably  be  construed  to  compromise  in 
appearance or fact, independence and/or objectivity of Internal Auditor. 
E.  Scope of Work and Responsibilities: 
Internal  Auditor  shall  provide  internal  audit  services  to  the  project.  Internal  Audit  of  project  will  be  carried  out  as  per 
approved internal audit plan agreed between project management and firm 
Scope  of  work of  Internal  Auditor  is to  determine  whether project's  risk  management,  controls,  and 
compliance processes,  as  designed  and  represented  by  management,  are adequate  and  functioning. 
Control frameworks are developed in compliance with GoKP Rules and Regulations, IFAD’s Guidelines 
as well as international standards such as Committee of Sponsoring Organizations model — COSO-ERM 
and ISACA's (Information Systems and Control Association) COBIT (Control Objectives for Information 
and related Technology). 
Internal Auditor should review that whether projects' control framework ensures that: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Risks are appropriately identified and managed. 
Significant financial, managerial, and operating information is accurate, reliable and timely. 
Employees'  actions  and  transactions  are  in  compliance  with  internal  policies,  standards,  procedures,  and 
external applicable laws and regulations. 
Resources are acquired economically, used efficiently, and adequately protected. 
Programs, plans, and objectives are achieved. 
Quality and continuous improvement are fostered in project's control process. 
Significant legislative and regulatory issues impacting project are recognized and addressed appropriately. 
Internal Auditor will carry out its responsibilities by: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Developing  an  Internal  Audit  plan  using  an  appropriate  risk-based  methodology,  including  any  risks  or  control 
concerns  identified  by  management,  external  auditor,  or  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC).  Agreeing  plan  with 
project director and submitting to PSC for review and approval. 
Executing Internal Audit plan, as approved and revised, from time to time. 
Performing  advisory  services,  beyond  assurance  services,  to  assist  management  in  meeting  project's  objectives, 
where  required.  (Clarification:  As  an  internal  auditor,  it  is  important  to  remain  independent  of  management 
operations and project implementation activities. IA firm can certainly add value and provide advisory to improve 
controls  design  and  overall  internal  controls  environment  that  may  assist  management  in  meeting  project’s 
objectives). 
Reporting suspected fraud, investigation of significant suspected fraudulent activities within the project, if any, and 
notify  PSC of results.(Exclusion: As  mentioned above, TORs requires  reporting suspected  frauds,  investigation of 
significant suspected activities within the project, if any, and notify the PSC of the results. While performing internal 
audit  procedures,  where  IA  firm  identify  instances  /  indicators  of  possible  fraudulent  activities,  red  flags  will  be 
reported to concerned / appropriate level with details noted based on information available. However, investigation 
200 
of any such fraudulent activity cannot be covered as part of current internal audit scope of work due to following 
reason: 
a. 
It is not practically possible to assess the nature of fraud and extent of work required to investigate the 
same.  
b.  Fraud  investigation  require  specific  competency  based  on  nature  of  fraud.  This  cannot  be  ascertained/ 
covered  under  current  scope  of  work. If there  are such  services required, these  can  be  provided  under 
separate arrangement). 
Communicating  results  of  Internal  Audit  and  recommendations  for  improvement  to  Project  Director.  Obtaining 
written management responses as to corrective action planned or taken within a specified time from issuance of 
audit reports. Evaluate and monitor disposition of proposed actions and their expected effectiveness. Instances of 
residual risk that may be unacceptable will be discussed with management and, if unresolved, reported to PSC. 
Physical  verification  of  a  sample  of  project  assets,  activities  and  outputs  in  districts  where  project  is  being 
implemented. 
Issuing internal audit reports to Project Director as well as PSC. 
Employing professional audit staff with sufficient knowledge, skills, experience, and professional certifications to 
carry out audit of project. 
Communicating  opportunities  for  improving  management  control,  functioning  and  organization  of  project  to 
management and PSC. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Control assurance activities performed Internal Auditor will include: 
  Reviewing reliability and integrity of financial and  operating information and how it is identified, measured, 
classified and reported. 
  Reviewing systems established to ensure compliance with laws and regulations. 
  Reviewing systems established to safeguard assets and, when appropriate, verifying existence of assets. 
  Appraising economical and efficient use of resources. 
  Evaluating adequacy and effectiveness of project's processes for controlling activities and managing risks. 
  Testing key financial reporting controls in identified financial systems and processes. 
 
Identifying significant risks to ability of project to meet its objectives, communicating them to management and 
ensuring that management has taken appropriate action to guard against those risks. 
  Performing early entry engagements to assist management in incorporating an adequate control structure in 
new systems and processes. 
  Reviewing  reports  of  external  auditor,  monitoring  compliance  against  recommendations  of  auditors  and 
reporting status to Additional Secretary (Development) and PCC. 
Key consideration to the scope of work 
Internal audit firm will assess the controls from design / improvement perspective and perform test of 
controls as per International Standards of Internal Auditing prescribed by Institute of Internal Auditors, 
USA.  A risk-based sampling methodology as prescribed by internal auditing standards issued by IIA shall 
be  followed.    However,  current  internal  audit  scope  does  not  cover  performing  any  financial  audits 
(providing  assurance  on  financial  reports  as  per  International  Auditing  Standards)  or  technical  / 
performance audits or impact assessments. 
1.  The IA firm shall obtain and rely on the information made available to us by the concerned management officials 
of the project. For such data basic sanity and consistency checks may be applied to ensure its reasonability and 
a  sample  may  be  selected  to  verify  some  of  the  transactions,  however,  any  intentional  or  unintentional 
errors/misreporting may not necessarily identified as a result.  
2.  The Internal audit firm will  be performed based on a sample transaction basis, which  may be selected  on  a 
judgmental and / or  random basis  depending on  nature  of  process being  audited.  There  would  always  be  a 
201 
sampling risk, that is sample selected may not be truly representative of population being tested. Hence all the 
issues may not be identified had entire population being tested.  
Implementation of the recommendations of internal audit shall be the responsibility of project management. 
Internal audit firm on a periodic basis shall perform a follow up audit and provide status of implementation to 
the management. 
Internal audit firm will not authorize, execute or consummate transactions or prepare any books of accounts 
or otherwise exercise any other authority on behalf of the project. 
Internal audit firm will not obtain / maintain custody of any assets. 
Internal audit firm will not act in any capacity equivalent to a member of management or an employee. 
Internal audit firm will not act as pre-auditor or pre-approver of the transactions or in any capacity equivalent 
to a member of management or an employee. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8.  Client  shall  provide  (or  cause  others  to  provide)  to  Consultant,  promptly,  the  information,  resources  and 
assistance (including access to records, systems, premises and people) that we reasonably require to perform 
the Services. 
9.  Timelines will be discussed for each internal audit execution and reporting at the time of internal audit planning 
and agreed/ defined in the internal audit plan. Timelines are subject to timely availability of the information/ 
meeting time by the project management.  
10.  Moreover, with respect to follow-up of the  DG audit comments, internal audit shall follow up on the points 
related  to  control  weaknesses  and  process  deficiencies  relevant  to  our  scope  and  period  of  audit.  Any 
transaction level points or rectification required or any investigation related to it, will not be part of our follow 
up scope. 
Project Activities / Processes where Internal Auditor should particularly focus include: 
Control Environment. Control environment risk factors incorporate management's attitude, awareness, 
and  actions  concerning  an  organization's  control  environment,  It  is  important  that  Internal  Auditor 
obtain  sufficient  knowledge  of  PMU  control  environment  to  determine  whether  collective  effect  of 
these factors establishes, enhances, or mitigates effectiveness of specific control techniques. In making 
this  determination,  Internal  Auditor  should  consider  PMU  managements'  philosophy  and  operating 
style, managements' monitoring of performance and compliance with laws and regulations. 
Financial Management .Internal Auditor shall perform a review of financial and internal control structure 
at  PMU and  report if  they  are in  accordance  with  international  standards  to determine  adequacy of 
existing controls related to management of all funds received by entities. Internal Auditor shall obtain 
sufficient  understanding  of  entities'  financial  management  system  and  provide  evaluation  of 
management control environment, accounting system and control procedures in order to determine 
adequacy of system to control and account for funds transferred to it. 
Procurement  Management.  Internal  Auditor  shall  review  project's  procurement  processes  with  an 
objective  to  provide  assurance  that  they  are  effectively  designed  in  accordance  with  Bank's 
procurement guidelines and are operating efficiently. This will involve review of project's procurement 
policies  and  procedures  for  procurement  planning,  avoidance  of  improper  business  practices  and 
conflicts of interest, competitive procurement, ordering procedures, invoice examination policies and 
procedures to ensure payments are made only for goods and services received. 
Contract Management.  Internal Auditor shall review project's processes for contract management and 
administration to provide assurance that all parties to contract fully meet their respective obligations as 
efficiently  and  effectively  as  possible,  delivering  business  and  operational  outputs  required  from 
contract and providing value for money. Internal Auditor shall carry out a detailed review of contract 
202 
administration functions such as inspection and acceptance, agreement modifications, disputes, proper 
accounting  and  termination  etc.  Internal  Auditor  will  also  liaise  with  External  Auditors  including 
provision of internal audit reports, discussion on project risks and compliance with recommendations. 
 Quality Assurance. Internal Auditor shall develop and maintain a quality assurance and improvement 
program  that  covers  all  aspects  of  Internal  Audit  activity  related  to  the  project.  This  should  enable 
evaluation of conformance of Internal Auditor activities with Institute of Internal Auditors International 
Professional Practices Framework (IPPF), Code of Ethics and best practices. 
F.  Reporting Arrangements 
For administrative and contractual matters, Internal Auditor shall liaise with Project Director. Envisaged 
reporting arrangements for internal auditor are summarized below: 
  Project Director 
Contractual matters including payment for internal audit services. 
- 
-  Discussion on level of risks, areas where management needs support and time allocations to prepare 
internal audit plan 
- 
Preparation and submission of internal audit plan for project. 
- 
Agreeing on dates and schedule for internal audit. 
- 
Submission of draft internal audit report. 
-  Discussion on draft internal audit report. 
- 
- 
- 
Submission of final internal audit report incorporating management comments. 
Reporting on follow-up of internal audit recommendations for project. 
Reporting on follow-up of external audit recommendations. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
G.  Deliverables & Payment 
Submission and approval of internal audit plan. 
Submission of internal audit reports. 
Attending meetings where internal audit reports are discussed. 
Follow-up on directives of PSC. 
Reporting on follow-up of internal audit recommendations. 
Reporting on follow-up of external audit recommendations. 
Consultant shall be entitled to fee on submission invoice along with relevant deliverables as per contract 
agreement. 
Percentage of fees 
60% 
40% 
Activity 
Upon submission of Draft Deliverables 
Upon submission of Final Deliverables 
In case of no management comments received on draft report within 2 weeks of submission of draft 
report, the draft report will be considered final for the purpose of raising final invoice. 
Out of pocket expenses (reimbursable) shall be billed on an actual basis (except for per-diem). The above 
mentioned  out  of  pocket  expenses  are based  on  estimated  time  and  cost  to  be  spent  by  our  team. 
Further it would comprise other expenses directly related to project execution. The amount proposed 
is the maximum ceiling for out of pocket expenses.  
203 
Further, Out of Pocket Expenses are for the work to be performed in KP, the expenses will be arranged 
/ reimbursed by KP-RETP. 
H.  Place of assignment 
Place of assignment is Peshawar Quetta, with field work as required. Internal Auditor shall provide an 
electronic copy and three (3) hardcopies of the each deliverable. 
Consultant’s Personnel 
Positions to be included in the proposals 
Engagement Partner 
# 
1. 
2.  Quality Assurance Lead 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Project / Internal Audit Manager  
Project / Audit Supervisor  
Senior Consultant / Team Members (02) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I.  Qualifications 
The firm must be registered with Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan (ICAP). 
The firm must be on Quality Control Rating (QCR) list of ICAP 
The firm must not be blacklisted or debarred by any government department. 
The firm must have an aggregate experience of not less than ten years in providing internal audit services in public/private sector. 
The firm must have undertaken 5 internal audit service assignments in the last five years. 
The firm must have undertaken at least one internal/external audit engagement of a project funded by IFAD, United Nations or the 
World Bank or ADB in the last 5 years.  
The  firm  shall govern  themselves  by  adherence  to  The  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors'  Code  of  Ethics.  The  Institute's  International 
Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing shall be adhered to by the firm.   
a)  The payment will be made quarterly upon the delivery of satisfactory quarterly report. 
Application Process 
a) 
Interested qualified firms are encouraged to apply for the above mentioned consultancy by sending the detailed CV along with the 
cover letter clearly mentioning (i) the position in the email/letter subject line, AND (ii) the expected daily consulting fee for the year  
to the following email address: 
b)  The deadline for the application is xx.xx.2019, day. 
204 
Annexure-22: Financial Tables for the Supervision Missions 
These financial tables are required for the supervision mission and they are placed as Appendix 2 to 
the Supervision Mission Report. IFAD has prescribed the format for these tables which is given 
hereunder for the guidance of the finance team.  
Appendix 2: 
disbursements by category 
Table 2A: 
Financial: Actual financial performance by financier; by component and 
Financial performance by financier 
(USD 
Appraisal 
‘000) 
Disbursements 
(USD ‘000) 
cent 
Per 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
Co-financier 
Government 
Total 
Table 2B: Financial performance by financier by component (USD ‘000) 
Co-financier 
Actua
l 
IFAD grant 
Actua
l 
IFAD loan 
Actua
l 
Compone
nt 
Apprais
al 
%  Apprais
%  Apprais
al 
al 
%  Apprais
Government 
Actua
l 
al 
%  Apprais
Domestic 1 
Actua
l 
al 
Total 
%  Apprais
al 
% 
Actua
l 
Table 2C: IFAD loan disbursements (SDR, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
Category 
Category description 
Original  
Allocation 
Revised  
Allocation 
Disbursement  W/A pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
Initial deposit 
Total 
Figure 1: 
IFAD loan/grant disbursement, comparisons between original and revised allocations and actual disbursement 
205 
Annexure-23:   Format for measuring compliance with legal covenants 
Supervision missions assess the extent to which a project has complied with applicable compliance requirements contained in the Financing 
Agreement, Letter to Borrower etc. 
The following table is part of the Supervision Mission Report as Appendix 3 
206 
Appendix 3:  Compliance with legal covenants: Status of implementation 
Target/Action 
Due Date 
Compliance 
Status/Date 
Remarks 
Section  
Section 4.02 
Section 4.02 
Section 4.03 
Section 4.04 
Section 4.05,  
section 11.10(b) 
Section 4.06  
Schedule 4,  
para 7   
Schedule 4,  
para 8(a) 
Schedule 4,  
para 16 
Covenant 
PCU to open and maintain a Project Account 
(in ...); GO? to make an initial deposit 
equivalent to USD ?????? 
GO? to replenish Project Account quarterly in 
advance 
Procurement of goods, works and services 
carried out in accordance with the 
procedures laid down in Schedule 3 
Insurance of vehicles, equipment and civil 
works financed from the loan proceeds to be 
consistent with sound commercial practice. 
Audit report submitted to IFAD. 
Progress reports to be submitted to IFAD on 
a quarterly basis. 
AWPB to be submitted to the Fund, for its 
review and comments 
A Mid-Term Review (MTR) to be carried out 
jointly by the Borrower and IFAD. 
Project to be exempted from all import 
duties, excise taxes and value added tax 
(VAT) on investment expenditures 
207 
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
1/14
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Moderate
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Substantial
Moderate
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
High
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
2/14
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Pakistan was one of the first countries to endorse SDG in 2015 when the
Parliament approved SDGs as the national development agenda. A major national
social safety net programme called Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP)
was initiated in 2008 which since its inception has been supported by successive
governments. The budgetary allocations for BISP have been increasing
consistently since the start of the programme despite fiscal constraints. The
Government in 2018 introduced a comprehensive multidimensional poverty
reduction strategy and launched a national poverty graduation Initiative called
“Ehsaas”. The Federal Government formulated a National Youth Development
Framework (NYDF) in 2020 which focuses on social, economic and political
empowerment of youth including skills development and youth entrepreneurship
through soft loans. An IFAD finance National Poverty Graduation Programme had
been included as integral part of Ehsaas. Under the strategy a new Ministry for
Social Protection and Poverty Alleviation was created which is mandated to devise
pro-poor policies and programmes and consolidate the existing policies and
programmes.
Mitigations:
To mitigate any risk, the IFAD country team will continue to support the
government’s efforts for agriculture, rural transformation and youth development.
The partnership with the government resulted in the provision of 34% government
contributions for scaling up and alignment with government poverty reduction,
youth men and women skill development and employment, value chain and climate
resilience agriculture development.
Governance
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
After the 18th amendment to the constitution in 2008 almost all key sectors related
to IFAD’s mandate and its administrative and fiscal responsibility are now provincial
subjects. However, challenges remain in the development of a strong system for
the delivery of development priorities in an efficient, equitable and transparent
manner and through participatory development approaches. There are striking
differences in resource allocation and management, availability of services and
local government systems, leading to disparities in the pace and level of
development across provinces and districts.
Mitigations:
3/14
The planning and development Department and Government line departments in
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa are generally well placed in terms of human resources,
technical and delivery capacity. However, financial constraints often result in sub-
optimal performance. The project will assist the Government in addressing
management and technical capacity gaps for improved and demand based service
delivery with focus on shifting service delivery and support system to the
community and the private sector. The project will particularly enhance capacity to
respond to climate change and risk reduction and to respond to the changing
demand for technologies for high value agriculture, value chain development and
market demand based vocational skills development and employability of youth.
The existence of a network of community organisations in the provinces,
engagement of NGOs as service provider for social mobilisation and participatory
development approach of the project will provide opportunities for inclusiveness,
equity and transparency.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The country’s macroeconomic situation has worsened since 2018, due to high
fiscal and current account deficits and low levels of reserves. The medium-term
growth outlook was forecasted to be impacted by COVID- 19. However, initial
estimates for FY 2020/21 indicate a GDP growth of 3.94%. This surprising
performance is attributed to smart lockdown policies, relief package for daily wage
workers and low income HHs, support for the industrial, trade and agriculture
sectors, cutting of policy rates etc. Some analysts estimate that since 2018, poverty
is likely to have increased by about 10 million persons due to economic challenges
and more recently owing to the COVID-19 pandemic
Mitigations:
The project will mitigate the effects of the macroeconomic situation and the COVID
19 impact on the target population with a strong focus on poverty reduction through
skill trainings and gainful employment opportunities for youth and value chain
approaches and through identified opportunities for encouraging the participation of
the private sector in the value chains.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Pakistan’s security environment has improved since 2014 as a result of concerted
counter terrorist and counter militant operations. The security situation in the
province is generally stable but remains unpredictable with a few terrorist-related
incidents recorded in the Newly Merged Districts (former FATA) of the province.
Out of 35 districts of the province, about 4-5 newly merged districts along the
border of Afghanistan remain unpredictable. Since 2014, a number of UN agencies
including UNDP, UNICEF, WFP, FAO and UNHCR and WHO are present in
Peshawar. International staff of UN agencies and diplomates are allowed to travel
to the province subject to authorisation/NOC by the federal and provincial
governments. 
Political Situation: Despite opposition attempts for a change in government, the
position of the ruling party is expected to be stable. Recently the current PM took
vote of confidence and has won the election of chairperson of the Senate. In view of
the somewhat effective containment of the COVID 19 impact and the recent GDP
growth, higher than expected, there is no immediate risk of any mass unrest.
Mitigations:
4/14
Security: The situation will be continuously monitored and appropriate mitigation
measures will be put in place if deterioration of security should emerge in any
district. The project will follow a phased approach and will have a mixed
implementation methodology including partnership/sub-contracts with local
organizations as well as direct implementation by project personnel where
acceptability of partners is an issue or securing clearance to operate remains a
challenge. 
UNDSS advisory will be followed and government security operates will be used for
districts with substantial risks. Additionally, the experience of IFAD indicates that
the engagement of local service providers for social mobilisation, a participatory
approach and strong involvement of community networks provide opportunities for
offsetting security risks to some degree. 
Political: Significant improvements have been made. Despite the the constraints
due to COVID 19, the current government has successfully mobilised the diaspora
to increase remittances, retired the highest ever foreign debts, improved the current
account deficit, and achieved a higher GDP growth than expected and released pro
poor policies and programmes. Agreements between donors and the
Pakistan/provincial governments are always owned and honoured by the
successive governments. The current government increased the pledge to the
IFAD Replenishment. Therefore, there is no risk to the project and its
implementation in case of change in government at Federal and Provincial level.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The project is well aligned with the federal and provincial government policies and
priorities and relevant SDGs. Project design and outcomes respond to the
Government’s poverty reduction strategy as announced in the National Poverty
Graduation Initiative called “Ehsaas” in 2019 and the National Youth Development
Framework (NYDF) of 2020. The project also responds to the provincial
government priorities for high value agriculture development through value chain
approach and youth and women development as articulated in relevant policies. 
There is, however, a notable risk of KP TEVTA not being able to design and deliver
the courses that would address the existing and emerging supply gaps in the
labour market. This could prevent the project achieving sustainable employment
targets that justify the investments in the first place. Since a new government will
take over after the election of 2023, there is also a risk of change in government
priorities subsequently.
Mitigations:
KP TEVTA shall be assisted to establish robust institutional arrangements to
conduct labour market assessments periodically and keep its course offerings
relevant to the demand of labour market. Also KP TEVTA shall be enabled to use
modern approaches for skills testing and certification—in collaboration with
NAVTEC, which is the highest regulatory body for technical and vocation education
in Pakistan. The PSC shall include all key stakeholders to ensure the issues of
labour market and employments are holistically discussed and followed up. IFAD's
IFAD’s past and on-going projects and programmes have supported and will
support government priorities notably for poverty reduction and agriculture
development. Generally, foreign funded project and commitments are not affected
with the change in government.
Policy Development and Implementation
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
5/14
Recognising its increased responsibilities after the 18th constitutional amendment,
the provincial government formulated policies for youth, women empowerment, and
agriculture. The agriculture policy is cognizant of the unique and diverse agro-
climatic conditions of the province which provides great potential for the
development of high value crops as well as the development of the livestock sector
through the value chain approach and private sector involvement. Youth
development policies, strategies and programmes gained focus during the last 10
years. However, a key challenge in Pakistan has been the execution of policies
including concrete actions, associating reforms and strategies and regulatory
frameworks etc.
Mitigations:
The project will provide support for effective implementation of the relevant parts of
the policies including the associating strategies, frameworks and capacity building.
The strategic interests of smallholder farmers and livestock holders, women, and
youth will be addressed by promoting their visibility through recognizing the critical
role that they play in the value chains and addressing their needs and priorities.
Market demand-based and competency-based trainings and focus of employability
will be introduced through capacity building for KP-TVETA. The project shall focus
on generating new, simple, and replicable approaches for policy implementation—
working collaboratively with all key stakeholders. This will ensure that the
successful approaches become visible and generate a strong traction for a wider
adoption and implementation by the provincial government.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Rural populations in the province are faced with inherent vulnerability to weather
related environmental conditions such as increased variability of monsoons, impact
of receding glaciers on the river systems, decreased capacity of existing water
reservoirs, and extreme events including floods and droughts. The provincial
government has a climate change policy and most climate-sensitive sectors have
climate-compatible medium term plans and budget—which also include
performance indicators and targets. Climate actions have been mainstreamed into
policy landscape largely with assistance from donors. However, the relevant line
departments i.e. agriculture, industry, livestock, etc. continue to lack technical
capacity to implement provincial government’s climate change agenda. Hence,
there is material risk that the line departments and other parties i.e. PFOs, FSCs,
Private Partners, and KP TEVTA etc. would not effectively mainstream climate
aspects in implementing project activities.
Mitigations:
The project will facilitate the provincial government in implementing the concept of
green development envisaged in the climate change policy. Some proposed
mitigation actions include the appropriate screening for climate smart agriculture,
food and fruit processing facilities and other subprojects to be proposed by the
PFOs, the promotion of sustainable land and water management practices, and the
capacity building of government staff and beneficiaries for risk reduction and for
building resilience. Provisions shall be included in the contractual agreements with
implementing partners to ensure compliance with climate action in project activities.
A Climate Change Specialist shall be part of the core team at PMU to ensure
oversight of project planning, execution, and reporting from climate change
perspective. Detailed guidelines shall also be included in PIM to facilitate the
process.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
6/14
The present and projected climatic patterns and trends for precipitation and
temperature indicate that seasonal variations in temperature and precipitation will
increase, resulting into more frequent and intensified extreme weather events. The
climate change induced impacts include severe water stress; food insecurity due to
decreasing agricultural and livestock production; the degradation of ecosystems
and biodiversity loss. However, most of the proposed activities under the project
are soft in nature and are not going to be substantially impacted by climate change.
Mitigations:
The project will ensure that climate change resilience is made a central factor in the
prioritization and selection of activities, in line with the provincial government’s
climate change policy. Support will be provided to equip the small holder farmers
with knowledge, skills, crop choices and practices in different locations and agro-
climatic condition to better cope with climate change induced challenges and with
the introduction and promotion of climate smart agriculture technologies and
services including efficient water use. The approval of interventions would be
subject to an environmental screening process to ensure that the construction does
not have any adverse social or environmental impact.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The main risk under component 1 are: weak capacities and business orientation of
farmer, limited access to finance for better technologies for the production and the
promotion of value added agri-processed products, weak services, absence of
facilitation for public private producer partnerships (4Ps). Under component 2. the
key risk is the outdated TVET curricula resulting in a strong disconnect between
the demand from various sectors for specific types of skilled labour and no focus on
employability. For the last three decades, the development of the province,
particularly NMDs, has been a high priority of the government, to offset the fallout of
conflict in Afghanistan and as well as to consolidate the recent peace and
development gains and to achieve the objective of a balanced regional
development of the Five Year Plan 2018-23.
Mitigations:
The project scope, approach and proposed activities were identified in consultation
with the federal and provincial governments and with reference to their
development priorities and are highly relevant to IFAD 11's business model and
corporate priorities. The project builds on evidence based lessons from IFAD
(SPPAP and ETI-GB) and other donor-financed projects and programmes. In line
with the priorities of the provincial government and IFAD, the transformation
potential of agriculture for enhanced incomes and employment will be pursued by
addressing the critical issues in the farm, off-farm and non-farm value chains,
including through professional and market oriented farmer organizations, private
sector engagement and access to financial services. 
Youth, men and women will be a priority target group. The project will provide an
opportunity for realizing the dividends of the “youth bulge” in terms of addressing
critical challenges related to human capital development. In view of the current
state of agriculture regarding productive employment and TVET challenges and
barriers to rural youth employment and business development, the project adopts a
multi- dimensional, coordinated and integrated approach to address diverse supply
and demand constraints and keeping in view the diverse regional level market
demands for labour. The project will specifically focus on youth employability for
employment and self employment/entrepreneurship in agriculture and other
emerging sectors in the province, through a range of activities tailored to the needs
and interests of different target youth groups. 
The institutional capacity gaps will be addressed through the reorientation of
existing government Farm Services Centres and the strengthening of the
agriculture extension and research services and TVET for the provision of demand
based services.
Technical Soundness
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
7/14
The project is technically robust and is based on lessons learnt. Component 1
benefits from the Pakistan (ETI-GB), the Sri-Lanka (NADEP/SAP) and the Asian
Pacific Farmer Programme (APFP Laos, Cambodia and Mongolia in particular).
Lessons from Pakistan (SPPAP) are fed into the design of component 2. One of the
potential risks that can be foreseen is that the innovative aspects of the project i.e.
improving the agriculture sector productivity and competitiveness through the
development of value chains and responding to climate change challenges and
community-centric service delivery, are hindered due to skills and capacity gaps
within the service providers and beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
The project design has been kept simple in terms of number, type and range of
activities as well as the implementation arrangements. The project will invest in
capacity building of beneficiaries and extension services. The project will create an
enabling environment for private sector involvement through farmers organisations,
improving the quantity and quality of crops and livestock and developing better
linkages with markets and value chain actors.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Substantial
Moderate
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Inherent institutional capacity risks are moderate in the province. The planning and
development department and line departments are reasonable well placed in terms
of management capacities and exposure to participatory development approaches.
However, start up delays are common and technical capacity and the skills level of
public service delivery institutions may pose a challenge for the implementation of
the projects approaches and interventions.
Mitigations:
As per IFAD experience, the project is well placed under the Planning and
Development Department which has a long history of planning and implementation
of multi-sectoral participatory development projects. A Project Steering Committee
headed by the Additional Chief Secretary of P&D Department, will provide the
policy level guidance, oversight, coordination and will take corrective actions where
warranted. The project management staff will be recruited on a competitive basis
from the public and private sector. 
To mitigate the risk of start up delays, assistance will be provided for the
formulation of the PC-I, parallel to the finalization of the project design so that the
PC-I is approved well in time. The IFAD country team will provide frequent
implementation support in the initial stage of the project. Additionally, adequate
resources have been provided for technical capacity building. Additionally,
adequate resources have been provided for policy support and capacity building for
Farm Services Centres, agriculture extension services and TVET for the provision
of demand based services 
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Owing to skills and capacity constraints, the M&E systems may not be well-
positioned to track performance in terms of outputs and instead focus on inputs,
thereby contributing to the project delivery risk.
Mitigations:
8/14
An M&E system will be developed to provide project management, the Government
and IFAD with reliable and timely information on project execution performance and
results and to ensure efficient and effective project implementation. The M&E
system will aim at: (i) Monitoring project execution (ii) Monitoring outreach and (iii)
measuring and evaluating project results and monitoring the critical assumptions
identified in the log frame. A Key element of the M&E system will be poverty
graduation tracking and participatory monitoring and evaluation. BISP PSC data will
be used as a benchmark to track the progress of poverty graduation of
beneficiaries.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
-Hiring process is subject to political interference. This may result in competent HR
not being selected and/or delays in recruitment. 
-Market for private enterprises that may want to become part of 4P arrangements is
thin and there is risk of qualified partners not being available/selected.
Mitigations:
I. Core staff of the PMU—Project Director, Finance Manager/FM Specialist, FM
Specialist, M&E Specialist should be engaged within eight (8) weeks of the date of
signing of the Financing Agreement. IFAD’s representative should take part in the
process of recruitment as an observer. 
ii. Well structured finance unit within the PMU that includes competent and qualified
staff who are capable of carrying out project financial management as per the fund
requirements. 
iii. Competent management—especially FM official should be hired in each PFO as
one of the access condition for IFAD funds; 
iv. Post-qualification due diligence of staff should be mandatory for private partners
to be engaged under P4R arrangements.All finance staff to undertake IFAD Online
Finance Management practices and procedures course. In addition to that, finance
staff should attend induction sessions on IFAD financial management requirements
as conducted by IFAD Finance Officer.
Project Budgeting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Component 2 (Economic Graduation and Employment) is the largest component of
the project. It is envisaged to be funded by the government through ongoing
projects. TEVTA is the major partner but it has very limited development budget
which can be a constraint. Second, it is not clear at this stage how the ongoing
schemes shall be identified and leveraged to achieve project outcomes. There is
also issue of role clarity vis-à-vis line departments i.e. agriculture, industries, social
welfare, local government etc. under this component which needs to be resolved
upfront.
Mitigations:
I. PMU should get the approval of AWPB & Procurement Plan through the PSC (by
30 April each year). 
ii. AWPB/Procurement Plans should be prepared in consultation with implementing
partners and these IPs should be supported by PMU/RPMUs to ensure proper
estimation of funding requirements in the AWPB 
iii. Roles and responsibilities of line departments with reference to such contribution
should be clearly stated in the notification/MOUs.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
9/14
Delays in the opening of account, ambiguities around the counterpart funding can
result in implementation difficulties for the project. The government contribution
shall comprise (a) “cash”—USD 9.1 million (23%) for payment of taxes and project
management costs; and (b) USD 31.3 million (77%) that will be leveraged from
ongoing development projects under the provincial Annual Development Plan. 
PFOs—which are implementing partners under component 1, need significant
handholding to be able to manage FM function properly. In the absence of a
competent FM function, the risk of funds not being used effectively is quite high.
This could significantly impair prospect of project delivery.
Mitigations:
I. Designated Accounts for the project will be opened within eight (8) weeks of the
date of signing of the Financing Agreement; 
ii. Access conditions for release of funds to FOs/IPs shall be clearly established in
MOUs/contractual agreements’. These conditions should be identified in the PIM
as well. 
iii. Counterpart Fund requirements shall be clearly established. A formal
MOU/Notification needs to be made by the provincial government for this purpose
clarifying what will be the counterpart inputs/activities and how they would be
measured and reported in project accounting system. 
iv. Checklists and timelines shall be established for release of payments against
different types of claims and shall be strictly adhered to.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Instances of non-compliance with applicable internal controls have been reported
by the Auditor General of Pakistan in recent audit reports and therefore specific
controls—established under Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual need to
be emphasized for compliance. Supervision missions should specifically examine
whether the project is in full compliance with these internal control requirements.
The M&E processes within P&DD are weak and provincial internal audit
arrangements don’t cover P&DD.
Mitigations:
I. Financial management procedures as part of the PIM need to be approved by the
PSC and shared with IFAD within eight (8) weeks of the date of the signing of
Financing Agreement; 
ii. No funds should be released to any PFO unless it meets all access conditions
i.e. dedicated account or separate ledger for tractability of project funds in a PFO’s
account (as appropriate), deposit of its share, engagement of competent FM official,
orientation training on accounting, record keeping, and financial reporting. 
iii. Post-qualification due-diligence should be carried out of all private partners
selected through a competitive process for 4P arrangements before they are
awarded contracts. 
iv. Specific internal controls such as monthly reconciliation of bank accounts,
maintenance of Fixed Asset Register on prescribed format, monthly budget vs
expenditure review etc. shall be mandatory. 
v. Internal Auditor shall review project transactions, processes, procedures, and
performance at least semi-annually to provide assurance regarding the fiduciary
controls, risk management and monitoring mechanisms in place. 
vi. FM manual needs to be finalized and the finance team exposed to related
IFAD’s requirements—including those relating to fraud risk awareness and
mitigation; the FM officials at FOs. 
vii. A system of Quarterly Progress/Financial Monitoring shall be institutionalized
covering all Implementing Partners.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
In several cases, IFAD projects not using appropriate accounting software ran into
financial reporting difficulties. The FM system also does not act as an effective
decision support system for the project. Project must procure an accounting
software the fully comply with IFAD’s accounting and financial reporting
requirements.
10/14
Mitigations:
I. An appropriate Accounting Software i.e. TOMPRO needs to be procured, installed
and the finance team trained in its use. Financial reports should be auto-generated
from the procured accounting software. 
ii. Integration of the PFOs/FSCs/Private Partners under 4Ps arrangements,
expenditures in the PMU accounting software. Relevant procedures to be identified
in the PIM. 
iii. PMU shall submit to IFAD; Quarterly Interim Financial Reports within 45-day of
period end, annual unaudited financial statements within 4-month of year end and
annual audited Financial Statements within 6-month of year end. 
iv. FM staff should be orientated to comply with IFAD’s requirements in their work—
including those relating to IFAD’s Anti-corruption policy.
Project External Audit
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Delays in submission of audit reports, weak-follow up with audit office resulting in
backlog of audit findings, non-resolution of audit findings causing the amounts
involved in those audit findings to convert into ineligible expenditure
Mitigations:
I. PMU needs to engage with Director General Audit (KP), through P&DD for timely
completion of audit. Scanned copies of the final audit report are encouraged to be
sent as soon the report is ready to ensure on-time submission and to avoid delays
resulting from mail services. Then the hard copy can follow to IFAD ICO in
Islamabad. 
ii. Audit observations should be settled within six (6) months after the Audit Report
has been shared with the P&DD to avoid backlog of unresolved audit findings. 
iii. Follow up meetings with the Auditors should be requested to settle any unsettled
audit findings from previous years.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The legal and regulatory framework exists in the form of Public Procurement Rules
of the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority of Pakistan and the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Public Procurement of Goods, Works and Services Rules of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Public Procurement Authority (KP-PPRA) for ensuring compliance to
its various provisions and rules. The KP-PPRA only exercises regulatory functions,
and procurement entities/projects are responsible to undertake the procurement.
Inadequate capacities often lead to non compliance of rules and delays in
procurement.
Mitigations:
As per IFAD general conditions for financing, the procurement of goods, works and
services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the KP-PPRA
procurement regulations, to the extent that such are consistent with the IFAD
Procurement Handbook and Guidelines 2019. The PIM will contain clear indication
of rules, regulations, policies and procedures to be adopted in order to ensure
compliance with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines.
Accountability and Transparency
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Risks related to Accountability and Transparency include: slow procurement
processing and decision making with potential implementation delays; unclear
defined roles in the contract management system with potential time and cost
overrun and poor-quality deliverables.
11/14
Mitigations:
IFAD will ensure the compliance of procurement principles as per IFAD’s
procurement handbook and guidelines through implementation support, monitoring
and prior review thresholds. The IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption
in its Activities and Operations shall apply to the project procurement processes.
Accountability for following the expedited approval processes and assigning staff
with responsibility of managing each contract will be maintained and ensured
through oversight by the IFAD country team in close coordination with the
borrower’s oversight agencies.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Generally there are limited capacities in administration, and the management of
contracts leading to mis-procurement and delays
Mitigations:
Qualified and experienced procurement staff, including a Procurement Specialist
and a Contract Monitoring Officer, will be recruited to carry out procurement
activities. The staff will be provided focused training and assistance by the IFAD
country office for capacity building.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk that delays in the the initiation and the completion of procurement
processes, due to inefficient planning, bidding, contract award and contract
management, may result in negative implications for project implementation
performance and cost overruns.
Mitigations:
The prevailing government rules and acts for public procurement generally conform
to the IFIs', including IFAD’s, procurement guidelines. The expedition of all stages
of the procurement process for timely completion, compliance and oversight of
procurement process, will be ensured and hands-on implementation support will be
provided through implementation support missions by IFAD.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
There is a moderate risk of, or threat to the loss of biodiversity, availability of
diversified nutritious food, ecosystems and ecosystem services, or the
unsustainable use/production of natural resources.
Mitigations:
The project is unlikely to have any adverse impact on biodiversity in the project
area. The project will invest in eco friendly infrastructure and support the
introduction of climate smart and sustainable technologies for agriculture and
livestock. Communities will be consulted and sensitised on the need to conserve
biodiversity and will be engaged in all such efforts.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
There is a low risk of causing pollution to air, water, and land, and of inefficient use
of natural resources that may threaten people, ecosystem services and the
environment.
12/14
Mitigations:
To mitigate any risk, the project plans to invest in various measures that will
promote resource efficiency. These include efficient water use technologies for
agriculture production, sustainable livestock production systems and climate and
social risks mitigation actions.
Cultural Heritage
no cultural heritage sites in the project area
Indigenous People
no presence of indigenous people
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
The risk that the project may cause exploitative labour practices like in-kind
community contributions of labour left to the chronically, extreme and vulnerable
poor (BISP Poverty Score Card Category 0-16) at the expense of their wage
earning opportunities
Mitigations:
The risk will be mitigated, as practiced in other IFAD financed project, through
exempting the chronically, extreme and vulnerable poor (BISP Poverty Score Card
Category 0-16) from any cash or in kind contributions.
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
There are no envisaged risks of significant negative impacts on community health
and safety. In fact, the project expects to have several positive impacts through
climate smart and sustainable agriculture technologies, including the promotion of
IPM and reduced use of pesticides. The project interventions are also expected to
result in greater availability of high nutrition value foods in households and
communities, which are a key driver of health. Exposure to spread of COVID 19 in
group meetings and training may pose a minor risk.
Mitigations:
For COVID 19, mitigation measures will include awareness creation and
sensitisation for social distancing, wearing of masks etc.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
n/a
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
The risk of any significant increase of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
thereby of contributing to anthropogenic climate change is minimal.
13/14
Mitigations:
No specific mitigation measures are required.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Pakistan is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world as a huge portion of
its population depends on the on farm and off farm sectors. The effects of climate
change are being felt in rural areas in and across ecosystems with adverse
impacts on natural resources and the livelihoods that they support. This exposure
to vulnerability is predicted to be exacerbated with impending impact of climate
change. Declining water availability and soil degradation is impacting agriculture at
a time when demand for agricultural products continues to rapidly rise due to
population growth and improving diets. The poor are likely to be hit hard by climate
change, and their capacity to respond to 
climate change is lowest.
Mitigations:
To reduce exposure to the inherent risks, the project will promote production
technologies that reduce exposure to increased variability as well as investments
in water resources management. Awareness raising and building resilience,
particularly among the poor, will be a key capacity building intervention.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Stakeholder engagement and coordination risks are low as the project will use the
successfully tried and tested institutional arrangements for stakeholder consultation
and coordination among and between implementation agencies and stakeholders.
The province has long history of implementation of donor funded participatory
integrated development projects
Mitigations:
The project design and its institutional arrangements are based on extensive
discussions with government and on lessons learnt. Key stakeholders include the
government planning and development and line departments, NGOs/Rural Support
Programmes, existing community organisations/groups and private sector engaged
in agriculture value chains. The Project Steering Committee will facilitate the
provincial level coordination and mechanisms have been put in place at
operational/field level for inter departmental, NGOs/RSPs, private sector and
community level coordination.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
There is a minimum risk related to the selection of the target group and the
participation of poor, smallholder farmers, women and youth in the project activities.
Mitigations:
14/14
The selection of the target group and households, particularly the extreme,
chronically and vulnerable poor, will be guided by the BISP Poverty Scorecard. A
national Poverty Score Card based on Proxy Mean Testing was developed for the
identification of poor households eligible for unconditional cash transfer. IFAD
introduced this accurate and reliable targeting tool in the country which has a
hallmark for targeting strategies for poverty reduction and smallholder agriculture
development and is being adopted across the country by government and donors.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk is low as the participatory development approach warrants that
beneficiaries, target groups and stakeholders can lodge grievances and have
corrective measures taken by the project.
Mitigations:
The tried and tested participatory development model prevailing in the province and
beneficiary feedback mechanisms through regular community organisations
conferences and participatory M&E are affective tools for grievance redressal and
corrective measure by the project. Additionally, most parts of the province has a
traditional alternative dispute resolution system called Jirga for individual and
community level grievance redressal and dispute resolution. However,
environmental and social policies related complaints can be registered in writing by
post or by email with PMU and Regional Project Management office who will
examine and resolve the issue to the satisfaction of complainant within two weeks.
Any project level grievance is not foreseen as it is being developed with the
involvement of the KP government and project interventions will be implemented
through community participation. However, in case of any issue during
implementation, PMU and Project Steering Committee will be the right fora for its
resolution. The complaint will have to be registered with PMU who will collect the
required information, listen to the concerned parties and dispose of the complaint
per merit within three weeks or refer it to PSC who will review it in detail and
decided it within four weeks. Complaints can also be registered with IFAD by email
(SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org) for a fair and timely resolution through an
independent process
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Exit strategy – KP-REAP  
The theory of change is based on the premise that a market-driven approach will best help 
smallholders to sustainably increase their income and improve their livelihoods. Further, when this 
approach is mainstreamed into the delivery of technical and vocational trainings, it generates 
employable workforce which readily meets unmet labour demand. The project creates and exploits 
the symbiotic relations between the demand and supply forces and focuses on institutional/capacity 
development to ensure safe exit and the sustainability of project outcomes as briefly described 
below:  
- 
- 
The smallholders—organized into Professional Farms Organization (PFOs) as legal entities 
will generate demand for inputs/services (including microfinancing)—based on clearly 
thought-out business plans, whereas the existing Farm Services Centres—transformed into 
commercial entities, will become the suppliers these inputs/services. Registered PFOs will 
have more bargaining power and a greater capacity for market penetration. Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4Ps)—created for agribusiness value chains development, will be 
linked with these PFOs and the FSCs, shall work collaboratively to enable smallholders/PFOs 
to optimize yield and quality of their produce per acceptable standards. This will—in turn, 
give smallholders a fair price for their effort.  
Institutional capacity at KP TEVTA to conduct labour market assessment and design market-
responsive courses shall be enhanced.  The project would train about 25,000 people for new 
jobs at new entities i.e. PFOs, 4Ps, and FSCs that would continue requiring these people 
beyond the project’s life. All technical and vocational trainings shall be based on labour 
supply gaps and where viable—complemented with start-up capital to enable trainees to 
have sustainable self-employment. Further, trainees shall be linked with government’s low-
cost microcredit programs i.e. Kamyab Jawan Program to facilitate further business 
development/expansion as appropriate. Fresh graduates shall be facilitated to get 
internships with potential employers under contracts which would require the latter to offer 
regular jobs upon the completion of the internships. Most fresh graduates don’t get jobs 
because their degrees don’t prepare them for the job market. The internship opportunity 
would address this gap. The government is committed to replicating this internships-led-
sustainable-job-creation model once it shows impact.    
-  All MOUs/contracts with partner organizations shall establish requirements of   market 
study, proper business planning—with clear breakeven point and profitability of the 
institutions supported, rigorous oversight and reporting. In case of technical/vocational 
trainings, the requirement of facilitating trainees in finding jobs shall be included in 
contractual arrangements with the service providers. Most project interventions—by design 
are co-financed by beneficiaries (FPOs, 4Ps, NFSs, internships for job placement etc.). As a 
result, all partner organizations will contribute to the sustainability of project outcomes.  
The specific strategy for successful exit under component 1 revolves around 3 main elements 
namely 1) establishment/restructure of autonomous new farming service centers (NFCS) 2) 
establishment of self-sustain 4P partnerships and 3) gradual transformation of newly 
established/restructured FPOs. All three (3) elements are interlinked and the success of the exit 
strategy depends on the coherence and interdependence between each element during subsequent 
implementation. 
Under first element, the establishment/restructure of autonomous NFSCs, it’s a pre-requisite that 
the established NFSCs would run as independent entities with a professional management. Ideally, 
the NFSCs should run as private sector entities and the role of PMU is to empower the established 
entities as much as possible to develop a self-functional structure (Administration, finance and 
operation) to build greater autonomy. Therefore, the recruitment of professional staff is key for the 
development of such autonomous structure as NFSC will play an integral role in procurement & 
delivery of quality inputs/services and market linkages/coordination etc. It’s expected that NFSCs to 
handle all transactions with respective FPOs through bank accounts which would develop a healthy 
credit history with banks/financial institutes. Such mechanism would enable them to obtain financial 
services through banks even after the project period which highlights the gradual transformation in 
to formal banking sector. Further, PMU would encourage those individuals whom have completed 
the training under component 2 (Skill development & employment promotion) to take up specific 
roles under NFSCs & FPOs to create more ownership and loyalty towards such roles.  
Similarly, FPOs would be strengthened through a capacity development program to ensure those 
entities would possess greater bargaining power and to perform better under business related 
partnerships or even 4Ps. As in the case of NFSCs, the established FPOs will develop a strong credit 
history with financial institutes as they continue to conduct transactions with NFSCs and prospected 
buyers which would enable them to access formal lending facilities upon completion of the project. 
In addition, the FPOs will be able to develop a substantial revolving fund within the entity itself by 
expanding their member base and to continue the lending operation as multi-purpose cooperatives. 
Moreover, PMU would assist FPOs to develop their own identity/brand through the proposed 
training support by service providers which would create strong presence/demand in respective 
markets.  
Finally, the establishment of 4Ps will promote establishment of rural infrastructure (Collection 
centers, dryers etc.) in villages as private sector may invest in such facilities to streamline their 
supply/value chain activities. PMU would encourage FPOs or even NFSCs to involve in management 
of such facilities with the support of private sector promoters on a commission/equity based 
sustainable models. This would enable technology transfer from private sector to grass root levels in 
a healthy manner. In addition, it’s expected that farmers, FPOs and NFSCs would develop greater 
understanding during the implementation of those 4Ps which would develop loyalty and trust 
among respective partners to continue the partnership even after project period. Further, the 
strategy promotes continuous engagement in provincial government support through 
extension/R&D activities where partners will be able to access laboratory facilities, new germplasms 
on a continuous basis through memorandum of understanding (MOU) between NFSCs/4P promoters 
which would run even after the project period.  
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
1/1
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies, strategies and
 National youth policies, strategies and
 National nutrition policies, strategies and
actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
actors
actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and opportunities by youth
 Key nutrition problems and underlying
causes, by group
 Key livelihood problems and
group
opportunities, by gender
 Nutritionally vulnerable beneficiaries, by
group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives (empowerment,
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
voice, workload)
empowerment
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Policy engagement on GEWE
 Youth employment included in project
outcomes and impacts
objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Women are > 40% of outreach
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index (IE.2.1)
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one of
below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index in
M&E budget
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth activities
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition activities
IFAD Adaptation Finance
$13,548,000
IFAD Mitigation Finance
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$13,548,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
This project is gender mainstreamed and not marked as gender transformative
Nutrition
TORs for nutrition partner will be prepared
Youth
TORs for youth expertise in the PMU will be developed
☐ No social inclusion themes
Pakistan
KP Rural Economic Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: ESMF
Mission Dates:
5 to 14 April 2021
Document Date:
08/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002333
5791-PK
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Pakistan 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa – Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Document Date:        
Project No. 
[Insert project number] 
Report No: 
[Insert report number] [If not final PDR delete line] 
Asia and Pacific Region 
Programme Management Department
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
= PKR 
=154 PKR 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
i
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
ADP 
BISP 
EAD  
EPA 
EU 
FAO 
FATA 
IFAD 
KM  
Km 
KP 
MTR 
NGO 
NMD 
NPGP    
NRSP   
P&D 
PIM  
PMU 
Annual Development Programme 
Benazir Income Support Programme 
Economic Affairs Division 
Environmental Protection Agency 
European Union 
Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas  
International Fund for Agricultural Development  
Knowledge Management 
Kilometer 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Mid-Term Review  
Non-Government Organization 
Newly merged districts 
National Poverty Graduation Programme 
National Rural Support Programme  
Planning & Development Department 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Project Management Unit  
PPAF    
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund 
PRA  
PME 
PSC  
RSP  
SDGs    
SECAP  
SMP 
SRSP 
Participatory Rural Appraisals 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation System  
BISP Poverty Scorecard 
Rural Support Programme  
Sustainable Development Goals 
Social, Environment and Climate Assessments in Project 
Social Mobilization Partner 
Sarhad Rural Support Program 
UNDP    
United Nations Development Programme 
USD 
WFP 
United States Dollar 
World Food Progamme 
ii
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
Table of Contents 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS ........................................................................................................................ I 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES ........................................................................................................................ I 
1: INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA ................................................................................................................................... 6 
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY ..................................................................................................... 9 
2: PROJECT OVERVIEW ...........................................................................................................................11 
KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA – RURAL EMPLOYMENT AND AGRIBUSINESS PROMOTION ...............11 
COMPONENTS/OUTCOMES AND ACTIVITIES ................................................................................................ 11 
PROJECT COST ESTIMATES ...................................................................................................................12 
PROJECT RISKS.....................................................................................................................................12 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................................................12 
3: THE LEGISLATIVE, REGULATORY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK.......................................14 
NATIONAL AND PROVINCIAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS ....................................................14 
PAKISTAN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT 1997 ..........................................................14 
PAKISTAN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REVIEW OF IEE AND EIA 
REGULATIONS 2000 ............................................................................................................................14 
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS ............................................................15 
NATIONAL WATER POLICY 2018 ...................................................................................................15 
NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY 2012 .............................................................................15 
CLIMATE CHANGE ACT 2017 ............................................................................................................16 
FOREST ACT 1927 ................................................................................................................................16 
LAND ACQUISITION ACT 1894 .......................................................................................................16 
ANTIQUITY ACT 1975 ........................................................................................................................16 
RESETTLEMENT POLICY .....................................................................................................................16 
NATIONAL CULTURE POLICY 2018 ...............................................................................................17 
PAKISTAN PENAL CODE 1860 .........................................................................................................17 
COOPERATIVES SOCIETIES ACT 1925 .........................................................................................17 
CONSTITUTION, ACTS AND RULES ON LABOR .........................................................................17 
OBLIGATIONS UNDER INTERNATIONAL TREATIES ...............................................................17 
IFAD ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS ..............................................................24 
IFAD POLICY ON AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ............................................24 
IFAD GENDER AND TARGETING POLICY.....................................................................................25 
IFAD GUIDELINES ON SECAP ..........................................................................................................26 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK........................................................................................................36 
4: SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..............................................................................38 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..........................................38 
5: POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS ....................................................40 
iii
Pakistan - Rural Economic Transformation Project 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS ..................................................................................40 
6: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS .................................................44 
6.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................44 
6.2 
SUB-PROJECT SELECTION AND SCREENING ................................................................44 
EXCLUSION LIST ..................................................................................................................................50 
APPROVAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL WORK ..........................................................50 
QUARTERLY AND ANNUAL MONITORING AND REVIEWS ....................................................50 
7: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN ......................................................52 
ANNEXURE 1.    SUMMARY OF IFAD GUIDANCE STATEMENTS. .........................................68 
iv
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
1: INTRODUCTION 
Pakistan is a lower-middle income country with a per capita income of US$ 1,6411 and 
an estimated GDP of USD 314 billion. The services sector (61 per cent) is the largest 
contributor to the economy, followed by industry (20 per cent) and agriculture (19 per 
cent). The latter absorbs 42 percent of labour force, generates important source of 
foreign exchange earnings and stimulates growth in other sectors. The Government of 
Pakistan (GoP) is focusing on supporting small and marginalized farmers to increase the 
productivity of high value niche crops and livestock, foster agribusiness development 
through value chain approach, access to financial services and improve climate resilience 
of small farmers.  
Pakistan’s  economy  has  been  hit  by  the  COVID  19  pandemic  and  the  country’s  GDP  is 
estimated  to  experience  a  negative  0.38  percent  growth  in  FY20  compared  to  a  pre-
COVID19 growth of more than 5.8% in 2018 and 5.6% in 2017. This is the 2nd contraction 
in  decades  and  reflects  the  effects  of  COVID-19  containment  measures  that  followed 
monetary  and  fiscal  tightening  prior  to  the  outbreak.  Economic  growth  is  projected  to 
remain below potential, averaging 1.3 percent for FY21-22. 
Pakistan is the sixth most populous country in the world with a population of 207 million 
and  expected  to  reach  280  million  by  2030.  Currently,  63  percent  of  the  population  is 
below the age of 30. Pakistan has the 9th largest labour force in the world with almost 4 
million youth attaining working age every year. Pakistan’s youth unemployment is higher 
than other South Asian countries like India, Bangladesh and Nepal. Enrolment in Pakistan’s 
specialised  Technical  Vocational  Education  and  Training  (TVET)  sector  remains  low  (13 
percent of total youth) despite high demand for skills training among both genders.  
Women  in  rural  areas  of  Pakistan  are  considerably  disadvantaged  with  respect  to 
disparities in access to resources, services and rights. The Global Gender Gap Index report 
of 2020 ranked Pakistan 151 out of the total 153 countries. Around 37% of the households 
(HHs) in the country are considered food insecure2.  Pakistan is 'on course' to meet two 
targets for maternal, infant and young child nutrition (MIYCN). Pakistan has made some 
progress towards achieving the target for stunting, but 37.6% of children under 5 years 
of age are still affected, which is higher than the average for the Asia region (21.8%).  
A 2008 nationwide poverty survey, being updated since 2017, established a national well-
being  registry,  to  target  the  most  vulnerable,  ranking  HHs  on  a  scale  from  0  to  100 
(Poverty  Score  Card).  Appendix  1  describes  the  typology  of  poverty  bands  and  related 
score card ratings. Per the registry definitions, the corresponding IFAD target groups in 
Pakistan  are  within  the  band  scale  of  0  to  40  or  around  100  million  people.  Ehsaas3 
programme is the biggest safety net programme in the world, providing unconditional cash 
transfers  to  the  most  vulnerable  5  million  people. Pakistan  continues  to  face  significant 
human development challenges with an HDI rank of 152nd out of 189 countries 
 Table 1 gives the gender and rural-urban divide as per 2017 census. Males make about 51 
percent of the total population while females are a bit less than 49 percent. More than 63 
percent  people  have  been  living  in  rural  areas  and  about  36  percent  make  the  urban 
population.  According  to  UNDP,  about  64  percent  of  the  population  is  younger  than  30 
years out of which  29 percent makes the age group of 15 to 29 years  
1 Economic Indicators 2019/2020, Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan 
2 National Nutrition Survey 2019. 
3 National Poverty Graduation Initiative (NPGI) locally named as Ehsaas (meaning sentiment/empathy in Urdu 
language). 3 Economic Indicators 2019/2020, Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan 
3 National Nutrition Survey 2019. 
3 National Poverty Graduation Initiative (NPGI) locally named as Ehsaas (meaning sentiment/empathy in Urdu 
language 
5 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Table 1. Population of Pakistan with details of male-female and rural-urban divide as per 2017 census.5 
Unit 
Total population (million) 
Total of Pakistan 
Male 
Female 
No. 
Percent of 
No. 
Percent of 
No. 
Percent of 
total 
Pakistan 
207.77 
Rural 
132.19 
63.62 
Urban 
75.58 
36.38 
106.45 
67.30 
39.15 
total 
51.23 
32.39 
18.84 
101.31 
64.89 
36.43 
total 
48.76 
31.23 
17.53 
Literacy in Pakistan.  The overall literacy rate improved from 58 percent in 2015-16 to 
60 percent in 2018-19 where overall male and female literacy rate was 71 and 49 percent, 
respectively. Urban literacy rate has reached 74 percent as compared to the rural areas 
rate of 51 percent. Rural male population was 65 percent literate while urban males were 
80 percent in 2018-19. Rural women literacy rate was 38 percent which was much lower 
than 67 percent of men (Economic survey of Pakistan 2018-19). 
Poverty in Pakistan.  According to estimates of Ministry of Planning and Development in 
2017, about 24% of Pakistan’s population lived below the national poverty line; comprising 
of 31% in rural areas and 13% in urban areas. Like almost every country around the globe, 
Pakistan’s economy suffered in 2020. The GDP growth rate for fiscal year 2019–20 was –
0.4 per cent — the first time it fell negative in seven decades. Per capita income fell from 
US$1625 to US$1325. COVID-19 closures and lockdowns to limit the spread of the virus 
are also contributing to growing unemployment and poverty. 
Youth.  About 64 percent of Pakistan population is below the age of 30 while 29 percent 
ages between 15 and 29 years which makes it one of the youngest country in the world 
and second in south Asia after Afghanistan. Regarding literacy, 29 percent young people 
are illiterate and only 6 percent have more than 12 years of education. While, 39 percent 
are  employed  (32  of  them  males  and  7  females),  57  of  100  youth  (16  males  and  41 
females) are neither working nor seeking jobs, and only 4 percent are unemployed and 
actively  looking  for  work    (  http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/unleashing-potential-young-
pakistan#) . 
Pakistan is an agricultural country where about 47 percent of the people are dependent on 
agriculture, however, its total contribution to the economy is about 19 percent followed by 
industry 20 percent while the services sector is contributing 61 percent. Around 64% of 
the  population  lives  in  rural  areas  mostly  depending  on  agriculture.    The  incidence  of 
poverty has decreased in these areas from 41 to 39 percent during the period 2015-16 to 
2018-19 at the national level4 (SPDC, January 2021). In terms of absolute numbers, five 
million persons have been added in the population below the poverty line during the period 
2015-16 and 2018-19. Close to 73 million persons were estimated poor during the year 
2015-16, while the estimated poor population was 78 million in 2018-19. 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Population of KP. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is the third most populated province of Pakistan 
after Punjab and Sindh. Recently, the erstwhile Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) 
4 Updating Pakistan’s Poverty Number for the year 2019, Social Policy and Development Centre (SPDC) Karachi-Pakistan, 
Jan. 2021 (Online at https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/105135/ MPRA Paper No. 105135, posted 15 Jan 2021 
01:15 UTC) 
6 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
mostly bordering Afghanistan  have also  been  merged  in the  province  leading  to  overall 
increase in area as well as population. Based on 2017 census, the total population of KP 
before merger of FATA was 30.52 million, out of which more than 81 percent was living in 
rural areas and about 19 percent was living in cities (Table 2). Total population of merged 
areas was 5.0 million mostly comprising of rural areas (97 percent). 
About 50.67 percent people are male and 49.32 percent are female while a small fraction 
is transgender in KP. Merged areas had more male population than KP in 2017. Around 
51.11 percent were males and 48.89 percent were females in merged areas. The urban 
division between male and female population in merged areas is more pronounced than 
KP. About 5 percent more males than women are living in cities of merged districts (Table 
2).  
Table 2. Population of KP, merged areas and combined based on 2017 census. 
Unit 
Total population (million) 
Percent population 
Male 
Female  Transgender  Total  Male 
Female 
Total 
Khyber 
15.468  15.055 
0.000913 
30.52
50.675 
49.322 
Pakhtunkhwa 
3 
Rural 
12.495  12.298 
0.000223 
24.79
50.397 
49.602 
81.229 
4 
Urban 
2.972 
2.757 
0.00069 
5.730 
51.877 
48.111 
18.771 
Merged areas  2.556 
2.445 
0.000027 
5.002 
51.109 
48.891 
Rural 
Urban 
2.482 
2.378 
0.000027 
4.860 
51.069 
48.930 
97.163 
0.074 
0.067 
0 
0.142 
52.469 
47.531 
2.837 
Grand 
total 
18.024  17.500 
0.001 
35.52
50.736 
49.261 
(KP  +  merged 
areas) 
Rural 
5 
14.977  14.676 
0.000 
29.65
50.507 
49.492 
83.472 
4 
Urban 
3.047 
2.824 
0.001 
5.872 
51.891 
48.097 
16.528 
7 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Figure  1  shows  the  combined  population  of  KP  and  merged  areas  where  83.5  percent 
people were living in rural eras and only 16.5 percent were in urban centers. Overall, 
urban female population is comparatively less than rural areas. 
KP--PERCENT POPULATION
9
2
2
.
1
8
3
6
1
.
7
9
2
7
4
.
3
8
1
7
7
.
8
1
7
3
8
.
2
8
2
5
.
6
1
R U R A L
U R B A N
R U R A L
U R B A N
R U R A L
U R B A N
K H Y B E R   P A K H T U N K H W A
M E R G E D   A R E A S
G R A N D   T O T A L   ( K P   +  
M E R G E D   A R E A S )
Figure 1. Graphical presentation of KP population with male-female and rural-urban 
comparison based on 2017 census. 
Education and literacy. The Pakistan Social and Living Standard Measurement Survey 
(PSLM)  2019-20  shows  that  56  percent  children  in  KP  excluding  merged  areas  and  54 
percent including merged areas attended school while literacy rate was 55 and 53 percent 
with and without merged areas, respectively. According to the survey, overall youth, aging 
between 15 and 24 years, literacy rate was 67 percent, out of which 81 percent was in 
urban areas and 65 percent in rural. Male and female literacy rate was 85 and 49 percent, 
respectively. 
Poverty in KP. Like the rest of the country, poverty had also been declining in KP since 
2010  but  the  trend  has  been  reversed  recently.  The  Household  Integrated  Economic 
Survey  (HIES)  of  2018-19  showed  that  poverty  had  increased  in  KP  where  36  percent 
population was poor in 2018-19 as compared to 27 percent in 2015-16. The incidence is 
higher  in  urban  than  rural  areas.  Poverty  has  increase  by  about  11  points  in  cities  as 
compared to 8.5 points in villages and small towns (Table 3).  Similarly, overall vulnerability 
to poverty has also increased from 54 percent in 2015-16 to 59 percent in 2018-19 in KP. 
Again, vulnerability to poverty is also higher in urban areas than urban. 
Gender.  Women  population  in  KP  is  a  bit  less  than  half  but  their  involvement  in 
economically productive activities is quite poor and the story starts from the beginning. 
Girls  enrollment  both  in  government  as  well  private  schools  was  34percent  against  66 
percent  of  boys  in  2014-15.  Out  of  12  percent  school  children  in  2015,  only  4  %  were 
girls. KP’s 80 percent population is rural where women are largely confined to domestic 
labor,  animal  husbandry  and  agriculture  work,  though  their  degree  of  involvement  in 
formal  and  informal  labor  markets  varies  from  district  to  district.  In  2014,  only  44,124 
women (17 percent) out of 256,486 men were in government service in KP. The proportion 
of women working in the informal economy has increased significantly from 66 percent in 
2003–2004  to  73  percent  in  2013-14.  Despite  lower  earning  potential  women  in  the 
informal 
(https://www.theigc.org/wp-
from 
content/uploads/2016/04/Kamal-Woodbury-2016-Working-paper.pdf  ).  According  to  a 
to  work 
sector 
home 
tend 
8 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
study published in 2018, women only represent 0.21 per cent or 6,444 people of the total 
migration from Pakistan, (ILO, 2018); 
Child labor. Reliable data is not available on the issue, however, its incidence is not denied 
in  the  province;  it  prevails  with  greater  extent  in  the  informal  sector  and  also  in  the 
agriculture sector (The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Labor Policy 2018). The largest number 
of  child  workers  was  in  Punjab  province,  followed  by  Sindh,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and 
Baluchistan.  Child  labour  in  Pakistan  is  prevalent  in  agriculture,  domestic  work,  coal 
mining, production of bricks, carpets, glass bangles, leather and surgical instruments and 
production and/or transport of drugs. Child trafficking is also prevalent in Pakistan which, 
can result in commercial sexual exploitation and forced begging. Child Domestic Labor as 
the  Worst  Forms  of  Child  Labor  (WFCL)  which  is  behind  closed  doors  and  girls  are  in 
majority  (90%).  Their  invisibility  increases  their  vulnerability  and  potential  violence 
exist 
exists 
Bonded 
(https://www.ilo.org/islamabad/whatwedo/projects/WCMS_764614/lang--en/index.htm 
).  
areas  where 
labor 
brick 
kilns 
they 
in 
in 
PURPOSE OF ESMF 
The ESMF will be used by REAP in order to ensure that all environmental and social 
safeguards are adequately addressed and that where required, relevant capacity building 
and training needs are established for effective implementation of the project. 
The main purpose of the ESMF is to: 
  Establish  procedures  and  methodologies  for  the  environmental  and  social 
assessment, review, approval and implementation of investments to be financed 
under the Project; 
  Specify appropriate roles and responsibilities, and outline the necessary reporting 
procedures,  for  managing  and  monitoring  environmental  and  social  concerns 
related to project investments; 
  Determine  the  training,  capacity  building  and  technical  assistance  needed  to 
successfully implement the provisions of the ESMF; 
  Establish the project funding needed to implement the ESMF requirements; 
  Provide practical information resources for implementing the ESMF. 
The ESMF provides a guide for the integration of environmental and social considerations 
into the planning and implementation of the proposed project activities. It further provides 
a  basis  for  environmental  assessments  of  all  sub-projects  to  be  carried  out  under  this 
proposed financing.  
It focuses on the nature and extent of significant adverse environmental impacts that may 
result  from  the  project  activities.  It  will  also  serve  as  a  framework  for  screening 
environmental  issues  for  the  concerned  project  activities  and  will  establish  a  unified 
process for addressing environmental and social safeguards issues on sub-projects from 
preparation, through review and approval, to implementation. 
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY 
In order to assess the potential impacts and propose mitigation measures together with 
management  plan,  the  strategy  involved  consultation  with  various  stakeholders, 
community and literature review (such as review of existing policies and guidelines). The 
rationale of consultations was to take on board views from different stakeholders, at least 
from local level, district level, and central government level. The strategies of executing 
this assignment followed five steps: 
(a) 
Review of activities and their implementation approach and processes for sub-
projects; 
9 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Identification  and  analysis  of  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts  the 
implementation processes will likely trigger and generate within and around the 
project activities; 
Development of a screening process for negative impacts for proposed project 
sites and project activities; 
Identification of appropriate mitigation measures for the predicted impacts and 
compilation  of  a  management  plan  for  addressing  environmental  and  social 
impacts  during  implementation,  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  project 
activities. 
Important phases of the study include: 
•  Data Collection;  
•  Literature review;  
•  Desk studies and visit to potential sub-project site;  
•  Stakeholders consultation; 
•  Characterization of the baseline conditions;  
• 
• 
Identification of potential impacts;  
Identification of impact mitigation measures; and  
•  Preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan. 
Field visits and Stakeholder consultations 
The  consultant  undertook  field  visit  to  Peshawar,  Swabi,  Bannu,  Kohat,  D  I  Khan  and 
Dhakki  area  to  meet  government  officials,  management  of  farm  services  centres  and 
farmers between 4 to 14 April 2021. The field visit enabled the consultant to observe the 
social and environmental setting of the proposed project activities in the existing physical 
conditions. The visits and consultations helped the consultants to understand better about 
stakeholders’ feelings of project benefits and the potential impacts of the proposed sub-
project  implementation  and  subsequent  operations.  The  consultations  provided  insights 
about  potential  impacts  of  the  sub-projects,  social  and  environmental  setups  and 
constraints, institutional capacities, available guidelines and policies. 
10
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
2: PROJECT OVERVIEW 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa – Rural Employment and Agribusiness Promotion 
Goal  and  objective.  As  per  Concept  Note  of  the  project,  the  overall  goal  of  the 
programme is to contribute to poverty reduction, and to food and nutrition security of rural 
households. The development objective is improved rural income and employment through 
high value agriculture in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner. 
Target area and implementation:  The project will cover all the 35 districts of the province as 
per request of the GoKP. The project will be implemented in a phased manner (10 districts 
rolled out in year 1 and 2 each) managed through 4 regional offices (5 districts per region). 
Then, 3 districts per year and per sub office will integrate the programme so that the 35 
districts will be covered by year 4; and this will leave enough time to implement the REAP 
throughout the province. Coordination among complementary projects and programmes 
will be facilitated by the Project Steering Committee and relevant sections of the planning 
and development department at the provincial level. Coordination for complementarities 
and synergies will be the responsibility of Project Management Unit. 
Target Groups: The primary target groups for the project will consist of the HHs falling 
in  the  PSC  0  –  34.  (0  to  40  for  component  2).  Women  and  youth  will  be  particularly 
targeted  with  specific  interventions  aiming  at  economic  and  social  empowerment.  They 
will  be  identified  through  the  local  organizations  and  in  particular  the  village  councils  / 
community  organizations  (validation  of  their  PSC  status). For  gender  empowerment, as 
per  the  Diamer  experience  (NADP),  religious  and  community  leaders  and  village 
elders/jirga will be engaged with. Smallholder farmers targeted for the production of high 
value  agriculture  and  livestock  will  be  assisted  as  members  of  farmer  organizations 
(300700 members), and the 4P models. 
Project  Beneficiaries:  Around  440,000  households  or  around  3.5  million  persons  will 
benefit  directly  or  indirectly  from  household  level  interventions  including  (i)  economic 
graduation and insertion (assets transfer, youth job market readiness/employment skills 
and  vocational  trainings;  productive  investments  -  start-up  capital)  and  (ii)  market 
oriented professional farmer organizations (around 550) with market study, business plan, 
professional  management,  matching  grant  investments,  private  partnership,  processing 
development and clear break-even point as well as exit strategy. Additionally, the target 
group (focus on the youth and women) will also benefit from capacity building, financial 
literacy,  trainings  for  climate  risk  and  resilience,  nutrition,  asset  management  for 
enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  the  assets,  enterprise  and  business  development. 
Investments in PFOs and 4Ps will create additional jobs from which women and youth will 
specifically benefit, especially those trained under component 2. 
Project interventions.  
Components/outcomes and activities 
Component  1:  Agribusiness  Development  –  Professional  Farmers  Organization 
and  4Ps  Development  This  Component  shall  consist  of  two  mutually  reinforcing 
subcomponents  as  follows:  (i)  Professional  Farmer  Organizations  Development  and  (ii) 
Agro Value Chain 4Ps. 
Sub Component 1.1: Professional Farmer Organizations Development: The project 
will develop 550 new or restructured Professional Farmer Organizations (PFOs) with 300 - 
700 producers per organization. These PFOs will be multi-purpose and not seasonal. 
Sub Component  1.2:  Agro Value Chain 4Ps development:  The project will develop 
20 4Ps, with a minimum of 1,000 producers per 4P. 
Component 2: Economic Graduation and Employment This component will support 
around  200,000  ultra-poor  and  poor  households  with  limited  access  to  land  and  with  a 
specific focus on women (50 per cent) and youth (50 per cent) to develop their skills to 
11
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
become  employable  or  to  create their own employment / business in order for them to 
improve significantly and in a sustainable way their livelihood.  
Component  3:  Programme  Management,  Policy  and  Institutional  Support:  The 
project  will  be  placed  under  the  Planning  and  Development  Department.  A  Project 
Management Unit will be established at Peshawar and additional regional offices will be set 
up in order to handle the distance / geographic coverage of the project.  
Project benefits. Total incremental benefit is estimated to the tune of USD 517 million 
generating annually, by REAP, starting around mid-term of the project:  
Total  direct  Economic  Graduation  of  3.5  million  people  (500  000  HHs)  plus  an 
additional estimated 100 000 HHs indirect beneficiaries (services and sub employment) or 
around 15 percent of the KP province overall population. 
Total  direct  improvement  of  Livelihood  (Health,  nutrition,  education)  of  3.5 
million people. 
Additional benefits include; 
Contribution for 3.5 million people to become bankable in the formal banking 
First KP Provincial PFO representation set up and capable to interact with the 
 
system 
 
GoKP on the economic interest / constraints of the small farmers. 
 
province 
Climate resilience / Nutrition / youth and Gender promotion as model in KP 
Project Cost Estimates 
The estimated investment requirement for the project is USD 197 million over 7 years 
which will impact directly around 3.5 million rural poor covering the entire province. IFAD 
financing  will  consist  of  USD  100  million  loan  on  blend  terms  (IFAD  11  conditions  for 
Pakistan).  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and  co-financers  will  contribute 
approximately USD 77 million through leveraging on-going PSDP for employment, skills, 
SME  development  and  loan  schemes  and  in  the  form  of  taxes  and  duties.  Beneficiary 
contributions will amount to about USD 20 million. Co-financing are under discussion with 
EU as well with other donors.  
Project Risks 
Unstable  security  situation  is  considered  a  risk  in  KP,  however,  the  situation  has 
substantially improved in most parts. Sporadic events in the newly merged districts may 
hinder  IFAD  supervision  activities  in  some  specific  areas  but  involvement  of  local 
consultants and partner organizations together with government institution will help run 
project activities. Operational risks include start-up delays due to slow preparation of PC-
1,  PMU  establishment  and  recruitments,  procurement  and  lengthy  approval  processes. 
IFAD will facilitate preparation of PC-1 while an interim PMU will be established for timely 
start-up of the project. The project is categorized as “B” in terms of environment and social 
category while in terms of climate risk, it is a “moderate” risk project.  
Project Implementation 
The Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan will be the coordinating agency at 
Federal  level  while  the  Planning  and  Development  Department,  Government  of  Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa will be the executing agency. A Provincial Project Steering Committee (PSC), 
chaired by Additional Chief Secretary, will be the oversight and governance mechanism. A 
Project Management Unit in Peshawar, headed by a Project Director, will be responsible for 
planning,  coordination,  financial  management,  procurement  and  M&E  function  of  the 
project activities accountable to the PSC. Regional Project Management Committees will 
be  established  to  implement  project  activities  in  the  respective  divisions.  Other  key 
implementing  partners  include  Vocational  and  Management  training  institutes,  Agro-
12
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
business  firms,  Agro-business  organizations,  line  departments  particularly  Agriculture, 
Livestock and Cooperatives, Environment, Social Welfare, Election and Local Government 
and Industries. In addition, Farm Services Centres, Farmer Organisations and cooperatives 
will be closely engaged with. A Finance Manager will be responsible for the management 
of project budgets and finances. Separate Bank accounts will be maintained for IFAD and 
Government funds The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be notified at the start 
of the project to articulate in detail projects planning, coordination, financial management 
and reporting requirements covering PSC, PMU and all implementing partners. 
13
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
3: THE LEGISLATIVE, REGULATORY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
This chapter discusses the policy, legal and administrative framework relevant to the 
environmental and social assessment of the proposed Project. 
National and Provincial Laws and Regulations 
Pakistan’s  statute  books  contain  a  number  of  laws  concerned  with  the  regulation  and 
control  of  the  environmental  and  social  aspects.  However,  the  enactment  of 
comprehensive legislation on the environment, in the form of an act of parliament, is a 
relatively new phenomenon. The laws relevant to the project and possible subprojects are 
briefly reviewed below. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Act 1997  
The Pakistan Environmental Protection Act 1997 is the basic legislative tool empowering 
the  government  to  frame  regulations  for  the  protection  of  the  environment,  where  the 
‘environment’  has  been  defined  as:  (a)  air,  water  and  land;  (b)  all  layers    of  the 
atmosphere; (c) all organic and inorganic matter and living organisms; (d) the ecosystem 
and ecological relationships; (e) buildings, structures, roads, facilities and works; (f) all 
social and  economic  conditions  affecting  community  life;  and  (g)  the  inter-relationships 
between  any  of  the  factors  specified  in  sub-clauses  ‘a’  to  ‘f’.  The  Act  is  applicable  to  a 
broad range of issues, including socioeconomic aspects: for example, land acquisition, air, 
water, soil, marine and noise pollution, and the handling of hazardous waste. 
Sections 11 prohibits discharge or emission of any gaseous, liquid or solid waste or noise 
in  an  amount,  concentration  or  level  in  excess  of  the  National  Environmental  Quality 
Standards (NEQS) specified by the Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak-EPA), 
while Section 13 prohibits import of hazardous wastes. Section 14 prohibits handling of 
hazardous substance except under license or in accordance with provision of any local law 
or  international  agreement.  Section  15  prohibits  operation  of  motor  vehicles  whose 
emission  of  air  pollutant  or  noise  is  in  excess  of  the  NEQS  or  the  established  ambient 
standard.  Section  17,  Clause  7  states  that  the  Director  General  of  the  federal  or  the 
provincial environmental protection agency may require the perpetrator to pay penalty. 
The  powers  of  the  federal  and  provincial  Environmental  Protection  Agencies  (EPAs), 
established under the Pakistan Environmental Protection Ordinance 1983, have also been 
considerably  enhanced  under  this  legislation;  they  may  conduct  inquiries  in  aid  of 
legislation into possible breaches of environmental laws either of their own accord, or upon 
the registration of a complaint. 
The  requirement  for  environmental  assessment  is  laid  out in  Section  12  (1)  of  the Act. 
Under this section, no project involving construction activities or any change in the physical 
environment can be undertaken unless an initial environmental examination (IEE) or an 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) is conducted, and approval is received from the 
federal or  relevant provincial EPA. Section 12 (6) of the Act states that the provision is 
applicable only to such categories of projects as may be prescribed. The categories were 
later  defined  in  the  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency  Review  of  IEE  and  EIA 
Regulations, 2000. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and EIA Regulations 
2000 
The Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and EIA Regulations 2000 
developed by the Pak-EPA under the powers conferred upon it by the Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act, provide the necessary details on preparation, submission 
and review of the IEE and the EIA. Categorization of projects for IEE and EIA is one of 
the main components of the Regulations. Projects have been classified on the basis of 
expected degree of adverse environmental impacts. Project types listed in Schedule I are 
designated as potentially less damaging to the environment, and those listed in Schedule 
II as having potentially serious adverse effects. Schedule I projects require an IEE to be 
conducted, provided they are not located in environmentally sensitive areas. For 
14
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Schedule II projects, conducting an EIA is necessary. A development project may not fall 
under either Schedule I or II.  
If the project for which this document was prepared includes construction of new 
irrigation canals, it will be considered a Schedule I project. If no new irrigation canal will 
be constructed and only the existing ones are to be rehabilitated or modernized, the 
project will be categorized under Schedule II. 
National Environmental Quality Standards 
The National Environmental Quality Standards (NEQS), promulgated under the Pakistan 
Environment Protection Act 1997, specify the following standards: 
  Maximum  allowable  concentration  of  pollutants  in  gaseous  emissions  from 
industrial sources; 
  Maximum  allowable  concentration  of  pollutants  in  municipal  and  liquid  industrial 
effluents discharged to inland waters, sewage treatment and sea (three separate 
set of numbers); 
  Maximum allowable emissions from motor vehicles; 
  Ambient air quality standards; 
  Drinking water standards; and 
  Noise standards. 
National Water Policy 2018 
The objective of Pakistan’s first National Water Policy, approved in April 2018, is to take 
cognizance  of  the  emerging  water  crisis  and  provide  an  overall  policy  framework  and 
guidelines for a comprehensive plan of action. The policy concedes that management of 
water  resources  is  a  national  responsibility,  but  irrigation,  agriculture,  water  supply 
(including  drinking  water),  the  environment  and  other  water-related  sub-sectors  are 
provincial subjects.  
The policy covers all water-related issues, including: water uses and allocation of priorities; 
integrated planning for development and use of water resources; environmental integrity 
of  the  basin;  impact  of  climate  change;  trans-boundary  water  sharing;  irrigated  and 
rainfed  agriculture;  drinking  water  and  sanitation;  hydropower;  industry;  groundwater; 
water  rights  and  obligations;  sustainable  water  infrastructure;  water-related  hazards; 
water quality management; awareness and research; water conservation measures; legal 
framework and capacity building of institutions in the water sector.  
 National Climate Change Policy 2012 
The  goal  of  the  National  Climate  Change  policy  is  to  ensure  that  climate  change  is 
mainstreamed in the  economically and socially vulnerable sectors and to steer Pakistan 
towards climate resilient development.  
The policy has the following main objectives: 
  To pursue sustained economic growth by appropriately addressing the challenges 
of climate change;  
  To integrate climate change policy with other interrelated national policies;  
  To focus on pro-poor gender sensitive adaptation while also promoting mitigation 
to the extent possible in a cost-effective manner;  
  To ensure water security, food security and energy security of the country in the 
face of the challenges posed by climate change;  
  To minimize the risks arising from the expected increase in frequency and intensity 
of extreme weather events such as floods, droughts and tropical storms;  
  To strengthen inter-ministerial decision making and coordination mechanisms on 
climate change;  
15
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
  To facilitate effective use of the opportunities, particularly financial, available both 
nationally and internationally;  
  To foster the development of appropriate economic incentives to encourage public 
and private sector investment in adaptation measures;  
  To enhance the awareness, skill and institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders; 
and 
  To promote conservation of natural resources and long-term sustainability. 
Climate Change Act 2017 
The  Climate  Change  Act  was  passed  in  2017.  The  objective  of  the  Act  is  to  tackle  the 
pressing  climate  risks  and  secure  global  funding  to  implement  projects  to  boost  the 
country’s  climate  resilience,  protect  lives  and  livelihoods  of  the  people,  mainly  those 
associated with agriculture. The new law established a Pakistan Climate Change Council, 
Pakistan Climate Change Authority and Pakistan Climate Change Fund. 
Forest Act 1927 
The  Forest  Act  1927 seeks to consolidate  the  laws  relating  to:  forests;  transit  of  forest 
produce; and duty that can be levied on timber and other forest products. The Forest Act 
provides for the creation of various classes of forests. It also allows provincial governments 
to  declare  state-owned  forest  lands  to  be  reserved  forests  or  protected  forests  and  to 
assume  control  of  privately  owned  forest  land.  The  Act  establishes  three  categories  of 
forests:  Reserve  Forests;  Protected  Forests;  and  Village  Forests.  The  Act  prohibits  any 
person  to:  set  fire  in  a  forest;  quarry  stone;  remove  any  forest-product;  or  cause  any 
damage to a forest by  cutting trees or  clearing up the area for cultivation or any  other 
purpose. 
Land Acquisition Act 1894 
The Land Acquisition Act (LAA) of 1894, amended from time to time, has been the de 
facto policy governing land acquisition and compensation in the country. The Act is the 
most commonly used law for acquisition of land and other properties for development 
projects. It comprises of 55 sections pertaining to: area notifications and surveys; land 
acquisition; compensation and apportionment of awards; disputes resolution; penalties; 
and exemptions. The Act allows the acquisition of private land by a government agency, 
after the government pays a pre-determined compensation to cover the losses incurred 
by landowners from surrendering their land. 
Antiquity Act 1975  
The Antiquities Act of 1975 ensures the protection of cultural resources in Pakistan. 
Antiquities have been defined in the Act as: ancient products of human activity; 
historical sites; sites of anthropological or cultural interest; and national monuments. 
The law prohibits new construction in the proximity of a protected antiquity and 
empowers the Government of Pakistan to prohibit excavation in any area that may 
contain articles of archeological significance. 
Under this Act, the project proponents are obligated to: 
  Protect antiquities from destruction, theft, negligence, unlawful excavation, trade 
and export; 
 
If an archeological discovery is made during the course of the project, it should be 
protected and reported to the Department of Archeology, Government of Pakistan, 
for further action. 
Resettlement Policy 
Resettlement  Policy  of  Pakistan  was  drafted  by  the  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection 
Agency in 2002 and is not yet approved by the parliament. In the absence of a specific 
16
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
resettlement  policy,  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  1894  has  been  the  policy  governing 
resettlement  and  compensation  to  the  persons  affected  by  a  project.  However,  the 
provisions of Land Acquisition Act 1894 do not take into account the changes that have 
taken  place  with  respect  to  social,  cultural,  economic  and  environmental  landscapes  in 
which they operate. Furthermore, the Act does not take into account gestation periods. 
Since the Land Acquisition Act is a national law that is implemented on a provincial basis, 
dispensations  in  compensation  and  resettlement  packages  can  differ  from  province  to 
province for similar cases of resettlement. 
National Culture Policy 2018 
Pakistan’s  first  National  Culture  Policy  was  launched  in  May  2018.  The  culture  policy 
envisages preservation of national heritage, integrating minorities’ culture, promotion of 
art and craft, and revival of regional languages to highlight the positive image of Pakistan.  
Pakistan Penal code 1860  
The Pakistan Penal code 1860 deals with the offences where public or private property or 
human lives are affected due to intentional or accidental misconduct of an individual or 
organization. The Code also addresses control of noise, noxious emissions and disposal of 
effluents. Most  of  the  environmental aspects  of the  Code  have been  superseded  by  the 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Act 1997. 
Cooperatives Societies Act 1925 
The Cooperative Societies Act aims to facilitate the formation and working of co-operative 
societies  for  the  promotion  of  thrift,  self-help  and  mutual  aid  among  agriculturists  and 
other  persons  with  common  economic  needs  so  as  to  bring  about  better  living,  better 
business and better methods of production and for that purpose to consolidate and amend 
the law relating to co-operative societies in the province. 
Constitution, Acts and Rules on Labor 
The  Constitution  of  Pakistan  defines  labor  rights  in  the  following  articles:  Article  11 
prohibits all forms of slavery, forced labour and child labour; Article 17 stipulates the rights 
to exercise freedom of association and to form unions; article 18 establishes the right to 
enter  upon  any  lawful  profession  or  occupation  and  to  conduct  any  lawful  trade  or 
business;  article  25  affirms  the  right  to  equality  before  the  law  and  prohibition  of 
discrimination on the grounds of sex alone; and article 37(e) makes provision for securing 
just and humane conditions of work, ensuring that children and women are not employed 
in  vocations  unsuited  to  their  age  or  sex,  and  for  maternity  benefits  for  women  in 
employment. 
In  addition  to  Article  18  of  the  Constitution,  Industrial  Relations  Ordinance  2002 
pronounces  on  the  conditions  of  termination  of  contracts.  Maximum  working  hours  are 
determined 
in  Factories  Act  1934;  West  Pakistan  Shops  and  Establishments 
Ordinance1969 and Mines Act 1923. Factories Act 1934 makes provisions for paid leave, 
while work conditions related to maternity are defined by Article 37 of the Constitution, 
Maternity Benefit Ordinance 1958 and Mines Maternity Benefit Act 1941. Employment of 
children is framed by Article 11(3) of the Constitution, Factories Act 1934 and Employment 
of Children Rules 1995. 
Obligations under International Treaties 
Nagoya Convention on Biological Diversity 
Often shortened to Nagoya Convention on Biological Diversity, Convention on Biodiversity 
or CBD, the full title in English is Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and their 
Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. Nagoya Protocol, which entered into force in 2014, is a supplementary 
agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity adopted in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 
The  Convention  has  three  objectives:  to  conserve  biological  diversity;  to  promote  the 
sustainable  use  of  its  components;  and,  to  encourage  equitable  sharing  of  the  benefits 
17
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. The Protocol strengthens legal certainty 
and transparency for providers as well as users of genetic resources. It does so by: making 
conditions  for  access  to genetic  resources  more  predictable; and, supporting  sharing  of 
benefits that arise from genetic resources. In case indigenous and local communities have 
established  rights  to  grant  access to  genetic resources,  contracting  parties must  obtain 
their prior informed consent and ensure fair and equitable benefit-sharing, by taking into 
account  existing  community  and  customary  laws,  procedures,  use  and  exchange.  The 
original Convention was ratified by and entered into force in Pakistan in 1994. The Protocol 
entered into force in the country in February 2016.  
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl 
Habitat 
Frequently  referred  to  as  Ramsar  Convention,  it  seeks  to  halt  the  progressive 
encroachment on and loss of wetlands, which are among the most diverse and productive 
ecosystems and indispensable for sustainable management of freshwater and biodiversity. 
According  to  the  Convention,  wetlands  encompass:  lakes  and  rivers;  underground 
aquifers; swamps and marshes; wet grasslands; peatlands; oases; estuaries; deltas and 
tidal flats; mangroves and other coastal areas; coral reefs; and all human-made sites such 
as fish ponds, irrigated lands, rice paddies, reservoirs and salt pans. 
The  parties  to  the  Convention  commit  to:  promote  wise  use  of  wetlands;  designate 
qualified  wetlands  to  the  list  of  Wetlands  of  International  Importance  for  its  effective 
management; and, cooperate internationally to manage transboundary wetlands, shared 
wetland syste  sms and  species. Pakistan ratified the Convention in August 1976, and it 
entered into force four months later. 
Four major wetland complexes exist in Pakistan: North Western Alpine, Salt Range, Central 
Indus  Plain  and  Makran  Coast,  and  19  sites  designated  as  Ramsar  sites.  Wetlands 
degradation in Pakistan, as elsewhere, is believed to be: changes in land use; population 
growth; and, economic development. 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora 
The  Convention  on  International  Trade  in Endangered  Species  of  Wild Fauna  and  Flora, 
abbreviated as CITES, aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals 
and plants does not threaten their survival. Currently it covers more than 35,000 species 
of plants and animals. The trade is estimated to amount to billions of dollars each year, 
including hundreds of millions of plants and animal specimens in the form of food project, 
leather  and  fur  goods,  musical  instrument,  timber,  tourist  knickknack  or  medicine.  The 
scale  of  illegal  trade  is  represented  by  7,000  species,  over  164,000  seizures  and  120 
countries since 1999. 
The  concerned  species  are  listed  in  three  appendices  to  the  Convention,  each 
corresponding to one of the three levels of protection provided. The species listed under 
the  first  appendix  are  subject  to  the  strictest  regulation  as  they  are  threatened  with 
extinction, and those under the third appendix the least. Appendix III lists species that are 
protected in at least one country, which has asked other CITES parties for assistance in 
controlling the trade. This list may be changed unilaterally by a CITES party. 
The Convention was ratified by Pakistan in April and entered into force in the country in 
July 1976. In Annex I, there are 59 species that concerns Pakistan. In Annexes II and III, 
202 and 36 species, respectively. The animals exported from Pakistan include: freshwater 
turtles;  tortoises;  marine  turtles;  raptors;  Indian  pangolin;  snakes;  other  reptiles;  fur 
animals,  such as  fox, jackal  wolf, freshwater  otter;  sharks;  and, invertebrates,  such  as 
scorpions. A recent study revealed that trade of animals was thriving in all corners of the 
country,  especially  in  Karachi  and  Peshawar.  Dried  Indian  cobra  and  sand  lizard  are 
reported to be consumed widely in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Punjab. Among the 55 wildlife 
species found on sale, 7 are listed under Appendix I of CITES, 15 and 6 in Appendices Ii 
and III, respectively. 
18
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and 
Paris Agreement 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, abbreviated as UNFCCC, 
sets its objective to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level 
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. It has 
been ratified by 192 parties, which include all United Nations member states, and entered 
into  force  in  1992.  The  Kyoto  Protocol  to  UNFCCC  was  agreed  in  1997,  although  the 
discussions on the details contributed until 2004. According to the Protocol, industrialized 
countries and countries of the former Soviet bloc must cut their emissions of greenhouse 
gases by an average of about 5% for the period 2008-2012 compared with 1990 levels. 
Kyoto  Protocol  was  ratified  by  and  entered  into  force  in  Pakistan  in  January  and  April, 
respectively, in 2005. 
At the  Paris climate conference  of UNFCCC in  2015, 195 countries adopted a universal, 
legally  binding  global  climate  agreement,  the  first  of  its  kind:  Paris  Agreement.  The 
governments  agreed  to  the  goal  of  limiting  to  1.5oC  the  increase  in  global  average 
temperature above pre-industrial levels. Paris Agreement was ratified by and entered into 
force  in  Pakistan  in  November  and  December,  respectively,  in  2016.  In  Pakistan,  the 
Climate Change Act 2016 was passed in March 2017, establishing a policy-making Climate 
Change  Council  and  a  Climate  Change  Authority  to  prepare  and  supervise  the 
implementation of climate change adaptation and mitigation projects. The main concern 
in  the  country  has  been  the  scant  amount  of  action  on  the  ground  because  of  lack  of 
capacity  at  the  Provincial  level.  Pakistan  submitted  its  Intended  Nationally  Determined 
Contribution (INDC) prior to the  Paris Agreement; the country “intends to  reduce up to 
20%  of  its  2030  projected”  greenhouse  gas  “emissions  subject  to  availability  of 
international grants to meet the total abatement cost ... amounting to about US$ 40 billion 
at current prices.” 
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries 
experiencing Series Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa 
The objective of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) is to 
“combat  desertification  and  mitigate  the  effects  of  drought  in  countries  experiencing 
serious drought and/or desertification, ... with a view to contributing to the achievement 
of sustainable development in affected areas[,]” and with special attention to arid, semi-
arid and dry sub-humid areas. It recognizes that, in order to achieve this goal, we need 
“long-term integrated strategies that focus simultaneously, in affected areas, on improved 
productivity of land, and the rehabilitation, conservation and sustainable management of 
land  and  water  resources,  leading  to  improved  living  conditions,  in  particular  at  the 
community  level.”  The  Convention  is  the  sole  legally  binding  international  agreement 
linking environment and development to sustainable land management. 
Pakistan ratified the Convention in 1997, and it entered into force in the country in the 
same  year.  A  National  Action  Programme  to  Combat  Desertification  in  Pakistan  was 
elaborated  in  2002  in  the  framework  for  the  Convention.  It  identified  main  causes  of 
desertification  as:  water  erosion;  wind  erosion;  soil  fertility  depletion;  deforestation; 
overgrazing;  biodiversity  loss;  waterlogging  and  salinity;  drought;  flooding;  and, 
socioeconomic  factors.  The  areas  estimated  to  be  affected  by  water  erosion  and  wind 
erosion were approximately 11 million and 3-5 million hectares, respectively. Wind erosion 
was  considered  responsible  for  close  to  one-third  of  total  soil  loss.  Remedial  measures 
proposed  included:  afforestation  and  agroforestry;  crop  production  management, 
including  horticultural  crops;  livestock  and  rangeland  management;  soil  and  water 
resources  management,  especially  related  to  water  use  efficiency  and  soil  fertility 
rehabilitation; and, biodiversity conservation. 
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain 
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides 
19
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous 
Chemicals and Pesticides, or the Rotterdam Convention for short, covers pesticides and 
industrial  chemicals  that  have  been  banned  or  severely  restricted  for  health  or 
environmental reasons by the Parties to the Convention and which have been notified by 
Parties  for  inclusion  in  the  Prior  Informed  (PIC)  procedure.  The  Convention  legally 
obligates implementation of the PIC procedure o these chemical products. By doing so, it 
promotes shared responsibility and cooperative efforts among Parties in the international 
trade of certain hazardous chemicals for the ultimate purpose of protecting human health 
and  the  environment  from  potential  harm.  The  Convention  also  contributes  to  the 
environmentally  sound  use  of  those  hazardous  chemicals,  by  facilitating  information 
exchange about their characteristics, by providing for a national decision-making process 
on their import and export and by disseminating these decisions to Parties. Pakistan signed 
the Convention in 2005 and it entered into force in the country in the same year. 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants 
The  Stockholm  Convention  on  Persistent  Organic  Pollutants  was  established  to  protect 
human health and the environment from chemicals that do not degrade  easily. As they 
persist  in  the  environment,  they  become  spatially  spread  and  accumulate  in  the  fatty 
tissues  of  fauna,  including  humans.  Such  organic  pollutants  are  harmful  to  the 
environment and human health: cancer; birth defects; damage to immune, reproductive 
and  nervous  systems.  The  Convention  obligates  its  parties  to  eliminate  or  reduce  the 
release of persistent organic pollutants into the environment. Climate Change is expected 
to  elevate  the  planet’s  vulnerability  to  persistent  organic  pollutants,  by  way  of  higher 
atmospheric temperature and extreme weather events. 
Pakistan affixed a simple  signature to the Convention in 2001, which was  subsequently 
ratified  and  entered  into  force  in  the  country  in  2008.  It  was  followed  by  a  “National 
Implementation  Plan  for  Phasing  Out  and  Elimination  of  POPs  from  Pakistan  Under 
Stockholm Convention Article 7(a)”in 2004. 
A  recent  study  on  the  subject  concluded  that  the  country  is  highly  contaminated  with 
organochlorine  pesticides  (OCPs),  polychlorinated  biphenyls  (PCBs),  polybrominated 
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), dechlorane plus (DP), and polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs). 
The efforts to eliminate the chemicals from the environment and to prevent exposure to 
them  are  hampered  by  lack  of  environmental  quality  standards,  food  safety  standards, 
and appropriate inventory of persistent organic pollutants as waste. 
International Labour Organization Convention No. 184 concerning Safety and 
Health in Agriculture 
The International Labour Organization Convention No. 184 concerning Safety and Health 
in Agriculture deals with agricultural and forestry activities carried out in the context of 
agriculture. Hence, it covers crop production, forestry product collection and harvesting, 
animal  husbandry  and  insect  raising,  the  primary  processing  of  agricultural  and  animal 
products  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  operator  of  the  undertaking  as  well  as  the  use  and 
maintenance  of  machinery,  equipment,  appliances,  tools,  and  agricultural  installations, 
including any process, storage,  operation or transportation which are directly related to 
agricultural production. It aims at preventing accidents and injury to health from engaging 
in such work, by eliminating, minimizing or controlling hazards in the agricultural working 
environment. Pakistan has not ratified the Convention. 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
The  International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights  guarantees  human 
rights related  to  economics,  society and  culture.  The  overall  framework  is  given by  the 
Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  and  the  Covenant  gives  legal  force  to  the 
Declaration, as is the case for the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The 
rights covered by the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights include: rights to 
20
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
work in just and favourable conditions and to strike; rights to social security, to adequate 
standard of living, to health and rights of families, mothers and children needing special 
protection and assistance; rights to education and to participation in cultural life. Pakistan 
ratified the Covenant in 2008. 
In 2016, a National Action Plan on Human Rights was launched, which covered: policy and 
legal  reforms;  access  to  justice;  implementation  of  key  human  rights  priorities; 
implementation of international treaties to which Pakistan was a party; establishment and 
strengthening  of  national  human  rights  institutions;  and  an  implementation  and 
monitoring mechanism for the Plan. A budget of 750 million rupees had been allocated for 
establishing  institutional  mechanisms  to  implement  the  Plan.  Implementation  was 
overseen  by  a  national  task  force.  The  country  reported  to  the  United  Nations  that 
challenges  in  implementing  the  Covenant  included:  limited  resources;  inadequate 
accountability mechanisms; and a need for improved training and awareness-raising for 
law enforcement agencies on human rights. 
Convention on the Rights of the Child 
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by Pakistan in 1990, stipulates the civil, 
political, economic, social, health and cultural rights that should be enjoyed by any human 
being  under  the  age  of  eighteen,  unless  the  age  of  majority  is  attained  earlier  under 
national legislation. It focuses on the needs specific to children, including: right from birth 
to  a  name; right  to  acquire  a  nationality; right to  know and  be  cared  for  by  her or  his 
parents; right to preservation of her or his identity; right to maintain personal relations 
and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child's 
best interests; right to express her or his own views freely in all matters; right to freedom 
of expression; right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; and right to freedom 
of  association  and  to  freedom  of  peaceful  assembly.  According  to  one  NGO,  Pakistan's 
progress in safeguarding child rights remains slow, although children make up nearly half 
of Pakistan's population, making it one of the largest populations of children in the world.  
International Labour Organization Convention No. 107 concerning the 
Protection and Integration of Indigenous and Other Tribal and Semi-Tribal 
Populations in Independent Countries, and Convention No. 169 concerning 
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries 
In  1957  the  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  adopted  the  Convention  No.  107 
concerning the Protection and Integration of Indigenous and Other Tribal and Semi-Tribal 
Populations  in  Independent  Countries.  ILO  was  the  first  international  entity  to  officially 
recognize the importance of issues related to indigenous peoples, and the Convention was 
the first international treaty to address their human rights. It entered into force in 1959. 
Later, it was recognized that the underlying assumption of Convention No. 107 was that 
indigenous  people  should  be  integrated  into  the  dominant  socioeconomic  and  cultural 
system.  Convention  107  was  revised  in  1989  to  become  Convention  No.  169  to 
acknowledge  that  indigenous  peoples  are  distinctive,  integrationalist  approach  was 
obsolete and its application was detrimental. 
Pakistan  ratified  the  Convention  No.  107  in  1960  and  is  in  force.  The  country  has  not 
ratified  the  later  Convention.  It  is  one  of  the  62  Conventions  and  Protocols  of  ILO  not 
ratified by the country. 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People 
The  United  Nations  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  People  was  adopted  by  a 
majority of member states in 2017. Pakistan was among these 143 states. The Declaration 
recognizes  “the  need  to  respect  and  promote  the  inherent  rights  of  indigenous  peoples 
which derive from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures, 
spiritual  traditions,  histories  and  philosophies,  especially  their  rights  to  their  lands, 
territories  and  resources”  and  that  “respect  for  indigenous  knowledge,  cultures  and 
21
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
traditional  practices  contributes  to  sustainable  and  equitable  development  and  proper 
management of the environment.” 
Also  recognized  is  “the  right  of  indigenous  families  and  communities  to  retain  shared 
responsibility  for  the  upbringing,  training,  education  and  well-being  of  their  children, 
consistent with the rights of the child.” It reaffirms individual and collective human rights 
for  the  indigenous  peoples  and  that  the  historical,  cultural  and  socioeconomic 
particularities of each people should be taken into account.  
The indigenous peoples in Pakistan include: Kochis, Rabari, Baluch, Bakarwal, Kehal, Jogi, 
Kabootra, Sanyasi and Kalash. The Kalash is one of the smallest with 5,000 people. The 
government  of  Pakistan  recognizes  the  Kalash  as  a  religious  minority,  but  not  as  an 
indigenous group. 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
The Convention on the  Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, often 
described  as  the  international  bill  of  rights  for  women,  obliges  signatory  countries  to 
eliminate discrimination against women in political and public life and to promote  equal 
rights for women and men. It also requires countries to take measures to: change harmful 
stereotypes based on gender; end exploitation of prostitution and trafficking in women; 
ensure  equal  rights  in  education  for  women;  guarantee  equal  access  to  health  care; 
eliminate discrimination in economic and social life against women, including employment, 
payment, law application, marriage and family life; give attention to the role and problems 
of rural women. Pakistan’s accession to the Convention took place in 1996. 
In  terms  of  indices  established  by  United  Nations  Development  Programme  –  Human 
Development  Index  and  Gender  Inequality  Index–  Pakistan  ranked  150th  and  133rd, 
respectively,  among  168  countries  in  2017.  Pakistan  belonged  to  the  group  of  least 
developed countries with respect to Gender Development Index among five groups. 
Codex Alimentarius 2015 
Codex Alimentarius is a collection of internationally adopted food standards and related 
texts. Their aim is to protect consumers’ health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. 
The Codex Alimentarius includes standards for all major foods–whether processed, semi-
processed  or  raw–for  distribution to  the  consumer. Materials for  further  processing into 
foods should be included to the extent necessary. The Codex includes provisions on: food 
hygiene;  food  additives;  residues  of  pesticides  and  veterinary  drugs;  contaminants; 
labelling  and  presentation;  methods  of  analysis  and  sampling;  and  import  and  export 
inspection and certification. Pakistan is a member since 1970. 
Institutional Setup for Environmental Management 
Climate Change Ministry and EPA: Pakistan’s per capita emissions are one of the lowest 
in the world. However, Pakistan remains in the top 10 countries that have been significantly 
vulnerable to extreme climate events during the last two and half decades.  The Climate 
Change Ministry has been established in April 2012 and is headed by the federal minister.  
1.  The Ministry has three attached organizations: 
i)  Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) 
ii)  Zoological Survey Department, and  
iii)  Global Change Impact Studies Center (GCISC) 
2.  The environment wing of the ministry is responsible for the Multilateral Environmental 
Agreements  (MEAs)  including  the  United  Nation  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) and Kyoto Protocol. The Ministry of Climate Change has prepared 
Framework  for  implementation  of  Climate  Change  Policy  (2013),  which  provides 
priority based adaptation and mitigation measures in Pakistan to cope with adverse 
impacts  of  climate  change  and  to  control  and  reduce  Green  House  Gases  (GHG) 
emissions during 2014-2030. 
22
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
3.  EPA. The KP government has established Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was 
established in 1989 under the administrative control of Physical Planning and Housing 
(PP&H) Department. However, it is now working under the newly created Environment 
Department. EPA head office at Peshawar while the three directorates at Abbotabad 
,D.I.Khan, and Swat along with regional offices at Gadoon Swabi are also functional. 
4. 
Irrigation Department is also involved in flood control and protection and drainage.   
5.  KP Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) deals with natural or man-made 
disasters in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and is mandated to engage in activities concerning 
all four stages of Disaster Management Spectrum. 
Provincial policies and Acts in vogue include:  
Climate Change Policy 2016. The goal of the policy is to ensure that climate action is mainstreamed 
in the development planning and especially in the economically and socially vulnerable sectors of the 
economy; and to steer Khyber Pakhtunkhwa towards green growth and climate compatible 
development. Some of the important objectives include: 
i. Enhance awareness of the impacts of climate change among all stakeholders for necessary 
appropriate measures to combat and minimize these impacts  
ii.Mainstream climate change in long term development planning as a vehicle for the 
implementation of the provincial Green Growth Strategy  
iii.Integrate adaptation and mitigation measures into key relevant sectors‘ policies, 
strategies, and plans  
iv.Facilitate action in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on climate adaptation and mitigation, while 
promoting long term sustainability  
v.Enhance interdepartmental coordination and cooperation for effective climate action.  
vi.Ensure water, food and energy security for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in the face 
of a changing climate  
vii.Address climate change risks particularly those arising from climate induced 
disasters. 
viii.Ensure interests of vulnerable groups and gender aspects are adequately addressed 
in climate development strategies and planning  
ix.Develop bases to secure sufficient financial and technological support, and 
strengthen institutional and human resource capacities to achieve policy objectives; 
x.Be able to tap financial and technological opportunities available internationally  
KP-Youth Policy 2016. The KP government links its youth development work with education, 
sports,  mobility,  tourism  and  culture  in  the  short  and  prosperity  in  the  long  run.  The 
government has visualized the youth policy for creating an enabling environment for the 
youth  by  providing  them  equitable  opportunities  to  realize  their  full  potential  in  a  safe, 
secure,  conducive and  congenial  environment, working  for  a developed  and  prosperous 
Pakistan.  One  of  the  major  objectives  is  that  the  youth  possesses  economic  and  social 
competencies  for  their  future  market  and  social  roles  through  an  enabling  quality 
education. The focus of the policy on youth groups, including male and female, rural and 
urban, literate and illiterate, and vulnerable youth groups i. e. minority youth, workshop 
workers, differently-abled youth. religious seminary students, jail inmates, transgender; 
internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and refugee youth. 
Wildlife  and  Biodiversity  Act  2015.  Main  aim  of  this  Act  is  to  strengthen  the  administration  of  the 
organization to effectively manage wild animals and their habitats and to conserve biological diversity 
and to realize  its intrinsic  and  extrinsic values through sustainable  use  and  community  participation. 
23
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Management of hunting and protection and conservation of Wildlife sanctuary, Site of Special Scientific 
Interest,  Wildlife  Refuges,  National  Parks,  Biosphere  Reserves,  National  Natural  Heritage  Sites  and 
Game Reserves have been covered under this Act. 
KP  Water  Act  2020.  The  Act  authorizes  the  provincial  government  to  establish  Water  Resources 
Regulatory Authority, Water Resources Commission and other relevant regulatory organs and service 
providers for the conservation, management, protection and judicious distribution among different users 
and its safe disposal. 
Agriculture Policy—A Ten Years Perspective 2015. A very important policy document 
of  the  KP  government  that  defines  the  role  of  Agriculture  Department  and  explores 
potentials  for  agriculture  under  a  Ten  Years  perspective  from  2015  to  2025.  Some 
important actions proposed under the strategy included: Enhance Production, Processing 
and  Marketing,  strengthening  systems  for  technology  generation,  assessment  and 
dissemination,  Creating  accredited  laboratory  and  inspection  system  for  product 
certification,  Rangeland  Development,  Disaster  Risk  Preparedness,  etc.    Many  of  the 
proposed actions are yet to be taken, however, the document provides a good platform 
for future plans and actions. 
Food  Security  Policy.  The  final  draft  of  the  policy  is  aimed  at  attaining  sustainable  food 
security, poverty alleviation and generating employment opportunities through achieving 
higher sustainable economic growth in the province. Short term, medium term and long 
term plans have been devised to ensure implementation of the policy. 
KP Prohibition of Employment of Children Act, 2015 to prohibit the employment of 
children and to regulate employment of adolescents in certain occupations and processes 
in the Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 
KP  Child  Labor  Policy  2018.  One  of  the  most  important  objectives  of  the  policy  is 
eradication of child labour, particularly, of its worst forms and gradual elimination of all 
forms of child labour from all the sectors of KP economy with the intention to declare KP 
a child labour free province. 
IFAD Environmental and Social Safeguards 
REAP project has been designed considering the above mentioned policies and guidelines 
together  with  IFAD  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  on  Environment  and  Climate  Change  2019-2025.  The 
Project  has  also  been  designed  in  compliance  with  IFAD’s  guidelines  on  Social, 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP), and is provided as a separate 
document. The following is a summary of the relevant pieces of policies. 
IFAD Policy on Agriculture and Rural Development 
IFAD  is  one  of  the  largest  sources  of  development  financing  for  agriculture  and  rural 
development  in  developing  countries.  In  line  with  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals 
(SDGs)  and  other  international  relevant  agreements  IFAD’s  core  mandate  is  to support 
the  social  and  economic  empowerment  of  poor  rural  women  and  men.  As  such,  it  is 
opposed to any investment that will have a negative impact on its target groups. In respect 
to  the  overall  goal  of  environmental  and  economic  sustainability,  IFAD  is  committed  to 
take  a  proactive  and  innovative  approach  to  promote  projects  and  initiatives  that  are 
specifically  designed  to  deliver  significant  environmental,  social  and  climate  adaptation 
and mitigation benefits.  
IFAD Indigenous Peoples’ Policy 
This Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples aims to enhance IFAD’s development 
effectiveness  in its  engagement with indigenous peoples’  communities  in  rural  areas.  It 
24
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
sets  out  the  principles  of  engagement  IFAD  will  adhere  to  in  its  work  with  indigenous 
peoples,  and  the  instruments, procedures  and  resources  IFAD  will deploy to  implement 
them. 
Indigenous people account for an estimated 5 per cent of the world’s population, but 15 
per cent of those people living in poverty. In many countries, rural poverty is 
increasingly concentrated in indigenous and tribal communities. 
IFAD’s  Strategic  Framework  identifies  indigenous  peoples  as  an  important  target  group 
because they face economic, social, political and cultural marginalization in the societies 
in  which  they  live, resulting in  extreme poverty  and  vulnerability for  a disproportionate 
number of them. To reach them requires tailored approaches that respect their values and 
build upon their strengths. In its engagement with indigenous peoples, IFAD will be guided 
by nine fundamental principles: (a) cultural heritage and identity as assets; (b) free, prior 
and  informed  consent;  (c)  community-driven  development;  (d)  land,  territories  and 
resources;  (e)  indigenous  peoples’  knowledge;  (f)  environmental  issues  and  climate 
change; (g) access to markets; (h) empowerment; and (i) gender equality. 
The formulation of the ESMF document recognises these principles so that they can be 
implemented throughout the project cycle. 
IFAD Gender and Targeting Policy 
Poverty targeting, gender equality and empowerment are cornerstones of IFAD’s work to 
reduce rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity. This puts people – rural women, 
men, youth and indigenous peoples – at the centre of IFAD’s development projects and 
policy engagement. This unique approach aims to support the development of inclusive, 
equitable,  sustainable  and  resilient  rural  societies  and  agriculture  sectors  that  are  food 
secure and able to take advantage of the opportunities provided by growing markets, thus 
providing a springboard  to  rural  transformation. Thus,  IFAD  has developed  a  deliberate 
Policy to address this issue. 
IFAD Land Policy 
Secure  access  to  productive  land  is critical  to  the  millions of poor  people  living  in  rural 
areas and depending on agriculture, livestock or forests for their livelihood. 
It reduces their vulnerability to hunger and poverty; influences their capacity to invest in 
their productive activities and in the sustainable management of their resources; enhances 
their  prospects  for  better  livelihoods;  and  helps  them  develop  more  equitable  relations 
with  the  rest  of  their  society,  thus  contributing  to  justice,  peace  and  sustainable 
development (IFAD, 2008) 
The Fund’s first strategic objective is to help “ensure that, at the national level, poor rural 
men  and  women  have  better  and  sustainable  access  to  ...  natural  resources  (land  and 
water), which they are then able to manage efficiently and sustainably.” Land access and 
tenure security issues are linked, directly or indirectly, to all the strategic areas of IFAD’s 
interventions. 
The IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has been formulated 
to: (a) provide a conceptual framework for the relationship between land issues and rural 
poverty,  acknowledging  the  complexity  and  dynamics  of  evolving  rural  realities;  (b) 
identify  the  major  implications  of  that  relationship  for  IFAD’s  strategy  and  programme 
development and implementation; (c) articulate guiding principles for mainstreaming land 
issues  in  the  Fund’s  main  operational  instruments  and  processes;  and  (d)  provide  the 
framework for the subsequent development of operational guidelines and decision tools. 
In the policy, land refers to farmland, wetlands, pastures and forests. Land tenure refers 
to rules and norms and institutions that govern how, when and where people access land 
25
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
or  are  excluded from  such access. Land tenure  security  refers  to  enforceable  claims on 
land, with the level of enforcement ranging from national laws to local village rules, which 
again are supported by national regulatory frameworks. It refers to people’s recognized 
ability  to  control  and  manage  land  –  using  it  and  disposing  of  its  products  as  well  as 
engaging in such transactions as the transferring or leasing of land. 
IFAD Guidelines on SECAP 
These  are  Guidelines  on  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedure 
(SECAP).  IFAD  remains  committed  to  mainstreaming  social,  environmental  and  climate 
change  solutions.  IFAD's  updated  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) were approved by the Associate Vice-President of IFAD's Programme 
Management Department in July 2017. This SECAP 2017 Edition provides guiding values 
and  principles,  and  defines  an  improved  course  of  action  for  assessing  social, 
environmental  and  climate  risks  to  enhance  the  sustainability  of  results-based  country 
strategic  opportunities  programmes  (RB-COSOPs),  country  strategy  notes  (CSNs), 
programmes and projects.  
Included  in  SECAP  are  a  series  Guidance  Statements  which  are  used  in  guiding  the 
programme  in  avoiding  and  mitigating  any  impacts  that  may  arise  due  to  the  project 
(Annexure 1). These include: 
1.  Guidance statement 1 – Biodiversity 
2.  Guidance statement 2 – Agrochemicals 
3.  Guidance statement 3 – Energy 
4.  Guidance statement 4 – Fisheries and aquaculture 
5.  Guidance statement 5 – Forest resources 
6.  Guidance statement 6 – Rangeland-based livestock production 
7.  Guidance statement 7 – Water (agricultural and domestic use) 
8.  Guidance statement 9 – Physical cultural resources 
9.  Guidance statement 11 – Development of value chains, microenterprises and 
small enterprises 
10. Guidance statement 12 – Rural finance (under revision) 
11. Guidance statement 13 – Physical and economic resettlement (under revision) 
12. Guidance statement 14 – Community health 
In case of resettlement or economic displacement, SECAP emphasises the application of 
the principles of “do no harm” and “free, prior and informed consent” at all times and for 
all beneficiaries for any intervention that might affect the land access and user rights of 
communities. However, in the current project, there is no resettlement involved, therefore 
the SECAP does not provide any information about the same. 
26
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
SECAP - Environment, Social and Climate Risk Screening 
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or 
C) and one of three climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Determination 
of  the  category  and  classification  also  depend  on  the  national  requirements  and  the 
existing national capacity to promote and implement environmental and social mitigation 
measures.  
A positive response to any question between 1 and 22 (see questions below) categorizes 
the project as A. Similarly, a positive response to question 23 to 38 categorizes the project 
as B. In case all answers are negative, the project will be categorized as C. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks categorization is given Table 
3 herewith where the REAP project has been rated as Category B. 
Table 3. Environmental and social and climate risks categorization. 
Guiding questions for environment and 
social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not 
readily remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any 
wetlands? (Guidance statement 1) 
2.  Would the project cause significant 
adverse impacts to habitats and/or 
ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of 
natural forest, loss of habitat, 
erosion/other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation and hydrological 
changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 
and 5) 
3.  Does the proposed project target area 
include ecologically sensitive areas,5 
areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation, and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats 
depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
4.  Is the project location subjected to 
major destruction as a result of 
geophysical hazards (tsunamis, 
landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The project covers the 
entire province which 
has national parks and 
wildlife reserves but, 
there are no activities 
under the project that 
will affect these areas in 
any way. 
The project covers the 
entire KP province where 
hazards may occur in 
specific locations, 
however, the project is 
financing soft activities 
and no civil works are 
5 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere 
reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and 
variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
27
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
involved to be affected 
by  geophysical hazards 
Natural resources 
5.  Would the project lead to 
No 
unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
exceeding carrying capacity. For 
example, is the development 
happening in areas where little up-to-
date information exists on sustainable 
yield/carrying capacity? (Guidance 
statements 4, 5 and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-scale6 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or 
where their development involves 
significant alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant 
use of agrochemicals which may lead 
to life-threatening illness and long-
term public health and safety 
concerns? (Guidance statement 14) 
No 
No 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based 
No 
(groundwater and/or surface water) 
development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion 
and/or reduced flow has occurred from 
the effects of climate change or from 
overutilization? (Guidance statement 
7) 
9.  Does the project pose a risk of 
introducing potentially invasive 
species or genetically modified 
organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have 
an adverse effect on local 
biodiversity? (Guidance statement 1) 
No 
10.  Does the project make use of 
No 
wastewater (e.g. industrial, mining, 
sewage effluent)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
Infrastructure development 
The project will be 
supporting agribusiness 
activities but will not be 
involved in any direct or 
significant use of 
agrochemicals 
6 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where 
they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
28
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
11.  Does the project include the 
No 
construction/ rehabilitation/upgrade 
of dam(s) and/or reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following 
criteria?  
-  more than 15 metre high wall;  
-  more than 500 metre long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir 
capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 
2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale 
irrigation schemes rehabilitation 
and/or development (more than 
100 hectares per scheme)?7  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared 
above 10 km long, or any farmer with 
more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (Guidance 
statement 10). Will the works entail 
temporary and/or permanent resident 
workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or 
correction of natural waterbodies  
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
15.  Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of 
surface water, leaving the river flow 
below 20 per cent environmental flow 
plus downstream user requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
No 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic 
No 
displacement8 or physical 
resettlement of more than 20 people, 
or impacting more than 10 per cent of 
an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion 
No 
and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources? (Guidance statement 9) 
18. Would the project generate significant 
social adverse risk/impacts to local 
No 
No infrastructure related 
activities in the project.  
No infrastructure and, 
therefore, no  
displacement or 
resettlement 
Actually, the project 
activities will increase 
7 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations 
determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they 
exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
8 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or 
means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
29
the income of such 
communities and will 
provide skills to their 
youth for reducing 
poverty and increasing 
income. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
communities (including disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups, indigenous 
people, persons vulnerable to GBV and 
sexual exploitation and abuse and 
people with disabilities) or other 
project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19. Does the project include the 
manufacture and transportation of 
hazardous and toxic materials which 
may affect the environment? 
(Guidance statement 2) 
20. Does the project include the 
construction of a large or medium-
scale industrial plant? 
21. 
 Does the project include the 
development of large-scale production 
forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22. Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 1 to Question 21) 
through the provision of a line of credit 
to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or 
social implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural 
No 
intensification and/or expansion of 
cropping area in non-sensitive areas 
that may have adverse impacts on 
habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include 
No 
rangeland and livestock development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries 
No 
where there is information on stocks, 
fishing effort and sustainable yield? Is 
there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing 
zones and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
26.  Would the project activities include 
No 
aquaculture and/or agriculture in 
newly introduced or intensively 
practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and 
30
There are no such 
activities that may 
adversely impact 
sensitive areas  
The project’s focus is on 
skill and capacity 
development for 
increasing production 
and incomes. 
The project activities will 
not  risk fish stock in any 
way.  
No new developments 
under the project and 
there is no coastal in 
project area.  
Aquaculture (fish 
farming) may be 
involved in the existing 
area by PFOs. 
The project may involve 
in small enterprise 
development depending 
upon business plans of 
PFOs. 
However, no activity will 
involve physical or 
economic displacement.  
The project will not 
develop agrochemicals, 
however, but PFOs may 
opt for community level 
development of fruit, 
vegetable or dairy 
processing units.   
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
clearing of coastal vegetation, change 
in hydrology or introduction of exotic 
species? (Guidance statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include 
No 
natural resource-based value chain 
development? (Guidance statements 
1, 6 and 12) 
28.  Do the project activities include 
watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
No 
29.  Does the project include large-scale 
No 
soil and water conservation 
measures? (Guidance statements 1 
and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale 
No 
irrigation and drainage, and small and 
medium dam subprojects (capacity < 
3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 
7 and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and 
microenterprise development 
subprojects? (Guidance statements 12 
and 13) 
Yes 
32.  Does the project include the 
No 
development of agroprocessing 
facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would the construction or operation 
No 
of the project cause an increase in 
traffic on rural roads? (Guidance 
statement 10) 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities 
have minor adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
No 
35.  Would the project result in physical 
No 
resettlement of 20 people or less, or 
impacting less than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term 
public health and safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
No 
37.  Would the project require a migrant 
No 
workforce or seasonal workers (for 
31
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 23 to Question 37) 
through the provision of a line of 
credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme 
climatic events, such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves? 
Yes  No 
Yes 
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area 
foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or 
extreme weather that will adversely affect 
the project impact, sustainability or cost 
over its lifetime? 
Yes 
Additional 
explanation of 
“yes” response* 
The project 
covers all 35 
districts of the 
province including 
areas vulnerable 
to flooding and 
droughts.   
Increase in water  
availability will 
be observed in 
the near future 
causing floods, 
but decrease in 
medium future 
and after 2050 
causing droughts 
There will be 
changes in 
temperature and 
rainfall.  By 2050, 
the temperature 
in the Province is 
expected to 
increase 
throughout the 
year by 1-1.5 0C. 
The rainfall 
projection 
indicates that the 
summer 
monsoon will 
bring much more 
rain in 2050 than 
in 1960-1995 
and the winter 
monsoon slightly 
less. 
3.  Would the project make investments in low-
lying coastal areas/zones exposed to 
tropical storms? 
No low lying 
coastal areas in 
KP.  
No 
32
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
4.  Would the project make investments in 
glacial areas and mountains zones? 
Yes 
5.  Would the project promote agricultural 
activity in marginal and/or highly degraded 
areas that have increased sensitivity to 
climatic events (such as on hillsides, 
deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
6.  Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced 
significant weather-related losses and 
damages in the past? 
7.  Would the project develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with a track record of 
extreme weather events? 
8.  Is the project target group entirely 
dependent on natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rainfed agricultural plots, 
migratory fish stocks) that have been 
affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events? 
9.  Would climate variability likely affect 
agricultural productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access to 
markets and/or the associated incidence of 
pests and diseases for the project target 
groups? 
33
Yes 
The northern part 
of KP is mostly 
mountainous and 
is famous for 
orchards and 
fruits. 
Agribusiness will 
be more 
rewarding there. 
Not for projects of 
this type which do 
not involve 
infrastructure and 
other civil works.   
There have been 
very specific 
localized cases 
with hard-core 
infrastructure 
development 
projects.  
The two 
components of 
the project mostly 
involve farmers’ 
organizations 
mobilization and 
capacity building, 
provision of 
vocational and 
skill development 
trainings. No 
infrastructure or 
civil works 
involved.  
They have other 
sources of 
livelihoods as 
well.  
In some cases, 
productivity may 
be affected due to 
floods and 
droughts which 
will also affect 
No 
No 
No 
No 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
10. Would weather-related risks or climatic 
extremes likely adversely impact upon key 
stages of identified value chains in the 
project (from production to markets)? 
11. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are diversified? 
12. Is the project investing in infrastructure that 
is exposed to infrequent extreme weather 
events? 
13. Is the project investing in institutional 
development and capacity-building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer groups, 
cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
14. Does the project have the potential to 
become more resilient through the adoption 
of green technologies at a reasonable cost? 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
15. Does the project intervention have 
opportunities to strengthen indigenous 
climate risk management capabilities? 
16. Does the project have opportunities to 
integrate climate resilience aspects through 
policy dialogue to improve agricultural 
sector strategies and policies? 
No 
Yes 
34
market 
accessibility.  
The project 
focuses on 
agribusiness 
development and 
training youth in 
skills for 
employable 
trades to 
generate income. 
No specific value 
chains identified. 
No such activities 
envisaged under 
the project. 
Exactly, the 
project will be 
establishing 
PFOs and 
strengthening 
FSCs who will be 
trained in running 
businesses and 
generating 
incomes on 
sustainable basis. 
Depending upon 
the business 
plans of PFOs, 
the project has 
the potential to 
adopt green 
technologies at 
small scales for 
small holders. 
Component-3 of 
the project  
provides 
opportunities for 
improving such 
strategies and 
policies. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
17. Does the project have potential to integrate 
climate resilience measures without 
extensive additional costs (e.g. improved 
building codes, capacity-building, or 
including climate risk issues in policy 
processes)? 
18. Based on the information available would 
the project benefit from a more thorough 
accounting of GHG  emission ? 
No 
No 
*The additional explanation, where possible, will provide the justification for classification. 
Consideration should be given particularly to provide additional explanations for questions 13 to 17. 
35
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Institutional Framework 
Several institutions, systems and mechanisms exist in the country to achieve a balance in 
the promotion of sustainable development. These extend to the support and development 
of agriculture, capacity building and trainings and community organizations. REAP will rely 
on the multiple institutional interactions to achieve its goals. Few of the key institutions 
and their main roles and responsibilities in relation to environmental protection and climate 
change  together  with  infrastructure  development  sector  in  KP  and  Pakistan  are 
summarised below: 
Government.  The  18th  amendment  to  the  constitution  in  2008  resulted  in  a  major 
decentralization  of  fiscal  functions  and  social  services  to  the  provinces  along  with 
corresponding  resources.  Almost  all  key  sectors  related  to  IFAD’s  mandate  are  now 
provincial responsibility. However, policy-related federal and provincial coherence remains 
a work in progress. Furthermore, the decentralization from provinces to districts and local 
levels has not progressed to an effective level, resulting in the prioritization of needs and 
related financial allocations remaining largely top-down and relatively uncoordinated.  At 
the Federal  level,  the    Economic  Affairs Division of  the  Ministry  of  Finance is  the main-
coordinating  agency  for  all  foreign-funded  loan  and  grant  programmes.  The  policy  for 
sourcing foreign loan and grant funding is approved by the Cabinet and implemented by 
the  Ministry  of  Finance.  At  provincial  level,  The  Planning  &  Development  Department, 
headed  by  The  Additional  Chief  Secretary,  is  the  lead  provincial  agency  responsible  for 
annual  development  planning,  monitoring  and  donor  and  inter-agency  coordination. 
Donor-funded  multisector  rural  development  programmes  have  always  been  managed 
through dedicated PMUs under the P&D Department. Depending on the nature of project 
interventions, relevant government departments are engaged for the implementation of 
various  project  activities.  All  programmes  involving  community  participation  have 
invariably been implemented with the assistance of the rural support programmes (RSP) 
and/or NGOs.  
Climate Change Ministry and EPA: Pakistan’s per capita emissions is one of the lowest 
in  the  world.  However,  Pakistan  remained  in  the  top  10  countries,  which  remained 
significantly vulnerable to extreme climate events during the last two and half decades.  
Pakistan received back to back climate change related disasters; such as floods in 2010, 
2011 and 2012, which led to establishment of the Climate Change Ministry in April 2012.  
The Ministry is Cabinet-level, headed by the federal minister.  
The Ministry has three attached organizations: 
iv)  Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) 
v)  Zoological Survey Department, and  
vi)  Global Change Impact Studies Center (GCISC) 
The  environment  wing  of  the  ministry  is  responsible  for  the  Multilateral  Environmental 
Agreements (MEAs) including the United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC)  and  Kyoto  Protocol.  The  Ministry  of  Climate  Change  prepared  Framework  for 
implementation of Climate Change Policy (2013), which provides priority based adaptation 
and mitigation needs in Pakistan to cope with adverse impacts of climate change and to 
control and reduce Green House Gases (GHG) emissions during 2014-2030. 
The  Framework  also  recommends  to  carry  out  provincial  level  climate  change  policies, 
strategies and action plans. At provincial level Environmental Protection Agencies (EPAs) 
are working on Provincial Climate Change Policies, Strategies and Action Plans. 
KP has Provincial Climate Change Policy since 2016 and the aim is to ensure that climate 
action is  mainstreamed  in  the development planning  and  especially in  the  economically 
and socially vulnerable sectors of the economy; and to steer Khyber Pakhtunkhwa towards 
green growth and climate compatible development. The EPA is headed by Director General 
(DG). 
36
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Civil  Society  -  Rural  Support  Programmes:  Social  mobilization  and  participatory 
development has long been a challenge for government departments. Furthermore, in the 
absence of well-established local government systems, or with weak systems in place and 
limited outreach of government service delivery, there is a significant institutional gap for 
the  articulation  of  development  needs  in  rural  hinterlands  and  meaningful  bottom-up 
participatory  development.  The  federal  and  provincial  governments  have  established 
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and National Rural Support Programme (NRSP) 
while KP has its own Sarhad Rural Support Program (SRSP) through one-time endowment 
funds  and  independent  management  under  an  own  Boards  of  Directors.  The  PPAF  and 
RSPs  are  completely  autonomous  and  apolitical  and  have  successfully  augmented  the 
capacity of government departments in transparent targeting, social mobilization, needs 
identification,  and  delivery.  NRSP  and  SRSP  are  the  two  active  RSPs  covering  together 
almost all the districts. PPAF is already a partner of IFAD in the NPGP while other partners 
and  service  provider  can  be  associated  with  after  the  due  process  of  procurement  and 
selection. 
The two UN organizations, FAO and WFP are working in KP and IFAD can partner with them 
to  reinforce  respective  interventions, particularly  on  climate  resilience  aspects,  advance 
technologies, nutrition and gender. The coordination of the intervention will be facilitated 
by the  Component-3  and  under  the  lead  of the  planning and  development  department. 
The KP Agriculture Department, Technical Education Board and TEVTA have the capacity 
support and deliver on project activities.  
Grievance Redress Mechanism: The tried and tested participatory development model 
prevailing  in  the  province  and  beneficiary  feedback  mechanisms  through  regular 
community  organisations  conferences  and  participatory  M&E  are  affective  tools  for 
grievance redressal and corrective measure by the project. Additionally, most parts of the 
province has a traditional alternative dispute resolution system called Jirga for individual 
and community level grievance redressal and dispute resolution. However, environmental 
and social policies related complaints can be registered in writing by post or by email with 
PMU and Regional Project Management office who will examine and resolve the issue to 
the  satisfaction  of  complainant  within  two  weeks.  Any  project  level  grievance  is  not 
foreseen as it is being developed with the involvement of the KP government and project 
interventions will be implemented through community participation. However, in case of 
any issue during implementation, PMU and Project Steering Committee will be the right 
fora for its resolution. The complaint will have to be registered with PMU who will collect 
the required information, listen to the concerned parties and dispose of the complaint per 
merit within three weeks or refer it to PSC who will review it in detail and decided it within 
by 
four 
email   (SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org)  for  a  fair  and  timely  resolution  through  an 
independent process 
Complaints 
registered 
weeks. 
IFAD 
with 
also 
can 
be 
37
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
4: SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING 
Introduction to Social and Environmental Setting 
KP is endowed with diverse natural resources, which include some of the most fertile soils, 
forest and water resources, which accommodate diverse species of flora, fauna and fish 
resources. However, these resources are currently challenged by complex interaction of 
several  factors  including  rapid  population  growth,  infrastructure  development,  climate 
change  and  man  induced  interventions.  The  unsustainable  land  use,  depletion  of  forest 
resources  and  loss  of  biodiversity,  heavy  soil  erosion  and  water  pollution  impose  a 
challenge to these resources. 
Demographics: As mentioned in the preceding paras, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is the third 
most  populated  province  of  Pakistan  after  Punjab  and  Sindh.  Recently,  the  erstwhile 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) mostly bordering Afghanistan have also been 
merged in the province leading to overall increase in area as well as population. Based on 
2017 census, the total population of KP before merger of FATA was 30.52 million, out of 
which more than 81 percent was living in rural areas and about 19 percent was living in 
cities. Total population of merged areas was 5.0 million mostly comprising of rural areas 
(97 percent). 
Water resources. Glacial melt in the upper mountainous ranges during summer and rains 
are usually feeding the rivers and streams of the almost throughout the year with varying 
discharges  depending  upon  temperature  and  precipitation.  Indus,  Kabul,  Swat,  Kunhar, 
Siran,  Panjkora,  Bara,  Kurram,  Tochi,  Dor,  Haro,  Gomal  and  Zhob  rivers  are  the  main 
sources of water for agriculture in the Province. The total groundwater resource of the KP 
has been assessed at 3.11 MAF which is used for drinking as well as agriculture. 
Agro-ecological Zones of KP.  The Environmental Protection Agency of KP has divided 
the province into five agro-ecological zones on the basis  of  climatic conditions covering 
temperature, rainfall, altitude and topography.  These zones are: 
Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, 
Swat and Chitral. 
Zone  B  –  Sub  Humid  Mountain  covering  districts  of  Haripur,  Batagram,  Mansehra, 
Abbottabad, Kohistan and Torghar.  
Zone  C  –  Central  Valley  Plains  covering  districts  of  Peshawar,  Charshada,  Nowshera, 
Mardan, Swabi, Kohat and Hangu.  
Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman range) covering districts of Bannu, Karak, 
Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan. 
Zone  E  –  comprising  of  the  western  dry  mountains  of  the  newly  merged  districts  of 
Mohmand, Bajaur, Khyber, Orakzai, Kurram, North and South Waziristan. 
Forests. Zone A is comprised mainly of snowcapped high northern mountains and forests. 
The  high  northern  mountains  of  Chitral,  Hazara  and  Swat  above  4000  m  have  low 
vegetative  cover.  Alpine  zone  forests  are  found  between  3350-3360  m.  Dry  temperate 
coniferous are present in the dry ranges of Himalayas; Himalayan moist temperate forests 
are found in Hazara district (Kohistan, southern parts of Palas Valley, Lower Kaghan Valley) 
at  an  elevation  of  1525-3660m.  There  is  a  narrow  zone  of  subtropical  forests  between 
900-2000m in the Southern parts of the Himalayan Mountains of Hazara and Swat Valley 
(KP Climate Change Policy 2016 and Ahmad H & Khan, n.d.). 
Biodiversity. Geographically, KP has a diverse ecosystem where all the five Zones have 
their  own  peculiar  characteristics  and  are  home  to  a  variety  of  flora  and  fauna.  The 
Himalayan forests are the habitats to many mammal and bird species. Out of 188 species 
of  mammals  that  occur  in  Pakistan,  98  mammal  species  are  found  in  KP.  Some  of  the 
endangered species found in KP include Snow Leopard, Brown Bear, Ibex and Lion-eared 
bat. 456 species of birds, 48 species of reptiles and approximately 4,500 species of plants 
are found in KP (Ahmad, 2012). The protected areas notified in KP include 6 national parks, 
38
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
three  wildlife  sanctuaries,  38  game  reserves,  90  community  game  reserves,  16  private 
game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks (Attachment-A). The combined area 
of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. The project activities will be implemented in all five 
agro-ecological zones of the province. 
Minerals.  The  newly  merged  districts  and  d  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Province  are  rich  in 
mineral  resources.  The  Hindukush-Karakoram  block  has  deposits  of  antimony,  arsenic, 
polymetallic sulphides, gold, radioactive minerals, graphite, and gemstones (aquamarine, 
topaz, tourmaline, ruby, spinel, pargasite, epidote, garnet, etc). Northern Indus Suture is 
characterized by showings and deposits of asbestos, chromite, serpentine, iron, peridot, 
emerald, magnesite, talc, soapstone and platinum group of minerals associated with gold. 
The  high  metamorphic  Khyber-Hazara  Zone  contains  beryl,  feldspar,  fluorite,  galena, 
garnet, graphite, magnetite, magnesite, marble, quartz, sheelite, talc and gemstones. The 
gemstones include aquamarine, moonstone, pink topaz, peridot, ruby, spessartine, garnet 
and  tourmaline.  The  southern  part  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  contains  bauxite/laterite, 
bentonite, clays, coal, fuller's earth, fire clay, glass sand, gypsum and anhydrite, iron ore, 
ochre,  lead-zinc  ores,  manganese,  limestone/dolomite,  shale  and  sandstone,  gravel,  oil 
and gas,  oil shale, potash  salts, radioactive  minerals, phosphate,  rock  salt  and  sulphur. 
Except for marble, most of the other  deposits a are yet to be properly explored, developed 
and brought into the economic benefit of the poor people especially in mountainous area. 
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323029656_Mineral_Deposits_of_Khyber_Pakhtunkh
wa_and_FATA_Pakistan ) 
Indigenous people. Among many indigenous people in Pakistan, Kalash or Kalasha are 
the only ones living in the north-western Chitral district of KP, neighboring Afghanistan. 
They are about 5,000 people who have been living in the Hindukush mountainous valleys 
of Bamburet, Birir and Rumbur. They speak the Kalasha language, from the Dardic family of 
the Indo-Aryan  branch  and  are  also  considered 
the  Pakistan's 
smallest ethnoreligious  group  (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalash_people).   These  people  were 
quite confined to their valleys and have been living for thousands of years according to their ancient 
cultural traditions and religion, however, road access to the area have been improved which has 
exposed  these  people  to  outer  world  now.  They  are  also  considered  to  be  Pakistan's 
smallest ethnoreligious group. 
to  be  one  of 
Economic opportunities. KP is endowed with abundant natural resources including fertile 
land for high value agriculture, forests, minerals, enormous potential for tourism energy 
and power development. KP’s share of Pakistan's GDP has historically comprised 10.5%, 
forestry share has mining output and nearly 78% of Pakistan’s marble production comes 
from this province. ranged from a low of 34.9% to a high of 81%, giving an average of 
61.6%,  while  more  than  20%  of  Pakistan's  Other  opportunities  exist  in  large  scale 
manufacturing concerns like cement, sugar and tobacco/cigarette units.  Dairy, meat, wool 
and fruit processing has great potential in the area. 
39
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
5: POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS 
Environmental and Social Impacts 
The design of REAP focuses on Professional Farmer Organizations (PFO) and Public Private-
Producer Partnership (4P) and then capacity building and trainings in employable trades 
so that people can earn money for making good livelihoods. As such the project does not 
entail  activities  that  would  warrant  environmental  hazards  at  least  in  the  beginning, 
however, the business plans of PFOs and 4Ps might lead to sub-projects that may involve 
some construction activities whose potential impacts can be: 
 
Impacts on public health of surrounding communities and workers through air, 
water and soil pollution, noise or direct contact with hazardous material.  
  Soil erosion and displacement are expected as soil related impacts 
  Ecosystem and biodiversity degradation through new development and economic 
activities. 
  The sub-project may require establishment of temporary workforce during 
construction period, while permanent workforce after infrastructure development 
and capacity building through trainings, and will induce negative impact on 
overall construction, operation and maintenance cost. 
However, the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and its implementation 
will minimize the adverse impacts. 
Climate change. Pakistan is among the top ten countries that are highly vulnerable to 
climate change.  Being an agricultural country, its economy is also very sensitive to any 
change  affecting  temperature  and  rainfall  in  the  country.  Increasing  temperatures  and 
changing  rainfall  patterns  and  intensities  are  impacting  the  livelihoods  in  Pakistan  and 
Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa.  Variations  have  been  observed  in  temperature  and  rainfall  in 
different parts of KP as given in Table 4 based on a 30 years (1980-2010) data analysis. 
The  trend  analysis  reveals  that  climate  change  in  KP  has  been  perceived  in  the  form  of 
increased rainfalls and increased mean temperatures (S. Babar, 2012). 
All the three regions, Southern, Central and Northern, are expected to receive more rains 
than  before  during  Kharif  while  the  overall  increase  for  KP  is  expected  to  be  11  mm. 
Maximum temperature has been decreasing for southern and central regions by 1.3°C and 
0.6°C,  respectively  and  has  been  increasing  by  0.7°C  for  northern  region.  Overall,  the 
maximum temperature has deceased by 0.6°C while mean temperature has decreased by 
0.3°C for KP in Kharif. The trends for Rabi season are increasing rainfalls and temperatures 
over a 30 years span (Table 4). 
Table 4. Trend in temperature and rainfall during Kharif and Rabi Seasons in KP. 
Region 
Kharif Season Trend 
Rabi Season Trend 
Rainfall   Max. 
Temp. 
Min. 
Temp. 
Mean 
Temp. 
Rainfall  Max. 
Temp. 
Min. 
Temp. 
Mean 
Temp. 
19mm↑ 
1.3°C↓  0.8°C↑  0.3°C↓ 
3mm↑ 
0.7°C↑  1.6°C↑  1.1°C↑ 
38mm↑ 
0.6°C↓  0.7°C↑  0.3°C↑  25mm↑ 
1.3°C↑  1.2°C↑  1.2°C ↑ 
4mm↑ 
0.7°C↑  1.3°C↓  No 
15mm↑ 
2.5°C↑  No 
1°C ↑ 
Change 
11mm↑  0.6°C↓  0.2°C↑  0.3°C↓ 
15mm↑ 
1°C↑ 
Change 
2°C↑ 
1.2°C ↑ 
Southern 
Region 
Central  
Region 
Northern 
Region 
KP 
Adapted from Climate Change and its Impact on Agriculture in Pakistan: A case Study of 
KP (1980-2010). Ph. D Thesis By Samreen Babar 2012. University of Peshawar, 
Pakistan).   
40
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Being an upper riparian, KP is more vulnerable to climatic events and disasters. Extreme 
events  such  as  cloudburst  over  the  catchment  areas  of  Indus  and  its  tributaries,  have 
frequently occurred during the last several years’ monsoon seasons, especially 2010. This 
often  leads  to  flash  floods  and  landslides,  causing  damages  across  several  sectors, 
including  agriculture,  livelihoods,  infrastructure,  transport  and  communications,  and 
housing. Areas near swelling rivers and low lying areas experience major floods causing 
all kinds of damages. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods 
(GLOF) due to increased temperatures and intense precipitation, mostly in Chital. Agro-
ecological Zones A and B are at high risk of flooding while droughts are more common in 
the southern districts, Zones C and D. (KP Climate Change Policy 2016). 
Discussions  with  the  Agriculture  Department  and  farmer  groups  revealed  that  rainfall 
pattern has changed in D. I. Khan. Rain showers during pollination and harvesting of date 
palm cause loss of about 30 to 40 percent. Rains during mango pollination period cause 
malformation of fruit and decrease production. Also, late cotton sowing is more beneficial 
now  than  the  traditional  sowing  period.  Abrupt  changes  in  day  and  night  temperatures 
adversely date palm production in D.I. Khan. 
Environmental, Social and Climate Change impacts for various activities and sub-projects are provided 
in the following Table. 
Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Factors and Mitigating Measures 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors 
Social Mobilization and 
Development (such as 
participatory planning, 
selection of target area 
and intervention, agri-
business development 
Social: 
  Clear mechanism for social mobilization based on 
predetermined criteria for selection of members  
  Community participatory planning is not 
institutionalized/ defined  
  Limited awareness of the community about the project 
goals and objectives  
  Limited scope for gender based community 
development 
  Poor strategies for involvement of women 
  Lack of awareness about Farm Services Centres and 
limited accessibility to cooperatives  
  Lack of clarity about the role and responsibility of FOs 
Environmental and Climate: 
Office establishment 
  Location; Easily accessible to all   
  Noise and dust pollution during construction 
  Labour and staff protection and safety at risk 
  Disposal of debris and other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution due to due to operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and movement may adversely affect 
movement of pedestrians, animals, and birds 
  Inadequate solid waste disposal  
  Poor sewerage and drainage system 
Establishment and 
Operation of PMU and 
Regional offices  
Social: 
  Location and accessibility 
41
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors 
  Community access to PMU/regional offices is not 
available or limited 
  Unavailability of Community complaint mechanism at 
PMU/Regional offices 
  Lack of mechanisms for participatory planning 
(particularly involvement of women) 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Noise and dust pollution during construction 
  Labour and staff protection and safety at risk 
  Disposal of debris and other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution due to due to operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and movement may adversely affect 
movement of pedestrians, animals, and birds 
  Inadequate solid waste disposal  
  Poor sewerage and drainage system 
Climate smart 
technologies—HIES, 
raised beds, land 
levelling, tunnels, etc. 
drought resistant 
varieties 
Social: 
  Lack of knowledge and information about new 
technologies 
  Selection of appropriate technology 
  Use of selected technology 
Environment: 
  Air, water and noise pollution 
  Oils, grease pour and spill around 
  Parking 
  Use of new varieties of fruits, vegetables and other 
seeds. 
Social: 
  Selection of candidates, courses, training institutes 
  Gender parity 
  Incentives and facilities for deserving candidates 
  Number of trainees per class 
  Location of and accessibility to selected training centre 
  Language of trainings  
  Familiarity with the machine/equipment and its use  
Environment 
  Class rooms with adequate space and facilities for the 
trainees 
  Proper seating and audio-visual facilities  
  Separate wash rooms and other facilities for women 
  Availability of all equipment, tools and material for 
training 
Vocational and skill 
development trainings  
42
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors 
Fruit /vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
Social: 
  Selection of site 
  Infrastructure development may affect neighbourhood 
environment during construction period 
  Mechanism for members’ access to various details and 
facilities   
  Limited awareness of member about design and other 
details  
  Lack of mechanisms for participatory planning 
(particularly involvement of women) 
  Access  of  and  inclusion  of  poor,  marginalized  and 
vulnerable  
  Local privacy and gender elements 
  Local community, gender, neighbourhood & stakeholder 
participation  
Environmental and Climate: 
  Noise, dirt, dust and air pollution may raise 
  Labour and staff protection and safety at risk 
  Material storage and vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, animals, and birds 
  Lack of essential facilities for labour and workers   
  Use of chemicals during construction and processing of 
products.  
  Improper waste and chemicals disposal during 
construction and operation of units 
  Wastewater disposal 
  Inadequate sewerage and drainage system 
  Adverse impacts on migratory birds movement 
  Construction of cold storages (insolation needs) 
  Storage of fruits for processing  
  Health and safety 
  Quality control 
43
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
6: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
This  section  describes  the  process  for  risk  assessment  of  the  potential  environmental, 
social and climate change impact of PFOs and 4Ps sub-projects. The sub-projects will be 
categorized as per SECAP criteria. 
6.2 Sub-Project Selection and Screening 
REAP will consider sub-projects with Category B and C only, while screening will be carried 
out per IFAD screening checklist and following the Rapid Assessment checklist.  Screening 
for environmental and social impacts using the Rapid Assessment Checklist (Attachment 
A) will be introduced for all subprojects before implementation. The screening process will 
include:  assessing  impacts;  examining  alternatives  to  minimize  the  negative  impacts; 
enhancing  positive  impacts;  and  compensating  for  adverse  impacts.  If  the  Rapid 
Assessment Checklist indicates that the possible negative impacts from implementation of 
the subproject would be minimal and that the positive impacts would certainly outweigh 
them,  further  action  with  respect  to  environmental  and  social  safeguards  will  not  be 
required upon approval of the Checklist results by PMU. If the negative impacts are more 
than  minimal  or  irreversible  according  to  the  Checklist,  an  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  must  be  conducted  and  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESMP) developed, whose suggested methodology and structure is shown in Attachment 
B, to mitigate the negative impacts.   
Attachment A: Rapid Assessment Checklist 
“Additional Information” field investigations and visits must be completed when negative 
impact  is  identified  or  expected.  For  the  purpose  of  allowing  examination  from  various 
angles, some impacts are addressed more than once through different questions. 
Section A: Project Siting 
Name of staff  
Date: 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for addressing 
the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Type, location and 
area of the sub-
project 
Type (infrastructure, agro processing, dairy 
processing, cold storage) 
The approximate area (ac/ha)? 
The GPS co-ordinates? 
The estimated number of population (male, 
female, aged over 70, aged under 15)? 
a.  Beneficiaries 
b.  Affected 
44
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Dominant environmental feature (e.g., 
rainforest, dry forest, savannah, barren 
land, agricultural land, pasture, other)? 
Likelihood of recurrent natural disasters 
(e.g., drought, flood, wild fire, strong wind) 
in the area? 
The level of economic resilience? 
Is the 
project/subproject 
area in or close to: 
Densely populated 
areas? 
Cultural heritage 
sites? 
Protected areas? 
Wetlands? 
Estuarine? 
Buffer zones of 
protected area? 
Special areas for 
protecting 
biodiversity? 
Other 
Will the project/subproject require support 
facilities (water, electricity, gas, access 
road etc.)? 
Source and quality of water? 
Section B: Project Environmental Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for addressing 
the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Ecological disturbances or 
loss of ecological functions 
45
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Will the 
project/ 
due to infrastructure 
construction? 
subproject 
cause: 
Environmental degradation 
from any of interventions? 
Environmental degradation 
from construction activities 
and equipment? 
Accidental release of 
hazardous chemicals? 
Increase in generation of 
solid waste? 
Whether the design 
includes safe waste 
disposal 
Occupational health 
hazards due to exposure to 
dust, hazardous material, 
noise, etc. 
Public health risks from 
solid, liquid, gaseous waste 
discharges? 
Changes in water flows? 
Eventual degradation of 
surface water bodies? 
Eventual degradation of 
groundwater bodies? 
Soil contamination? 
Decrease in soil fertility? 
Air pollution?  
Section C: Social Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project/subproject 
stage for addressing 
the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
46
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
  Other 
Does the 
project/ 
subproject:  
Operate where property 
rights on resources (e.g., 
land and water) are legally 
and traditionally recognized? 
Cause changes to land 
tenure, land use, access to 
or use of resources? 
Require land acquisition? 
- 
 How will the cost be shared between the 
project and the landowner? 
Obtain private land with 
project/community funding 
and through willing-buyer-
willing-seller arrangement? 
Involve dislocation or 
involuntary resettlement of 
inhabitants? 
Cause modification in 
technology and land uses, 
which affect current 
socioeconomic activities? 
Increase unemployment? 
Cause influx of laborers 
from other areas? 
Create a possibility of 
uncontrolled in-migration of 
people and overloading of 
infrastructure from 
improved transportation 
system? 
Have disproportionate 
impacts on the vulnerable 
groups (e.g., the poor, 
women, children, indigenous 
peoples, disabled)? 
Involve or be complicit in 
alteration, damage or 
removal of cultural 
heritage? 
Section D: Other Considerations 
47
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project stage for 
addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the national regulation in country 
require EIA or ESIA for the activities under 
the project? 
Does local capacity exist for fulfilment of 
EIA and ESIA requirements in 
country/countries affected by the project? 
Does the project address issues that have 
also been addressed by other projects or 
approaches? 
What are  the project/subproject 
cumulative or long-term impacts? 
Is it possible to isolate the impacts from the 
project/subproject for monitoring? 
Attachment B: Suggested Methodology and Structure of Environmental and Social 
Management Plans 
An  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  will  be  prepared  for  each 
subproject where initial screening demands preparation of such a plan. 
Suggested Structure 
A suggested structure of ESMF is as follows: 
1.  Executive Summary 
A summary of the contents and key findings written in a way that is easily understood by 
the general public. It should be concise, about 3 to 5 pages. 
2.  Background 
Subproject specific background information will be included in this section. 
3.  Subproject Overview 
This section will provide an overview of the subproject and its relation to the project to 
which the subproject belongs. 
4.  Objectives 
The  section  will  list  the  objectives  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
specific to the subproject, based on its detailed information provided by the appropriate 
Project Management Unit. The project and subproject details should include their precise 
nature and scope, site location, activities to be undertaken, and timing and scheduling. 
5.  Scope of Work 
48
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
This section should list and describe all national, provincial legislations and regulations as 
well as IFAD policies that give rise to the Environmental and Social Management Plan. The 
scope should take into account the nature and the magnitude of the potential impacts in 
addition to the project location and size. 
6.  Screening of Environmental and Social Impacts  
This  section  will  contain  the  assessment  results  of  anticipated  impacts  of  the  project 
activities  on  the  environment  and  the  people,  including  the  list  of  key  concerns  and 
potential impacts of the subproject on the environment and the people. The assessment 
will be the base for deciding whether any auxiliary plan would be required:  
7.  Baseline information 
This  section  will  describe  proposed  sites  and  their  immediate  surroundings  with  texts, 
maps,  photographs  as  well  as  key  environmental  and  social  aspects  of  the  sites  and 
surroundings, such as  demography,  ethnicity, socio  economic activities, occupation  and 
livelihoods, land form and land use, land ownership, water resources, settlements, critical 
habitat or protected areas, formal and informal groups,  methods of communication and 
transport,  cultural  heritage  sites  or  graveyards,  sensitive  receptor  such  as  schools, 
hospitals  and  access  routes.  The  section  will  also  include  baseline  data  necessary  to 
monitor all key environmental and social impacts identified through screening. 
8.  Environmental and Social Impacts 
This section will outline both positive and negative impacts, including cumulative ones, of 
the subproject by each type of intervention, assess the severity of these impacts and the 
range  of  measures  required  to  avoid  (mitigate,  in  case  avoiding  is  not  possible)  the 
negative impacts and enhance positive ones. 
9.  Stakeholder Consultations and Information Disclosure 
This  section  will  describe  the  objective,  process,  and  outcome  of  the  stakeholder 
consultations---with community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and NGOs 
with  experience  in  the  area---that  are  carried  out  during  the  ESMP  preparation.  The 
emphasis  will  be  on  the  concerns  and  suggestions  regarding  the  subproject  and  its 
potential impacts. 
This  section  will  also  list  all  project  and  subproject  information  shared  with  the 
stakeholders during the preparation of the plan and arrangements for disclosing subproject 
information.  
10. Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
The section will describe all impacts (including cumulative ones), mitigation measures for 
each  impact,  indicators  for  each  impact,  the  parties  responsible  for  implementing  each 
mitigation  measure,  and  the  parties  responsible  for  monitoring  each  indicator.  A  single 
indicator may be monitored in different ways by multiple stakeholders to allow maximum 
participation  of  various  stakeholders,  and  subsequently  enhanced  ownership  and 
implementation of the project. 
11. Capacity Assessment and Training 
This  section  will  detail  capacity  assessment  among  the  relevant  officials  and  other 
stakeholders  on  implementing  environmental  and  social  management  plan.  It  will  also 
include  a  plan  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  stakeholders  while  implementing  the 
subproject and the ESMP. 
12. Cost Estimates and Sources of Funds 
The section will indicate cost estimates and sources of funds for institution development 
activities,  training  programs  for  implementation  teams  and  local  institutions,  technical 
assistance to authorities, costs for preparation of ESMP and other safeguard documents, 
and their implementation.  
49
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
EXCLUSION LIST 
The criteria for exclusion of sub-projects is provided in the following Table: 
Table 5.    Sub-project and Activity Exclusion List 
Negative sub project list 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
The proposed REAP will automatically exclude sub-projects that:  
Require acquisition of land and physical or economic displacement of any number 
of people 
Block the access to or use of land, water points and other livelihood resources 
used by others 
Encroach onto fragile ecosystems, marginal lands or important natural habitats of 
national or international importance (e.g. ecologically-sensitive ecosystems; 
protected areas; natural habitat areas, forests and forest reserves, wetlands, 
national parks or game reserve; any other environmentally sensitive areas) 
without adequate mitigation measures  
4 
Impact on physical cultural resources of national or international importance and 
conservation value 
In  addition  to  the  above,  sub-projects  that  would  be  categorised  as  Category  “A”  sub-
projects based on the SECAP should be avoided in order to limit the costs of further EIA 
work that may be required. However, if sub-project of high economic value is identified, 
the necessary EIA work should be done and the project carried out.  
Approval of Environmental and Social Work 
The completed screening form along with any additional planning reports will be forwarded 
to  the  review  authority,  which  is  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA),  Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa.  The  review  team  will  be  assisted  by  environmentalists  from  the  PMU  to 
make sure that all the requirements are in place to avoid delays. 
The first step in the approval process is to determine if all the relevant information has 
been  provided,  and  that  it  is  adequate.  EPA  will  also  check  if  the  technical  team  has 
thoroughly considered all environmental and social issues with regards to the identification 
of potential adverse effects arising from the sub-project as well as mitigating measures to 
adequately address negative impacts.  
Based on the desk appraisal and if needed, the field appraisal, EPA will grant approval, 
and monitor the mitigation measures during implementation.  
Quarterly and Annual Monitoring and Reviews 
Environmental and social monitoring needs to be carried out during the implementation of 
the  sub-projects.  Monitoring  of  the  compliance  of  sub-project  implementation  with  the 
mitigation measures set out in the sub-project’s ESMP will be  carried out jointly by the 
REAP  PMU  and  its  regional  offices  and  the  implementing  partners  team.  The  projects 
concerned  staff  should  supervise  the  monitoring  activities  which  should  be  reported 
quarterly and annually during the implementation phase.  
Compliance monitoring comprises on-site inspection of activities to verify that measures 
identified in  the ESMP  are  being implemented. This  type  of  monitoring is  similar  to  the 
normal tasks of a supervising staff whose task is to ensure that the Contractor is achieving 
the  required  standards  and  quality  of  work.  The  appointed  environmental  and  social 
safeguards  specialists  will  have  the  responsibility  of  conducting  the  environmental  and 
50
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
social inspections. Quarterly and an annual inspection report must be submitted (together 
with the monitoring report) to the IFAD for review and approval. 
Monitoring Indicators 
In order to be able to assess the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures for 
the impacts that will arise from the potential project activities, the dedicated staff from 
PMU, regional offices and implementing partners will conduct regular monitoring of all the 
sub-projects. The  overall performance and effectiveness  of the project can be assessed 
through monitoring the following indicators: 
Area (hectares/acres) of vegetation clearance; 
Incidences of work-related illnesses at construction sites or project areas. 
Incidences of work-related injuries at sites 
Number of pit latrines for excreta disposal for workers; 
Number of agro- infrastructure rehabilitated; 
Number of direct beneficiaries; 
Quality  of  construction  materials 
infrastructure; 
for 
the  agricultural,  agro-processing 
Quality of water discharged from the establishments; 
Number of employment opportunities for locals; 
Number of new employees engaged by the project; 
Ratio of men to women employed by the project (ensure equity in the recruitment 
processes); 
Percentage of youth engaged in the projects; 
Number of safeguards training courses conducted for all staff including extension 
officers; 
Number of safeguards training courses conducted for beneficiaries; 
Ratio of men to women trained (ensure equity in the training processes); 
Implementation of the public consultation plan; 
Institution of planned maintenance of machines and infrastructure; 
Number of climate smart technologies adopted; 
Area of degraded land reported and or restored; 
Area of land under climate smart agriculture; 
Quantity of pesticides and fertilizer used; 
Use of IPM; 
Water and soil conservation structures established; 
Climate change coping mechanisms, and adaptation strategies employed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
7: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
The ESMP provides guidelines for the management of potential environmental and social 
impacts  together  with  climate  change  aspects  of  the  project  interventions.  The  ESMP 
identifies parties responsible for monitoring actions, and any training or capacity building 
needs, Mitigation measures have been identified to reduce present and potential impacts 
associated with the proposed activities. Social mitigation includes the measures creating 
awareness and proper mobilization, proper participation of members in the planning and 
implementation  of  activities,  inclusion  of  women  etc.  to  mitigate  effects  of  local 
disagreements and conflicts. Physical mitigation includes measures that address impacts 
to the physical environment, such as biological communities, vegetation, water resources, 
air quality and others. 
The project does not involve infrastructure and other civil works development, however, 
there  are  chances  that  the  FPOs  might  go  for  establishing  fruit,  vegetable  or  dairy 
processing units at local level. Generally, fruit processing (canning, drying, freezing, and 
preparation  of  juices,  jams,  and  jellies)  steps  include  preparation  of  the  raw  material 
(cleaning, trimming, and peeling followed by cooking, canning, or freezing. Plant operation 
is  often  seasonal  and  typically  generates  volumes  of  effluents  and  solid  waste.  The 
effluents contain high organic loads, cleansing and blanching agents, salt, and suspended 
solids such as fibers and soil particles. They may also contain pesticide residues washed 
from the raw materials. The main solid wastes are organic materials, including discarded 
fruits. Odor problems can occur with poor management of solid wastes and effluents. 
Environmental  impacts  associated  with  a  dairy  processing  unit  are  generation  of  waste 
and wastewater. Once started, it is a regular full time activity to be monitored regularly to 
avoid environmental impacts. Wastewater and packaging material waster are generated 
that need to disposed-off properly to avoid any contamination especially water resources.  
Quality control mechanisms to be in place from processing to storage and to consumer.  
 Details of the ESMP and mitigation measures are provided in the Table 7.1, while climate 
change adaptation and mitigation measures are provided in Table 6, 7 and Appendix-C.   
Table 6. Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Factors and Mitigating 
Measures 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
Social: 
Social: 
  Clear mechanism for 
social mobilization 
based on 
predetermined criteria 
for selection of 
members  
  Community 
participatory planning 
is not 
institutionalized/ 
defined  
  Limited awareness of 
the community about 
  Well-defined community 
mobilization and development 
mechanism will be ensured  
  Participatory planning and 
design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of 
women will be ensured) 
  Community organizations will 
ensure coordination with local 
government department 
  Role of and access to various 
community development 
facilities will be made clear to 
the community through 
Social 
Mobilization and 
Development 
(such as 
participatory 
planning, 
selection of 
target area and 
intervention, 
agri-business 
development 
52
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
the project goals and 
objectives  
consultations, meetings and 
seminars 
  Technical and business support 
will be provided to cooperatives 
including business plan 
development  
 Clarity about the role and 
responsibilities made  
Environmental and Climate: 
  Ensure easy access with 
transport availability and on 
main road 
  Measures taken to avoid noise 
and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
measures taken care of 
  Good quality and well-
maintained generators installed 
  Smooth and calm operations of 
office.to avoid inconvenience to 
neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to 
protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid 
waste material will be ensured 
  Proper sewerage and drainage 
will be ensured 
  Limited scope for 
gender based 
community 
development 
  Poor strategies for 
involvement of 
women 
  Lack of awareness 
about Farm Services 
Centres and limited 
accessibility to 
cooperatives  
  Lack of clarity about 
the role and 
responsibility of FOs 
Environmental and 
Climate: 
Office establishment 
  Location; Easily 
accessible to all   
  Noise and dust 
pollution during 
construction 
  Labour and staff 
protection and safety 
at risk 
  Disposal of debris and 
other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution 
due to due to 
operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on 
plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and 
movement may 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Inadequate solid 
waste disposal  
  Poor sewerage and 
drainage system 
Social: 
Social: 
Establishment 
and Operation 
53
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Ensure easy access with 
transport availability and on 
main road 
  Easy community access to 
PMU/Regional ensured with 
phone and email address 
widely circulated and displayed 
in PFOs offices, 
  Participatory planning and 
design to be considered a pre-
requisite (particularly 
participation of women will be 
ensured) 
  Adequate complaint 
registration and redressal 
mechanism to be 
operationalized 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Measures taken to avoid noise 
and dust pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
measures ensured 
  Good quality and well-
maintained generators installed 
  Smooth and calm operations of 
office.to avoid inconvenience to 
neighbourhood including due to 
vehicles parking and movement 
  Maximum care exercised to 
protect plants etc 
  Adequate disposal of solid 
waste material will be ensured 
  Proper sewerage and drainage 
will be ensured 
of PMU and 
Regional offices  
  Location and 
accessibility 
  Community access to 
PMU/regional offices 
is not available or 
limited 
  Unavailability of 
Community complaint 
mechanism at 
PMU/Regional offices 
  Lack of mechanisms 
for participatory 
planning (particularly 
involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and 
Climate: 
  Noise and dust 
pollution during 
construction 
  Labour and staff 
protection and safety 
at risk 
  Disposal of debris and 
other solid waste  
  Noise and air pollution 
due to due to 
operation of 
generators) 
  Adverse effect on 
plants and shrubs 
  Vehicles parking and 
movement may 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Inadequate solid 
waste disposal  
  Poor sewerage and 
drainage system 
Social: 
Social: 
  Lack of knowledge and 
information about new 
technologies 
  PFOs will organize awareness 
campaigns about the benefits of 
such technologies. 
Climate smart 
technologies—
HIES, raised 
beds, land 
54
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
levelling, 
tunnels, etc. 
drought 
resistant 
varieties 
  Selection of appropriate 
technology 
  Use of selected 
technology 
  PFOs and project staff will help 
select the right technology for 
the right interventions 
  Proper trainings will be 
organized on the use and 
maintenance of the proposed 
technologies and interventions. 
Environment: 
Environment: 
  Air, water and noise 
pollution 
  Oils, grease pour and 
spill around 
  Machinery will be properly used 
and maintained to avoid and 
minimize any pollution 
  Ensure proper packing and 
  Parking 
  Use of new varieties of 
handling of oils and lubricants 
  Vehicles and machines will be 
fruits, vegetables and 
other seeds. 
properly parked under 
designated sheds 
  Certified varieties and seeds will 
be recommended and used 
under PFO and project 
staff/service provider guidance. 
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of candidates, 
  Criteria developed for selection 
Vocational and 
skill 
development 
trainings  
courses, training 
institutes 
  Gender parity 
  Incentives and facilities 
for deserving 
candidates 
  Number of trainees per 
class 
  Location of and 
accessibility to selected 
training centre 
  Language of trainings  
  Familiarity with the 
machine/equipment 
and its use  
Environment 
  Class rooms with 
adequate space and 
facilities for the trainees 
  Proper seating and 
audio-visual facilities  
55
of providing the right and 
required training to the right 
persons in the right institute for 
getting the employment.  
  Equal opportunity provided to 
the women candidates in the 
selected field 
  Appropriate number of students 
per class to receive proper 
attention and time during 
lectures and practical 
  Poor and deserving candidates, 
especially women, should be 
provided with incentives and 
facilities 
  Preferably local language or Urdu 
will be used for lectures and 
teaching material. 
  Centres should be easily 
accessible with public transport 
  Special lectures on the use of 
machine and equipment with 
emphasis on precautions. 
Environment 
  Ensure selection of centres with 
proper facilities 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
  Separate wash rooms 
and other facilities for 
women 
  Availability of all 
equipment, tools and 
material for training 
  Ensure required facilities for 
women 
  Ensure all tools, equipment, 
electronic and mechanical 
devices are available 
Social: 
Social: 
  Selection of site 
  Infrastructure 
development may 
affect neighbourhood 
environment during 
construction period 
  Participatory and consensus 
approach for site selection 
  Adequate project construction 
planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on 
the neighbourhood 
  Mechanism for 
  Ensure access to information and 
Fruit 
/vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
members’ access to 
various details and 
facilities   
  Limited awareness of 
member about design 
and other details  
  Lack of mechanisms for 
participatory planning 
(particularly 
involvement of women) 
  Access  of  and  inclusion 
of  poor,  marginalized 
and vulnerable  
privacy 
gender elements 
  Local 
and 
  Local 
community, 
gender,  neighbourhood 
stakeholder 
& 
participation  
all details  
  Access to alternate routes to be 
ensured during construction 
period    
  Participatory planning and 
design to be ensured 
(particularly participation of 
women to be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation 
and Maintenance will be well-
defined, and spread through 
workshops and meetings 
  Access to various facilities and 
finances will be made clear to 
members through consultations, 
meetings and seminars and 
records availability 
  Community  consent  regarding 
gender  elements,  particularly 
privacy  of  women  shall  be 
addressed  
  Stakeholders 
consultation 
including  nearby  communities, 
women shall be ensured and their 
concerns  shall  be  addressed  for 
sustainability  
Environmental and 
Climate: 
  Noise, dirt, dust and air 
pollution may raise 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Labour and staff 
  Measures taken to minimize 
protection and safety at 
risk 
pollution 
  Use of PPEs and other safety 
  Material storage and 
measures ensured 
vehicle movement may 
56
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design 
stage 
adversely affect 
movement of 
pedestrians, animals, 
and birds 
  Proper storage of material and 
vehicle maintenance and 
movement ensured to avoid 
inconvenience. 
  Lack of essential 
  Training on occupational 
facilities for labour and 
workers   
  Use of chemicals during 
construction and 
processing of products.  
  Improper waste and 
chemicals disposal 
during construction and 
operation of units 
  Wastewater disposal 
  Inadequate sewerage 
and drainage system 
  Adverse impacts on 
migratory birds 
movement 
  Construction of cold 
storages (insolation 
needs) 
  Storage of fruits for 
processing  
  Health and safety 
  Quality control 
hazards, storage and use of 
chemicals, on maintenance and 
operation machinery and 
vehicles for involved personnel 
will be organized. 
  Materials and chemicals that 
consist of small particles or 
pieces must be stored in a 
container with a watertight 
cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with 
water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles must 
be operated with designated 
fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be 
placed along the routes 
  Adequate planning of labour and 
worker camps with WASH, 
sewerage and drainage system 
will be ensured 
  First aid facilities to be provided 
at site.  
  Processing units shall not be 
installed in ecologically sensitive 
or protected areas 
  Waste generated shall be 
disposed off at suitable sites and 
after treatment to reduce the 
potential for acidification  
  Waste treatment and 
management plan shall be 
devised and implemented  
  Eco-friendly energy supply shall 
be preferred.  
  Carbon footprint of the 
processing unit shall be 
calculated and mitigation 
measures shall be ensured  
  Use of water in large quantity 
shall be avoided and recycled  
  Processing units shall have 
proper health & safety 
arrangements for workers 
  Ensure quality standards of the 
product  
57
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Climate change adaptation/mitigation measures are provided in following Table 7. 
Table 7: Climate change impacts together with adaptation and mitigation measures. 
Main themes 
Main challenges 
under Future 
Climate Change 
Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation 
Measures at the design 
stage 
Tentative 
Cost 
Estimate  
Fruit 
/vegetable/dairy 
Processing Plant 
(example) 
  GHG emissions 
  Increased 
water use 
USD 7000 to 
10000 per 
plant.  
  Inclusion of climate 
change assessment 
during infrastructure 
design. 
  Climate resilient 
design of 
infrastructure 
  Awareness raising of 
the farmers and line 
departments (through 
trainings and 
seminars) on climate 
change and its impacts 
  Construction and 
curing of concrete 
need adequate care 
and consideration due 
to expected rise in 
temperature 
  Sheds and first aid 
should be made 
available at sites for 
labours (to protect 
them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)   
58
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Appendix-C: Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements  
Actions 
Indicator  
Responsibility 
Time Frame  
Cost/ 
Budget 
Source 
Environment  
Project (and sub-
projects) 
environmental 
requirements and 
responsibilities need 
to be clearly defined. 
Preparation of 
environmental 
guidelines for sub-
projects. 
Environmental guidelines 
including screening, 
approvals, mitigation 
measures and well defined 
responsibilities. 
2022-2027 
USD 0.20 m 
PMU will be 
responsible for 
elaborating and 
defining details of 
guidelines and then 
oversee overall 
implementation 
under the project 
while regional offices 
will monitor and look 
after the projects in 
respective regions. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will also support and 
monitor the  
implementing 
partners in sub-
projects. The 
concerned line 
departments (EPA) 
are expected to 
provide guidance and 
approve sub-projects 
when submitted 
59
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Detailed plans and 
designs for sub-
projects developed. 
Design consultant to 
prepare detailed plans 
and designs for sub-
projects. 
Detailed Plans and Designs 
for sub-Projects. 
project 
implementation 
period 
(2022-
2027). 
in 
Included 
project 
cost—Comp-
1 
Design consultants 
prepare design in 
consultation and 
coordination with  
PMU/Regional 
officesPMU reviews 
the designs and the 
social,  
environmental and 
climate change 
checklists. 
Consultation with 
PFOs and 4P will be 
required.  
Community and 
stakeholders 
Endorsement/consultation 
undertaken of plans 
Approval of plans by PMU 
and Concerned line 
department (EPA), if 
required. 
Plans to include 
details of 
infrastructure 
development together 
with financing details 
including O&M 
responsibilities. 
Plans to include 
detailed social, 
environmental and 
climate change 
assessments. 
Plans to be approved 
by the project team 
and relevant line 
departments. 
Guidelines prepared 
for reducing 
environmental impacts 
for various sub-
projects of 
Component-1 
Plans to be endorsed 
by communities and 
approved by the 
project 
management/social 
mobilization partners. 
Environmental  
mitigation actions, 
such as solid waste 
management, water, 
air and noise quality, 
eco-system, agro-
chemicals, and other 
hazardous chemicals   
60
Guidelines prepared 
Increased awareness and 
capacity of stakeholders 
groups 
Consultants will 
prepare the 
guidelines to be 
reviewed and 
approved by PMU. 
PMU/Regional offices 
and implementing  
partners will monitor 
and implement the 
2019 and project 
implementation 
(2022-
period 
2027). 
Included 
in 
project  cost 
—Comp-1 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Training and 
awareness of 
stakeholders groups 
Sub-project cost includes 
investment in 
environmental  
Mitigation Measures 
Investment in 
environmental 
mitigation 
measures including 
safe disposal of waste, 
chemicals reduction, 
adoption of IPM 
. 
Implementation of the 
Environmental and 
Social 
Management 
(ESMP) 
Plan 
Implementation 
responsibilities to be 
defined, allocated and 
costed. 
Bid documents include 
requirements 
for the environment 
safety 
measures. 
and  mitigation 
Bid Documents and 
ToRs for the various 
components need to 
incorporate the 
ESMP requirements 
guidelines and 
organize trainings 
and capacity building 
programs for the 
concerned 
stakeholders. 
PFOs and 4Ps will 
ensure safe disposal 
of waste material. 
PMU to ensure that 
ESMP requirements 
are part of the bid 
documents and that 
cost is also included 
in the bid.  
Contractors will be 
responsible for the  
implementation of 
the guidelines while 
PFOs/4Ps and 
implementing 
partners will monitor 
under the overall 
supervision of 
PMU/Regional 
offices.  
project 
implementation 
(2022-
period 
2027). 
Included 
in 
project  cost 
—Comp-1 
Climate Change 
Indepth analysis of 
Preparation of 
Indepth/Detailed Climate 
PMU will have  
Included in 
61
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Climate change 
impacts assessment, 
and 
adaptation/mitigation 
measures need to be 
understood. 
indepth/detailed 
climate change 
analysis and 
adaptation/mitigation 
guidelines for 
projects. 
Change Analysis and 
Adaptation Guidelines 
Training for the 
community and 
government officials 
to understand climate 
change impacts 
together with 
adaptation and 
mitigation measures 
(awareness granted). 
Responsibilities and 
financing for climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation 
is agreed. 
Participative and 
sustainable climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation 
program is 
implemented.. 
Climate change adaptation 
initiatives are being 
implemented. 
Monitoring of climate 
adaptation/mitigation 
programs and climate 
damage. 
Potential Climate 
Change Risks are 
reduced. 
62
project cost —
Comp-1 
2022-2027 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost —
Comp-1 
specialized climate 
change staff to be 
respponsible for 
climate change 
related activities 
including preparation 
of guidelines.  
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure 
adaptation and 
implementation by 
PFOs/4Ps and 
implementing 
partners. 
Cost for climate 
related activities 
included in the 
design estimates and 
bid documents of all 
sub-projects. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure that  
climate change 
adaptation/mitigation  
activities under sub-
projects are 
prepared by PFOs in 
consultation and 
agreement with 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Social 
A well-defined and 
strong social 
mobilization process 
to facilitate the 
delivery of programme 
activities in an 
inclusive and effective 
manner 
Detailed technical 
proposal of the social 
mobilisattion partner 
elaborate mobilization 
strategy 
Approved social 
mobilisation 
plan/strategy/poverty 
graduation strategy 
Implementation of the 
social mobilisation 
/poverty graduation 
strategy 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost 
concerned members 
and are then 
implemented as per 
design guidelines 
and requirements 
RSPs and 
implementing 
partners will provide 
detailed 
methodology and 
strategy with work 
plans in their 
proposals for 
inclusive and 
effective social 
mobilization of the 
concerned 
stakeholders in 
coordination with 
PMU and regional 
offices. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will monitor and 
ensure quality of 
social mobilization. 
Labor standards and 
Healthy and safe 
All facilities are physically 
Implementing 
63
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
working conditions 
working conditions 
provided where 
normal facilities like 
wash rooms (separate 
for mael and female), 
personal protection 
equipments (PPEs), 
first aid box and clean 
water are available. 
provided and register 
maintained. 
partners  ensure all 
facilities and 
PMU/Regional offices 
regularly monitor 
and check facilities 
and register. 
2022-27 
Working hours are 
properly observed  
Eight hours working 
days are oberved 
Registers are maintained 
for all staff with in-out 
timings. 
Child labour and 
underpaymnet 
Age of intending 
labourers to be 
checked from valid 
identity cards. 
Identity card numbers and 
mobile numbers entered in 
daily rosters.  
Implementing 
partners maintain 
the register, 
PMU/regional offices 
monitor with field 
visits  and checking 
of registers 
Implementing 
partners to ensure 
no underage 
labourers are hired 
for any job under the 
project. All labour 
are paid per market 
rates. PMU/Regional 
offices will regularly 
monitor by visits, 
daily rosters and 
payment receipts. 
Stakeholders 
participatory planning, 
Detailed information 
and engagement with 
Guidelines for stakeholder 
engagement in design of 
Sub-project and  
activities to be 
2022-27 
Included in 
project cost 
64
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
design and 
implementation of the 
sub-projects 
stakeholders including 
farmers, 
disadvantaged groups, 
women and youth 
sub projects. 
Final plan and design 
to be endorsed by 
representative 
stakeholders. 
Documentation of 
stakeholder engagement 
and endorsement. 
Gender equitable 
approaches are 
developed for 
improving income, 
food, nutrition. 
Gender equitablity is 
adhered in 
selection/targetting 
criteria. 
Gender equitability plan 
prepared. 
Training and 
implementation of the 
Community Led 
Empowerment 
planned by 
PMU/Regional 
offices, PFOs and 4Ps 
will be participatroy 
in all respects from 
design, planning and 
impmlementation. 
PMU and regional 
offices will ensure 
proper social 
mobilization and 
awareness of 
concerned members 
and their 
involvement from the 
beginning till end.  
PMU/Regional offices 
to ensure the 
partcipation of 
women and extra 
poor with support 
from implementing  
partners according to 
targets set in the 
project.  
Included in 
project cost 
2022-2027 
Monitoring 
Effective consultation 
and public disclosure 
of social, 
Requirements to be 
defined in compliance 
to EPA and IFAD 
Public 
consultation/disclosure 
effectively documented. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will ensure that all 
details of sub-
2022-2027 
Included in 
project cost 
65
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
environmental and 
climate change 
documentation 
requirements. 
Overall monitoring 
and evaluation needs 
to be coordinated and 
effective to meet 
project evaluation 
requirements. 
Monitoring and 
evaluation 
requirements would 
be defined; including 
physical and financial 
progress and 
reporting  
Approved plan for 
monitoring and evaluation 
include social, 
environmental and climate 
change mitigation 
indicators.  
Monitoring and evaluation 
reports. 
Quarterly and annual 
reports. 
ESMP Reports as required 
Routine monitoring of 
social, environmental 
and climate change 
risks activities 
especially progress of 
ESMP. 
66
projects along with 
their benefits social, 
environmental and 
climate change 
impacta are shared 
with all stakeholders. 
Easy access to 
record and 
documatation will be 
provided to all. 
PMU/Regional offices 
will supervise and 
monitor the physical 
and finalcial progress 
of activities by PFOs, 
4Ps with the help of 
implementing 
partners within the 
agreed schedules 
and quality. 
Implementing 
partners will carry 
out routine 
monitoring  while 
PMU/Regional offices 
will supervise and 
evaluate the 
progress.   
Included in 
project cost 
2022-2027 
2022 to 2027 
Included in 
project cost 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
67
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
ANNEXURE 1.    SUMMARY OF IFAD GUIDANCE STATEMENTS. 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 1 :   BIODIVERSITY  
Biodiversity or biological diversity refers to the full range and variety of the world’s biota, 
and its living organisms. Biodiversity is usually considered at three levels: (i) generic, (ii) 
species,  and  (iii)  ecosystem  diversity.  Conservation  of  biological  diversity  aims  at 
maintaining  global  biological  resources  to  meet  the  needs  of  humanity  today  while 
ensuring their availability for future generations – a fundamental criterion of sustainable 
development (IFAD, 2017). 
Conservation  of  biodiversity  is  a  cornerstone  of  IFAD  projects,  particularly  those  for 
agricultural development. Value chain development projects may also offer opportunities 
for  preserving  biodiversity  by  promoting  the  sustainable  harvesting  and  marketing  of 
products derived from old plant varieties and breeds (e.g. underutilized species), locally 
used  plants  (e.g.  medicinal  plants)  and  non-timber  forest  products.  Short  value  chains 
supplied by many small producers, who use considerably more species and varieties than 
larger farms, are more suitable for the conservation of agrobiodiversity than long value 
chains served by a few large farms with monocultures. In addition, agricultural practices 
such  as  mixed  cropping  and  agroforestry  have  proved  beneficial  for  climate  change 
adaptation and improved agricultural productivity.  
IFAD does not implement projects in areas of critical habitats or which result in conversion 
or degradation of such habitats. Emphasis will be to identify alternatives and ensure that 
any  potential  degradation  or  conversion  is  appropriately  mitigated.  IFAD  will  protect 
biodiversity by designing its projects appropriately, ensuring that they are implemented 
sustainably with full community participation, and providing sound recommendations for 
improving borrowing countries’ agricultural policies. 
Biodiversity  should  be  identified  at  an  early  stage  of  project  preparation  to  allow  for 
optimum integration of conservation and development objectives. The following are some 
of the issues to be considered in this identification process: 
  Adopt  an  ecosystem  perspective  and  multisectoral  approach  to  developmental 
programmes; 
  Promote  fair  and  equitable  sharing  of  costs  and  benefits  from  biodiversity 
conservation  and  sustainable  use  at  all  levels:  local,  national,  regional  and 
international;  
  Encourage  full  stakeholder  participation,  including  partnerships  between  civil 
society, government and the private sector; 
  Ensure  that  IFAD  programmes  and  projects  are  consistent  with  the  wider  policy 
framework, and/or changes are made for supportive policies and laws; 
  Ensure  that  institutional  arrangements  are  effective,  transparent,  accountable, 
inclusive and responsive; 
  Provide and use accurate, appropriate, multidisciplinary information, accessible to, 
 
and understood by, all stakeholders; 
IFAD’s  investments  should  be  sensitive  to,  and  complement,  local  and  national 
structures, processes and capacities; 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 2 – AGROCHEMICALS 
Increased food production is one  of  IFAD’s central objectives; the use of  agrochemicals 
(mainly fertilizers and pesticides) may be necessary to achieve higher yields per unit area. 
However, the environmental and social (including health) concerns raised by such use of 
agrochemicals must be carefully considered (IFAD, 2017). 
Agrochemicals include fertilizers, liming and acidifying agents, soil conditioners, pesticides, 
and  chemicals  used  in  animal  husbandry  such  as  antibiotics  and  hormones.  The  use  of 
agrochemicals  has  been  critical  to  raising  crops  for  food.  However,  some  of  these 
68
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
chemicals  cause  substantial  damage  to  the  environment,  ecology  and  human  health, 
greatly reducing their net benefits.  
IFAD  projects  promote  the  use  of  agrochemicals  directly,  as  a  project  component  for 
increased crop productivity, or – more commonly – indirectly, by increasing the availability 
of  short-term  credit  for  farm inputs or  water for  irrigation, which encourages  increased 
use of agrochemicals.  
Careful  selection  of  the  type  of  agrochemicals  and  management  of  their  use  (timing, 
dosage, mode of application, etc.) can reduce to acceptable levels the environmental risks 
they pose while providing the needed benefits for increased production with lower financial 
and health risk costs.  
IFAD projects should strive to improve existing pesticide and fertilizer use by ensuring that 
the  proper  institutional,  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  in  place  and  that  sufficient 
technical  and  managerial  capacity-building  is  provided  for  the  selection,  application, 
storage,  disposal  and  monitoring  of  pesticides,  which  are  often  hazardous  if  they  are 
misused or handled improperly.  
The  use  of  agrochemicals  can  also  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  promoting  indigenous 
farming practices, such as: 
 
 
 
 
the cultivation of locally adapted crops and varieties, which are often resistant to 
local pests and diseases;  
the  use  of  locally  available  natural  biopesticides  and  pest-repellent  crops,  with 
adapted cultivation strategies (seeding periods and methods, etc.);  
the use of natural on-farm animal and green manure; and  
the utilisation of organic farming techniques.  
Ensuring diversity in the crops and varieties cultivated on a farm, especially indigenous 
crops, reduces the risk of high-level pest infestations and disease epidemics and facilitates 
enhanced  ecosystem  services,  including  through  pollinators  and  active  soil  fauna  and 
flora.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 3 – ENERGY 
Worldwide, 2.4 billion people rely on traditional biomass such as fuelwood and charcoal 
for cooking; 1.3 billion people do not have access to electricity (REN21, 2012). Households 
expend significant proportions of their disposable incomes, time and labour on low-quality 
energy  sources.  This  situation  entrenches  poverty,  constrains  the  delivery  of  social 
services, limits opportunities for women, and erodes environmental sustainability at the 
local, national and global levels (UN-Energy, 2004).  
Modern bioenergy technologies can offer a wide range of solutions that are appropriate to 
rural domestic energy needs (e.g. for cooking on flexi-biogas) or to  energy demand for 
productive uses (e.g. water pumping for irrigation). 
Broad  and  reliable  access  to  energy  allows  the  powering  of  agricultural  and  transport 
equipment, is particularly important for producers who are off the power grid or connected 
to an unreliable power  supply, and reduces rural poverty through increased agricultural 
and labour productivity (IFAD, 2017). 
Energy  security  is  receiving increased  attention  in  the  IFAD  portfolio,  which  focuses  on 
improving access to  energy for domestic, processing and farming purposes, to  enhance 
the  quality  of  life  and  living  standards  of  poor  rural  people.  In  partnership  with  other 
entities, and in support of country-owned initiatives, IFAD explores alternative sources of 
energy for poor people, to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels or traditional biomass 
by  capitalizing  on  opportunities  to  use  renewable  energy  sources  at  the  farm  and 
community levels, and promoting low-cost technologies that use local resources to provide 
energy to rural areas.  
69
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
Renewable energy is of growing interest because of its potential to diminish reliance on 
fossil  fuels, reduce  carbon  emissions  and  mitigate  climate  change. For  example,  biogas 
can provide poor rural people in developing countries with clean and renewable energy all 
year  round.  The  use  of  biogas  stoves  frees  women  from  the  need  to  collect  fuelwood, 
enabling them to undertake other productive activities.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 4 – FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE 
Fisheries  projects  can  be  divided  in  two  groups:  (i)  capture  fisheries  (harvest  of  wild 
stock); and (ii) culture fisheries or fish farming (freshwater aquaculture, brackish water 
aquaculture and Mari culture). Capture fisheries include marine operations (offshore and 
near-shore) and inland operations (rivers and lakes). Fish farming produces more fish than 
is  normally  available  from  wild  stock,  by  manipulating  or  managing  the  fish  and  food 
resources (by containment in ponds or specific productive areas, creating new or improved 
use of natural habitats). 
The demand for fish has steadily increased over the past five decades and it is no longer 
possible to meet this demand from wild fish stocks alone. Increased fish production can 
only  be  achieved  through  better  management  of  capture  fisheries  resources  and  the 
aquatic ecosystem and expansion of aquaculture. Aquaculture can improve food security 
and  diversification  of  livelihoods,  thereby  reduce  households’  vulnerability  to  natural 
hazards and economic uncertainty. However, aquaculture must be managed responsibly 
to avoid negative social and environmental impacts, including pollution, damage to aquatic 
biodiversity,  conflicts  over  resource  rights,  and  marginalization  of  small-scale  actors 
(IFAD, 2017).  
Climate change poses new challenges for the sustainability of fisheries and aquaculture 
systems all across the globe. Coastal communities are in the frontline of climate change 
impacts  and  are  vulnerable  to  sea  level  rise,  extreme  weather  events,  changing 
distribution  and  abundance  of  fish  stocks,  eroding  coastlines,  salt  water  intrusion, 
expansion of tourism amenities, and the impacts of ocean acidification on food security 
and coastal resources.  
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011) explains the broad 
environmental  objectives  for  IFAD  fisheries  and  aquaculture  sector  interventions  to:  (i) 
strengthen fisheries management and the tenure rights of fishing communities to common 
pool resources; (ii) introduce ecosystem approaches for both fisheries and aquaculture; 
(iii)  restore  and  develop  protected  areas;  (iv)  promote  integrated  coastal  and  marine 
resource management to ensure sustainable fishing practices; (v) invest in retraining and 
education for fishers to create alternative employment opportunities; and (vi) encourage 
sustainable forms of aquaculture.  
The GS serves to protect the environment from the effects of both capture and fish farming 
which include over exploitation and habitat destruction. Through this GS, IFAD seeks to 
achieve the following social, economic and environmental outcomes through investments 
in fisheries and aquaculture:  
 
 
increase food production;  
improve  nutrition  for  fishing  and  fish  farming  communities,  surrounding 
communities and extending to the national level;  
increase incomes and employment opportunities, including for youth and women;  
improve the health and quality of life in fishing communities;  
increase national trade and exports of fisheries and aquaculture products;  
reduce the immigration of young fishers to urban areas;  
 
 
 
 
  provide access to financial services for small-scale fishers and fish farmers;  
  preserve and strengthen habitats that are important for rejuvenating fish stocks, 
such as mangroves and coral reefs;  
  enhance  access  to  knowledge  and  sustainable  fisheries  and  aquaculture 
technologies;  
70
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
 
strengthen policies and institutions for fisheries resource management, tenure and 
access rights of local people; and  
  enhance resilience of coastal communities against climate change and other shocks 
by  incorporating  climate  change  impacts  in  the  design  of  new  fisheries  and 
aquaculture projects.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 5 – FOREST RESOURCES 
Forests  have  an  important  role  in  supporting  local  and  global  ecosystem  services  and 
providing resources to some 1.6 billion people (UNEP, 2008), due to their highly productive 
nature. They are used and managed for different – often competing – purposes, such as 
timber  and  fuel  wood  production,  Non-Timber  Forest  Products  (NTFPs)  collection, 
watershed management, shelter and food supply for indigenous people (forest dwellers), 
emergency shelter and food supply for surrounding farming communities or herders, and 
conservation of biological diversity. Natural stands of trees and shrubs play an important 
supportive role in savannah pastoralism and are used as a restorative measure for fertility 
improvement  in  shifting  cultivation.  Tree-based  production  systems  do  not  require  the 
continuous managing of the soil (IFAD, 2017). 
Forests  equally  have  untapped  potential  to  lift  rural  people  out  of  poverty  (Sunderlin, 
Angelsen and Wunder,  2010), providing a source of employment, income, food, energy 
and  housing.  Forest-based  livelihood  activities  include  livestock  grazing,  controlled 
hunting, and the collection of wild fruits and insects, all of which provide highly nutritious 
resources that can contribute to food security and alleviate dietary deficiencies.  
IFAD,  recognizes  the  importance  of  managing  forests  sustainably  to  reduce  land 
degradation  while  improving  food  security  and  providing alternative income  sources for 
communities  and  small  farmers.  Thus,  the  GS  seeks  to  protect  natural  forests  from 
destructive  activities  such  as  crop  production  &  logging.  It  promotes  management  of 
natural forests by rural and indigenous communities, who can be provided livelihoods and 
adequate  income  generating  activities  through  alternative  livelihood  activities  such  as 
livestock  grazing,  natural  honey  collection/production,  collection  of  firewood,  medicinal 
plants, wild fruits & nuts, controlled hunting, etc.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 6 – RANGELAND-BASED LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION 
Livestock  production  is one  of  the  fastest  growing  agricultural  subsectors  in  developing 
countries, Accounting for 30 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and spurring 
a  demand  for  animal-source  food products that  is likely to  double  in  the  next  20  years 
(FAO, 2002). The growth of the sector exerts some pressure on natural resources such as 
the rangelands for the livestock, and without adequate measures being taken, in rangeland 
and  feed  stock  management,  may  lead  to  an  increase  in  greenhouse  gases  and  thus 
contribute to climate change (IFAD, 2017).  
Rangelands  include  grasslands,  woodland  savannahs,  open  forest  (and  in  some  cases 
cleared areas of closed forests), shrub lands, wastelands, abandoned agricultural areas, 
and deserts  that  support domestic  ruminants  and  wild  herbivores.  The  targets  of  these 
range  areas  vary  from  large-scale  commercial  ranching  to  mixed  farming  or  traditional 
pastoral systems. Hence, depending on the scale of the operation, different measures will 
be adopted. Rangeland and pastoralist activities are two areas in which IFAD is very active. 
These areas support a large number of herders and livestock producers, however, open-
access to these areas has resulted in grave environmental consequences. Over-grazing is 
one of the most notorious of these impacts (others include human settlement, roads, and 
harvesting fuel wood) leading to a loss of surface top-soil and losses in soil fertility.  
Managing  the  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  the  livestock  sector  requires,  at  a 
minimum,  disaggregating  between  extensive  and  intensive  production.  In  extensive 
livestock production, the livestock are reared outdoors on natural and semi-natural forage, 
and in intensive production the livestock, are reared indoors and based on cultivated inputs 
or  by-products.  The  nature  of  the  environmental  impact  and  the  appropriate 
71
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
environmental  responses  vary  entirely  between  these  two  broad  types  of  systems 
(McGahey et al., 2014).  
These guidelines address extensive livestock production on rangeland resources, i.e. some 
form of pastoralism. In developing countries, it is recommended to focus on both greening 
the intensive livestock sector and capitalizing on the inherent sustainability of pastoralism 
for local, regional and international markets (McGahey et al., 2014).  
The  basic  guidance  and  good  practices  for  IFAD  interventions  in  the  management  of 
rangeland-based livestock involve promoting and supporting: (i) integrated crop/livestock 
systems; (ii) development of improved, locally adapted livestock genetics, and avoidance 
of erosion or loss of animal genetic resources; (iii) pastoral institutions and recognition of 
tenure rights and customary grazing lands; (iv) strengthened local governance capacity, 
national  governance  policy  and  institutional  coherence;  (v)  livestock  diversity;  (vi) 
management  and  recycling  of  livestock  manure  as  organic  nutrients  for  restoring  soil 
fertility;  and  (vii)  range  restoration,  enhancement  and  sustainable  rangelands 
management.  
The  primary  beneficiaries  are  poor  livestock  keepers,  particularly  those  who  are 
economically or socially at risk and politically marginalized, such as rural women, youth, 
landless poor people, and people for whom animals such as poultry and small ruminants 
provide,  at  most,  subsistence  or  a  minimum  contribution  to  daily  nutritional  guidance. 
IFAD is committed to developing a sustainable livestock sector in which poor farmers and 
herders might obtain higher incomes and better access to assets, services, technologies 
and markets. Thus, the GS seeks to promote sustainable rangeland management curbing 
all these negative impacts.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 7 – WATER (AGRICULTURAL AND DOMESTIC USE) 
Many poor rural people face severe constraints in their access to adequate quantities of 
good quality water for domestic and agricultural uses. Clean water supplies and sanitation 
remain  major  problems  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  with  11  per  cent  of  the  global 
population lacking access to safe drinking water. Agricultural production accounts for 70 
per cent of global freshwater use, mainly through crop irrigation (IFAD, 2017). 
In irrigation, water is managed for agricultural production. Most systems are established 
to improve crop yields per unit of land. Irrigation systems include: (i) water storage; (ii) 
water  conveyance;  (iii)  water  delivery  to  plants;  and  (iv)  disposal  of  drainage  water. 
Irrigation water is conveyed and delivered to plants by gravity, sprinkler or drip irrigation. 
The setting up of these systems impacts on the environment in many ways. Facilities for 
drainage of excess water are not always provided in irrigation systems which may lead to 
water logging and soil salinization. 
Water management in agriculture includes projects fed by surface water or groundwater 
and/or rainfall in irrigation, soil and water conservation, swamp rehabilitation, watershed 
management, water for livestock, and inland fisheries and aquaculture.  
The  potential  negative  impacts  of  water  investments  affect  several  environmental  and 
social aspects and include soil degradation, water quality, public health, effects on flora 
and fauna and disruption of ecosystem services, particularly when introduced on a large 
scale.  In  the  near  future,  accelerating  changes  in  the  global  climate  will  cause  major 
alterations in the patterns of the water cycle and the geographical distribution of water, 
with  significant  effects  on  agricultural  activities.  Climatic  change  will  have  significant 
consequences on water supply, water systems, infrastructure and agriculture. It could also 
undermine  IFAD’s  investments  and  reduce  the  long-term  sustainability  of  results. 
Therefore, FAD aims to reduce the vulnerability of water management and infrastructure 
to current climate variability while also considering the long-term effects of climate. Thus, 
this GS seeks to protect the environment from the adverse effects that can be inflicted by 
irrigation schemes. 
72
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 9 – PHYSICAL CULTURAL RESOURCES 
For purposes of this guidance statement, physical cultural resources (PCR), also known as 
cultural heritage or cultural property, may be defined as movable or immovable objects, 
sites,  structures,  groups  of  structures,  and  natural  features  and  landscapes  that  have 
archaeological, historical, religious, spiritual or  other  cultural  significance.  As  such,  PCR 
may be found almost anywhere, in urban or rural settings, above or below ground, or even 
under water.  
PCR may derive their significance from various sources, whether as part of a community’s 
cultural identity and heritage, as assets for economic or social development, or as sources 
of valuable scientific or historical information. As a result, their cultural significance may 
be local, provincial, national, or even international in nature (IFAD, 2017). 
Although the likelihood that IFAD programmes and projects will involve or affect PCR is 
small, in such unlikely cases where PCR is found, IFAD will assist borrowers in avoiding, 
minimizing  or  mitigating  adverse  impacts  on  PCR  in  the  development  programmes  and 
projects that it finances. To this end, IFAD will use due diligence in applying its SECAP to 
ensure that PCR are properly identified and adequately addressed, and that any measures 
to protect PCR comply with the borrower’s national legislation as well as with its obligations 
under  relevant  international  treaties  and  agreements  (e.g.  UNESCO  Convention 
Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 1972).  
While  it  is  unlikely  that  IFAD’s  portfolio  of  agricultural  and  rural  development 
programmes/projects  will  involve  or  affect  PCR,  IFAD  is  committed  to  identifying  and 
protecting  PCR  in  all  its  operations.  After  all,  even  smallholder  agriculture  and  rural 
development projects on marginal lands may, depending on location, involve resources of 
archaeological (e.g. ancient ruins, monuments, prehistoric caves), historical (e.g. original 
structures, architectural works, historic sites), religious (e.g. churches, mosques, temples, 
sacred grounds) or cultural (e.g. cemeteries, traditional meeting places) significance. Of 
particular  concern  are  IFAD  programmes/projects:  (i)  involving  significant  excavations, 
demolition, movement of earth, flooding or other environmental changes; and (ii) located 
in, or in the vicinity of, a PCR site recognized by the borrower. For this reason, IFAD will 
use  its  SECAP  to  ensure  that  any  PCR  involved  in  or  potentially  affected  by  an  IFAD 
programme/project are properly identified and adequately protected.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 11 – DEVELOPMENT OF VALUE CHAINS, 
MICROENTERPRISES AND SMALL ENTERPRISES  
A value chain is a vertical alliance of enterprises that collaborate, to a greater or lesser 
extent, to bring a product from the initial input supply stage, through the various phases 
of production, processing and distribution, to the final marketing to consumers  
The  main  goal  of  IFAD’s  value  chain  projects  is  to  integrate  target  groups  (small  rural 
producers) into viable value chains to improve their access to secure markets and to raise 
their incomes sustainably. These projects finance activities to address constraints to small 
producers’ participation in, and their benefits from, value chains. In general, value chain 
projects  include  one  or  more  of  three  categories  of  intervention:  (i)  process/product 
upgrading;  (ii)  functional  upgrading;  and  (iii)  upgrading  of  coordination  and  business 
models. In practice, these interventions can entail a wide variety of approaches, depending 
on local challenges and opportunities. The interventions combine value chain development 
with  development  of  microenterprises  and  small  enterprises  (MSEs),  and  support  small 
producers’ organizations and their capacity for collective action (IFAD, 2017). 
Micro and Small enterprise (MSE) development consists of a series of support measures 
to ease constraints posed by existing MSE policies including, trading laws and regulations, 
capital  and  administrative  requirements,  credit  services,  legal  status  etc.  Additionally, 
micro  and  small  enterprise  development  concentrates  on  intervention  points  along  the 
value chain. As such, micro and small enterprise development initiatives do not in and of 
themselves produce negative environmental impact. They can be used to lessen the impact 
of small enterprises on natural resources. Several issues feature prominently in this GS: 
73
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
  Environmental issues associated with value chains fall into two categories: green 
issues,  i.e.  enhancement  or  depletion  of  natural  resources  including  water,  soils 
and biodiversity; and brown issues, i.e. pollution of air, water and land through the 
waste generated by production processes; 
  A key issue is the capacity for value chain segments to drive positive and negative 
environmental outcomes in other geographies or for other stakeholders through a 
cascade along the value chain; 
  From a social perspective, well-designed value chain projects  can improve  social 
inclusion as well as improve average incomes; 
  other  two  key  issues  to  manage  in  all  value  chain  projects  are  gender  and  food 
security. Different stages and functions of any value chain will be associated with 
gender-specific knowledge, assets, decision-making powers and responsibilities; 
  Household food security and nutrition may be at risk in value chain designs that 
emphasize monocropping and commercial sales at the cost of local food access or 
labour demands.  
Inclusion of youth is also a growing issue in value chains; 
 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 12 – RURAL FINANCE  
Developing  inclusive  rural  financial  systems  and  fostering  innovations  to  increase  the 
access of poor people in rural areas to a wide range of financial services and sound financial 
institutions  is  central  to  IFAD’s  mandate  and  key  to  agricultural  and  rural  livelihoods 
development.  IFAD  concentrates  on  rural  microfinance, which  refers  to  the  provision  of 
financial  services  to  people  with  low  incomes  in  rural  areas  for  both  on-  and  off-farm 
activities.  This  includes  the  provision  of  a  wide  range  of  financial  services  to  farming 
communities, including savings, deposits, money transfers, insurance, and credit. Diverse 
funding mechanisms such as supplier credit, contract farming, crop and investment loans 
all  provide  farmers  with  external  sources  of  capital  during  the  production  cycle  (IFAD, 
2017). 
Rural finance is also used by most farming families to support non-farm income generating 
activities such as food processing, buying and selling, micro-enterprise, and the migration 
of family members for seasonal employment in cities. And finally, finance also supports 
critical  life  cycle  needs  such  as  the  education  and  marriage  of  children,  medical 
emergencies, housing solutions, and the acquisition of assets for old age. All these have 
to be done with the environment in mind, so that they do not end up impacting on the 
environment. 
The  provision  of  financial  services  to  poor  rural  households  faces  many  challenges, 
including  weak  infrastructure  and  low  population  density  located  in  marginal  areas, 
inherent  risks  of  serving  low-income  clients  living  and  working  in  ecologically  fragile 
environments and areas with demarcated natural resources, lack of typical client collateral, 
the limited capacity of Financial service providers (FSP), and low levels of client education. 
The  overall  financial  market  may  be  stunted  and  distorted  from  subsidized,  targeted 
lending.  Taken  together,  these  challenges  increase  the  transaction  costs  and  risks  of 
serving  rural  areas  and  require  continual  attention  and  innovation.  The  contemporary 
approach to rural finance focuses on building the sustainability of FSPs, thinking beyond 
the short life cycle of donor-driven projects.  
To  foster  financial inclusion  for  poor  people  in rural  areas,  IFAD’s  Rural Finance Policy1 
requires  compliance  with  six  guiding  principles  in  IFAD-financed  rural  finance 
interventions:  
(i)  support access to a variety of financial services;  
(ii)  promote a wide range of financial institutions, models and delivery channels; 
(iii)  support demand driven and innovative approaches, including providing a full range 
of  financial  services  to  poor  families  who  live in  degraded areas,  which  may,  for 
example,  support  natural  resource  management  practices  and  alternative 
livelihoods that are less harmful to the ecosystem; 
74
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
(iv) encourage, in collaboration with private sector partners, market-based approaches 
that strengthen rural financial markets, avoid distortions in the financial sector and 
leverage IFAD’s resources;  
(v)  develop  and  support  long-term  strategies  focusing  on  sustainability  and  poverty 
outreach; and  
(vi) participate  in  policy  dialogues  that  promote  an  enabling  environment  for  rural 
finance. Any deviation from these principles requires clear justification and approval 
by management.  
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 13 – PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC RESETTLEMENT 
This  GS  provides  guidance  to  country  programme  managers  (CPMs)  and  country 
programme management teams (CPMTs) who are envisaging or dealing with activities or 
interventions that could imply physical relocation or any change in land use and livelihoods 
options resulting from an investment supported by IFAD that could negatively impact on 
some elements of IFAD’s target groups and the wider communities where they are found. 
The  GS  identifies  key  principles  and  measures  that  the  Fund  should  follow  in  order  to 
minimize potential risks and avoid any possible negative impacts of physical resettlement 
or economic displacement (IFAD, 2017). 
The GS considers resettlement not only as the physical relocation of people but also as 
restrictions on or loss of access to means of livelihoods. Physical displacement refers to 
relocation,  loss  of  residential  land,  or  loss  of  shelter,  while  economic  displacement 
implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods. 
Physical and economic resettlement could be either agreed/negotiated or involuntary:  
  Involuntary Resettlement: This is when affected people or communities do not 
have the capacity to refuse it – because the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) 
principle is not properly implemented and they do not have power of choice – or 
their rights to refuse it are over-ridden by national law or are simply denied.  
  Agreed/Negotiated Resettlement: This is when, in the respect  of the do-no-
harm principle and after having properly informed people and gone through the 
FPIC  process,  people  potentially  involved  in  the  resettlement  agree  on  being 
relocated and/or selling or relinquishing access to assets, against fair and timely 
compensations for their losses.  
IFAD’s core mandate is to support the  social and economic  empowerment  of poor rural 
women and men. As such, it is opposed to any investment that will have a negative impact 
on  its  target  groups.  Should  resettlement  or  economic  displacement  be  envisaged,  the 
FPIC and the do- no-harm principles – which are two pillars of IFAD's Policy "Improving 
Access  to  Land  Tenure  Security  Policy"–  will  be  followed  at  all  times  and  for  all  its 
beneficiaries for “any development intervention that might affect the land access and use 
rights of communities.” Thus, IFAD will make sure that 
the “do-no-harm principle” is adhered to at all times.  
 
  The project affected people’s free, prior and informed consent has been solicited 
through inclusive consultations based on full disclosure of the intent and scope of 
the activities planned and their implications. 
GUIDANCE STATEMENT 14 – COMMUNITY HEALTH  
This GS concerns itself with the health and safety risks associated with agriculture, as well 
as the use of improved technology and personal protective equipment (PPE). Generally, 
there  is  a  lack  of  knowledge  about  how  farmers  are  affected  by  their  exposures  to  the 
variety  of  health  risks  that  they  are  confronted  with  every  day.  Even  the  general 
improvements  in  health  and  safety  in  the  workplace  and  the  implementation  of  the 
International Labour Organization policies and procedures have not found their way into 
the  agricultural  sector.  Furthermore,  there  is  little  medical  surveillance  in  this  sector, 
resulting in a lack of credible research data and evidence (IFAD, 2017).  
75
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
This guidance statement aims to identify the main health issues arising from agricultural 
projects,  the  causative  factors  and  potential  mitigation  measures.  A  health  impact 
resulting from an IFAD-funded project, plan or programme is a measurable change on the 
health status of an individual, group or population, which may be attributable to the direct 
or  indirect  effects  of  an  agricultural  development.  The  impacts  may  be  intended  or 
unintended and may not become apparent for many years after prolonged exposure, or 
due  to  long-term  latency  in  the  human  body.  The  main  health  impacts  related  to 
agricultural projects are:  
  occupational diseases, disorders and injuries;  
  waterborne  diseases  spread  to  humans  through  pathogens  in  water  and  on 
irrigated crops;  
  vector-borne diseases caused by habitat change;  
  non-communicable diseases;  
  nutritional disorders; and  
 
communicable diseases from interaction between people.  
There  are  a  number  of  occupational  health  issues  associated  with  agriculture,  fishing, 
aquaculture and forestry projects:  
traumatic injury;  
respiratory illnesses;  
 
 
  noise-induced hearing loss;  
cancer and other disorders from exposure to chemicals;  
 
zoonoses;  
 
  dermatoses;  
  heat and cold stress; and  
  musculoskeletal disorders.  
Climate change will cause a number of environmental changes which could affect human 
health  in  one  or  more  ways.  Where  rainfall  and  flooding  are  predicted  to  increase 
(southeast Asia, Asia, the Caribbean, northern South America and West Africa), there will 
be  an  increased  risk  associated  with  vector-borne  diseases,  especially  those  carried  by 
mosquitoes and ticks. 
On the other hand, drought and increasing aridity are inimical to most pathogens, while 
some, such as cysticercosis, bovine TB, rabies, brucellosis and echinococcosis are unlikely 
to be sensitive to climate change. 
Hotter,  drier  conditions  will  result  in  greater  amounts  of  dust  and  respiratory  illnesses, 
while these conditions will also increase the risks of heat stroke.  
76
