Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB                 Asian Development Bank
ADP                 Annual Development Programme
BISP                 Benazir Income Support Programme
BPPRA             Balochistan Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
BRACE             Balochistan Rural Development & Community Empowerment Project
BRI                   Belt and Road Initiative of the Peoples Republic of China
BRSP               Balochistan Rural Support Programme              
CDD                 Community Driven Development                       
CO                   Community Organization
CPEC               China Pakistan Economic Corridor
CPI                   Community Physical Infrastructure
EAD                 Economic Affairs Division
ECNEC             Executive Committee of the National Economic Council
EU                    European Union
FAO                 Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations
GLLSP             Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project
GoB                 Government of Balochistan
IFAD                 International Fund for Agricultural Development
KM                   Knowledge Management
km                    Kilometer
LSO                 Local Support Organization
MDGs               Millennium Development Goals
MTR                 Mid-Term Review
NGO                Non-Government Organization
NSER               National Socio-Economic Registry
NPGP               National Poverty Graduation Programme
NRSP               National Rural Support Programme
PC-1                 Planning Commission Proforma 1  (Governments own design report)
PCC                 Project Coordination Committee
PCR                 Programme Completion Report
P&D                 Planning & Development Department
PIM                  Programme Implementation Manual
PMIFL              Prime Minister’s Interest Free Loan (Scheme)
PMU                 Project Management Unit
PPAF               Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund
PRA                 Participatory Rural Appraisals
PME                 Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation System
PoU                  Prevalence of Under Nourishment
PSC                 BISP Poverty Scorecard
PSLM               Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement
RBA                 Rome based UN Agencies (FAO, IFAD and WFP)
RO                   Reverse Osmosis
RSP                 Rural Support Programme
SDGs               Sustainable Development Goals
SECAP             Social, Environment and Climate Assessments in Project
SMP                 Social Mobilization Partner
ToT                  Training of Trainers
VDP                 Village Development Plan
VO                   Village Organisation
UC                   Union Council
UCDP               Union Council Development Plan
UNDP               United Nations Development Programme
WFP                 World Food Programme
Executive Summary
1/25
Pakistan is a lower-middle income country with its services sector (59%) being the largest contributor to the economy, followed by
agriculture (21%) and industry (20%). The country’s economic growth made a slow and steady recovery during 2014 to 2018 but has
since then decelerated and projected to be around 2.5 per cent during 2019-20. Pakistan was ranked 23rd in terms of fragility among
178 states. With a total population of 207.8 million, the country is the 6th most populous in the world with around 60 percent of
population living in rural areas and having its workforce largely (38%) employed in agriculture. Pakistan continues to face significant
human development challenges (ranked 150 out of 189 countries[1]). Around 32 percent of young people are literate and another six
percent having any technical skills. Women in rural areas of Pakistan are considerably disadvantaged with respect to disparities in
access to resources, services and rights.
Pakistan’s Vision 2025 commits the attainment of SDGs A national poverty graduation programme “Ehsaas” has recently (July 2019)
been launched. In the context of the province of Balochistan a Gender Equality Policy and Action Plan was developed with
implementation being at its early stage. A coastal areas development policy has also been recently issued. The federal government as
well as the province is currently or plan to formulate sectoral policies including agriculture, livestock and fisheries.
Balochistan is geographically the largest province of Pakistan (covering 44% of land mass) but with the smallest population (6%). The
province is 80 percent rural with a poverty rate as high as 75 percent. More than 40 percent of the population is in the age groups
below 25 years. Among other constraints, the province is also prone to recurring climate- change induced events including droughts
interspersed with flash floods. 
The proposed project (GLLSP II) is a second phase of the IFAD Funded Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihood Support Project (to be completed
by September 2019). The GLLSP II will consolidate the results already achieved and will geographically cover the same two districts
i.e. Gwadar & Lasbela. The target districts have high levels of poverty. The area is predominantly rural where households (around
133,000 in total) depend mainly on agriculture, livestock and fisheries resources exploited in an unsustainable manner. Women are
socially and economically disadvantaged and the present status of nutrition and food security is alarming. Investments in the
development of youth skills remain low.  There is considerable potential for development of fisheries, livestock and agriculture as well
as youth empowerment with the right combination of infrastructure, human development and value chain investments.
GLLSP, has physically covered 90 per cent of the villages in Gwadar and Lasbela districts having established a network of over 3,500
community organizations (COs). The project developed very successful models for community driven development but the coverage
of the beneficiary needs was constrained by resource limitations, limited institutionalization of community development, gaps in
poverty graduation. However, the available community network offers a foundation for full coverage of the gaps with appropriate
adjustments based on lessons learnt and approaches evolving in the country. Fisheries, institutionalization of community development
planning, poverty graduation and climate change resilience will be the key focus of GLLSP II. Key lessons necessitate: appropriate
time and resource commitment, a dynamic and holistic poverty graduation approach covering all poor households, a structured and
financed approach to mainstreaming priorities and a better-articulated 4Ps based fisheries development with support in infrastructure,
policies, capacities and linkages.
The GLLSP II Development Objective is “to sustainably increase the incomes and enhance the livelihoods of the rural poor fisherfolk’s
and agricultural households in the project area”. It will benefit around 100,000 hhs and cover the overall 400 villages of the two
districts during a six-year implementation period. There will be a particular focus on women and youth. Necessary socio-economic
infrastructure will be financed both for agricultural and fishing communities including community infrastructure, roads to markets,
jetties and landing sites. All project interventions are aligned with IFAD Strategic Framework (date) and IFAD 11 corporate priorities.
The project consists of three complementary components. Component 1 - Community Development aims at enabling rural
communities to sustainably improve their incomes and livelihoods. This component consists of three complementary sub-
components; (i) social mobilization sub-component will engage the target beneficiary households and result in 45 Union council
development plans (UCDPs). These plans will reflect the identified needs and priorities covering both public and private/ household
interventions; (ii) the poverty graduation sub-component will focus on provision of productive assets to ultra-poor, technical and
enterprise training for poor, women empowerment and youth employment promotion; and, (iii) the social and economic infrastructure
sub-component will address the priorities identified through UCDPs(800 CPIs/2 per village) and 80 kms of farm to market roads. The
component also has specific interventions to augment climate smart agriculture and household nutrition improvements through the
collaboration with FAO and WFP.
Component 2 - Fisheries Value Chain Development aims at improving small fishing communities incomes (50,000 fisher-folks). The
sub-component – fisheries value chain package -  4Ps business framework will be established at 30 landing sites (11 till MTR)
involving professionally run fishing households’ cooperatives, private sector led factories, middle-men and banks and Department of
Fisheries. The overall aim is to improve the quality of the fish catch reaching the factories, reduce wastage, expand marketing
avenues and sustainably manage fish resource. The banking sector will be engaged for fisherfolk’s financial inclusion. The sub-
component 2 – infrastructure will support construction of 3 jetties and allied infrastructure at prioritized sites. Linked to this are the fish
market access roads of 80 km to be constructed to link landing sites and jetties with factories and trunk roads. The third sub-
component will support Fisheries Department’s capacity building and institutional strengthening.
Component 3 - Project Management and Policy Support will finance the establishment of a Project Management Unit at Quetta, with
two project implementation units (on each at Gwadar and Lasbela) and will also provide TA support to the provincial government in
five domains of project relevance including youth development, nutrition and food security, climate change action planning, Fisheries
Policy and law on fisheries cooperatives, updating and institutionalization of CDD approach and exposure to best practices (through
South-South and Triangular Cooperation).
GLLSP II’s theory of change aims to address the development challenge of sustainably improving incomes and reducing poverty
among the smallholder farmers and fishermen. It takes a sustained and holistic pathway of poverty graduation in areas of entrenched
poverty with an integrated and responsive package of community level and household level interventions, and a more flexible and
nuanced approach for coastal fishing communities and agricultural hinterland smallholder farmers through an integrated impact
pathway.
2/25
GLLSP II will accrue quantitative and qualitative benefits for nearly 100,000 households of which at least 50 per cent will be poor (0-
40) and over 50 per cent will be women members. A total of 50,000 ultra-poor and poor households will benefit from poverty
graduation interventions to move to the next level of economic well-being. These include 8,500 of ultra-poor, 6,000 youth, 10,000
women and 30,000 agricultural households. Of the total persons benefited, about 35 per cent will be from common households. CPIs
will benefit around 76,000 hhs directly while a total of 160 km farm and fish market access roads will benefit on average 16,000
households per km. In addition 50,000 small fisherfolk will benefit from fisheries infrastructure and value chain interventions.
At project completion, expected outcomes are: no 0-11 (ultra-poor) household in the project area and 60 per cent of 12-40 households
have been graduated to the next band of economic well-being; all priority community infrastructure needs, particularly water security,
have been addressed and all main fisheries and agriculture production areas have been linked by roads to main CPEC/national
highway network; 50,000 registered fisherfolk reduce their waste by 30 per cent and improve their incomes by 30 per cent.
Total project costs are estimated at US$ 72.801 million to be invested over six years of project implementation period. IFAD
contribution will be a loan of US$ 60.155 million on blend terms from the IFAD11 allocation. An IFAD Grant amounting to US$ 3
million will be provided for technical assistance and capacity building. Balochistan Government and beneficiary contribution make up
the remaining amount of US$8.654 and US$0,992 million respectively.
The financial analysis of the GLLSP II investment over a period of 20 years indicates a positive net present value of US$40.60 million
while the internal rate of return is noted to be 20.94 per cent, which is well above the discount rate of 11.17 per cent (Average
discount rate between 1992 - 2019 (Source: tradingeconomies.com/State Bank of Pakistan). The economic internal rate of return
shows viability of the proposed project investment being 29.05 per cent while NPV has been found to be US$73.74.
GLLSP II inherent risks is rated as “Medium”. The key risk include an erratic macro-economic situation, fiduciary risk and security
situation in Baluchistan. The main operational risks include weak management capacity, procurement inefficiencies and potential
start-up delay. Mitigation measures have been built in management structure and processes included in the design. The project is
categorized as “B” in terms of environment and social category while in terms of climate, it is determined as a “high” risk project.
The Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan will be the coordinating agency at Federal level while the Planning and
Development Department, Government of Balochistan will be the executing agency. A Provincial Project Steering Committee (PSC),
chaired by Additional Chief Secretary, will be the oversight and governance mechanism. A Project Management Unit, headed by a
Project Director, will be responsible for planning, coordination, financial management, procurement and M&E function of the project
activities accountable to the PSC. The existing Project Management Unit of GLLSP I will be transitioned after an assessment to take
charge of GLLSP II. The social mobilization partner(s), to be competitively selected, will implement the community development
component while construction of roads will be implemented by the Construction and Works Department (C&W). The implementing
partner(s) will notify a designated focal person/Activity Manager at Departmental and District levels. The Project Implementation
Manual (PIM) will be notified at the start of the project to articulate in detail projects planning, coordination, financial management and
reporting requirements covering PSC, PMU and all implementing partners.
The current project approach and design contains innovative features to increase the participatory, evidence based and holistic
approach to socio-economic development of poor rural Union Councils. GLLSP II will also propose to demonstrate viability of an
institutionalized system for the transfer of development funding to community/village organizations. The project design attempts as
well to develop a 4-P value chain for fisheries sector that engages the fisherfolk, the government and the private sector. Finally,
GLLSP II will pilot some innovative technology-based approaches for improving rural smallholder farmers and fisherfolk access to
finance and markets through e-financing and e-commerce. 
The PMU of GLLSP I will continue until 31 March 2020 and will contribute to the project readiness for GLLSP II. Preparatory activities
under the current project include a Labour Market Survey, a Youth Census, procurement of latest BISP data, preparation of project
PC-I, Business Plans for 8 existing fisherfolk cooperatives and prefeasibility of three Jetty Sites.
During the Project implementation, it will benefit from two IFAD supervisions – a full supervision and an implementation support
mission each year.  Mid-Term Review: A project Mid-Term Review will be conducted at the end of third year to take stock of progress,
learn from experience and carry-out any required mid-way course corrections for enhanced performance and impact. Project
Completion: a Project Completion Report will be prepared towards the end of Project Year 6. The report will be essentially a self-
assessment/evaluation by the project on its progress, impacts and results as compared to project objectives and interventions.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
Pakistan is a lower-middle income country with a per capita income of US$ 1,641[1] and an estimated GDP of USD 270 billion[2].
The services sector (59 per cent) is the largest contributor to the economy, followed by agriculture (21 per cent) and industry (20
per cent). The Country’s economic growth made a slow and steady recovery from 2014 to 2018 reaching a growth of 5.3 per cent
in 2018, but has since then decelerated and is estimated to be around 2.5 per cent during 2019-20. Pakistan scores 94.2 on the
Fragile States Index 2019 and is ranked 23rd in terms of fragility among 178 states. The country has been facing serious
2.
3.
4.
challenges of a weakening economy, adverse balance of trade, inflationary pressures, internal and external conflicts undermining
economic growth.
3/25
With a total population of 207.8 million[3], the country is the 6th most populous in the world with around 60 per cent of the
population living in rural areas and having its workforce largely (44 per cent) employed in agriculture. Pakistan continues to face
significant human development challenges (ranked 150th out of 189 countries[4]) with most of the human development indicators
(health, education, and gender) below the regional average for South Asia. Only around 32 per cent of young people are literate
and another 6 per cent have some technical skills[5]. A 2008 nationwide poverty survey, updated in 2017, established a national
well-being registry, to target the most vulnerable, ranking households on a scale from 0 to 100. Per the registry definitions, the
corresponding IFAD target groups are within the band scale of 0 to 34 or around 100 million people. Women in rural areas of
Pakistan are considerably disadvantaged with respect to disparities in access to resources, services and rights.
Balochistan specific context. Balochistan is geographically the largest province of Pakistan (46 per cent of land area of the
country), representing the smallest population (12.3 million or 6 per cent of the national total) and a meager share in the national
economy (3.5 per cent). The province’s 80 per cent population and 90 per cent of the poor live in rural areas. The province is
further characterized by poor road connectivity (0.15 km/sq. km, less than half of the national average). While 52 per cent
households are classified as poor, rural poverty is as high as 75 per cent. About 40 per cent of the population is in the age
groups below 25 years, warranting concerted efforts to increase the employability of youth. Recurring droughts (the latest being a
decade long), earthquakes in 2008 and 2011 and flash floods in 2010 and 2012 caused major damage to the infrastructure,
economic resources and disrupted the livelihoods. Only 61 per cent population of the province has access to an improved source
of drinking water while 32 per cent has access to sanitation facilities.
The proposed target districts i.e. Gwadar and Lasbela cover 70 per cent of Pakistan’s 1100 km long coastline and have a high
concentration of poverty. Compared to the national average of the 38.8 per cent, Gwadar and Lasbela have 48 per cent and 58
per cent of the population respectively in the category of multi-dimensionally poor. There are limited opportunities for agriculture
as only 8 per cent households in Gwadar own cultivable land while only 10 per cent area of Lasbela is irrigated. Nevertheless,
fisheries, small-scale agriculture and livestock remains the major sources of livelihoods for majority of the households in Gwadar
and Lasbela. Table 1 depicts the demographics of the two districts including the number of poor (0-34 households):
5.
Table 1: Project Area Populations and Poor Households
District
Area (sq.km)
Union councils
Population
Households
0-34 PSC
Households*
Gwadar
15,216
Lasbela
12,574
Total
27,790
17
28
45
263,514
39,922
14,434
574,292
93,165
30,890
837,806
133,087
45,324
6.
7.
8.
*As per previous PSC survey in 2008. New survey likely to result in increased numbers
Women constitute 47 per cent of the Balochistan population and are socially and economically disadvantaged. The average
woman, in a poor household, spends 4-5 hours every day collecting water for the family. The status of nutrition is alarming with
nearly half (47 per cent) of the children under 5 years of age in project districts found as stunted and the rate of wasting being at
19 per cent. In terms of vulnerability, 55 per cent of the population in Gwadar and 70 per cent in Lasbela is facing food security
emergency[6] and has been categorized as districts in crises (phase 4)[7]. High illiteracy, lack of skills among youth,
underdeveloped natural resources (including fisheries, agriculture and livestock), limited off-farm income opportunities and lack of
any sizeable industry have resulted in a large cohort of unemployed youth.
The proposed target districts have significant potential for development of fisheries, livestock and agriculture and for developing a
cadre of skilled youth to take on job opportunities represented by CPEC, Hub industrial area, Hub Marble City, within the districts,
as well as in other major cities outside the province, especially in the city of Karachi which is now well-connected through the
coastal highway. However, long distances, poorly developed communication systems that connect rural areas of the districts to
coastal highway and sub-optimally performing value chains, all lead to limited production, wastages, low value-added produce,
high transaction and transportation costs and they all together severely undermine the income generation and negatively impact
the quality of life of the population.
9.
Relevant National Strategies and Policies:
10.
Pakistan’s poverty reduction strategy is guided by the Pakistan Vision 2025 which aims to halve the poverty by 2025 and attain
upper middle-income status for the country. This is premised on economic growth, a knowledge economy, social justice and
protection and universal access to quality social services. Vision 2025 also articulates the government’s commitment to attain
SDG goals in terms of poverty reduction, education, gender equality, women health, mother and child health, and environmental
sustainability. The 18th amendment to the Pakistan constitution in 2008 resulted in a major decentralization of fiscal functions and
socio-economic services to the provinces along with the corresponding resources.  Almost all key sectors related to IFAD’s
mandate fall under provincial responsibility. Policy-related federal and provincial coherence remains work in progress, while the
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
decentralization from provinces to districts and local levels has yet to be institutionalized. The policy and regulatory framework
related to fisheries in particular is relevant to the project area and a key priority for the government alongside decentralized and
participatory rural development.
4/25
Rural and agricultural sector.Upon devolution, agriculture, food, fisheries and livestock became provincial domains. The newly
created Ministry of National Food Security and Research issued a National Food Security Policy in 2014 which aims to achieve
an average growth rate of 4 per cent for the agriculture sector (as compared to a historic 3 per cent over the last 20 years).
However, the approach to rural development is fragmented and managed by many different line departments, hitherto applying
the top-down approach, with no institutionalized mechanism to holistically cover rural development at the district, union council
and village levels, evidencing the need for greater community mobilization and adoption of participatory approaches.
Social Protection and Poverty Graduation: BISP remains the largest national social safety net programme providing
unconditional cash transfer of US$ 01 billion annually to around 5.4 million eligible families (up to poverty score of 16.7). Today,
the Government’s poverty graduation strategy calls for partnerships with rural support programmes and NGOs, to help poor
households graduate out of poverty. A new Ministry for Social Protection and Poverty Alleviation has been created to spearhead
poverty alleviation efforts. The Ministry has launched a national poverty graduation programme “Ehsaas” which includes the
IFAD-funded National Poverty Graduation Programme as a core component,  offering an opportunity to leverage its poverty
graduation and credit interventions in GLLSP-II’s. Today, a number of poverty graduation models, approaches and programmes
have been tested and lessons learned have emerged, allowing for pursuit and scaling up of best practices and complementary
interventions. The GLLSP II will comprehensively address poverty and rural development priorities in the two targeted districts
applying poverty graduation holistically.
Gender and Youth: The Government of Balochistan established the Women Development Department in 2009 to implement the
National Plan of Action for Women and various provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW). The government also approved a ‘Gender Equality Policy’ in May 2013 to enhance women’s social,
political, legal and economic status.[8] This was followed by a Strategic Action Plan 2016–2020 which is being reviewed with the
support from UNWOMEN to be aligned with the SDGs. Providing youth with skills has been declared a national priority and a
national skills development programme for youth from low income and poor families, and an interest-free loan scheme “Kamyab
Jawan” have been launched to help unemployed youth start their own businesses.
Coastal Area Development Policy: The Government of Balochistan has issued a policy for the development of the coastal
areas and the sustainable management and development of fisheries. The Coastal Area development plan complements the
infrastructure developments taking place under the CPEC/BRI project. Five new jetties are being developed for fish landing
among the eight officially notified landing sites. A new Act to promote Fisherfolk’s Cooperatives is also being finalized.
Climate change. There is a growing recognition of the challenges and importance of environmental considerations. The project
area is prone to climate change effects including erratic rains, droughts, raising temperature, rising sea levels, sedimentation of
the landing sites and environmental degradation.  As a result, the farming systems and fisheries have been impacted by lower
productivity, crop failures, declining livestock and decrease in fish catch warranting on one hand a climate resilient agriculture
and livestock, and on the other a sustainable fisheries management. There is need for both policy reform and enforcement of
existing regulations at provincial and sub-provincial levels with regards to sustainable fisheries management, protecting
biodiversity and adaptable rural development with effective mitigation efforts to manage the impact of environmental degradation
and climate change.
16.
Key Actors and Institutional Arrangements:
17.
18.
19.
20.
Government:   At the Federal level, the Economic Affairs Division of the Ministry of Finance is the main-coordinating agency for
all foreign-funded loan and grant programmes. The policy for sourcing foreign loan and grant funding is approved by the Cabinet
and implemented by the Ministry of Finance. At provincial level, the Planning & Development Department, headed by the
Additional Chief Secretary, is the lead provincial agency responsible for annual development planning, monitoring and donor and
inter-agency coordination, including the implementation of the multi-sector donor-funded projects.
RSPs and NGOs: Currently, under the umbrella of the Rural Support Programme Network (RSPN), one national and five
provincial Rural Support Programmes (RSPs) and affiliated NGOs are covering 145 of the total 148 districts of the country. These
RSPs and affiliates cover 4,255 Union Councils through 425,588 community organizations with a membership of 7.5 million
households and a population of 48.9 million. These RSPs are completely autonomous and apolitical and have successfully
augmented the capacities of the government departments in transparent targeting, social mobilization, needs identification, and
delivery. NRSP is currently the largest RSP having country-wide operations covering 7 districts in Balochistan, including the two
project districts. NRSP has been the social mobilization partner in GLLSP I having organized around 3,500 COs in 380 villages.
Micro-Finance: The Micro-finance sector has experienced exponential growth since 2006 when IFAD partnered with PPAF
through the Microfinance Innovation and Outreach Programme (MIOP 2016-11). The sector now has 42 microfinance banks,
non-banking microfinance institutions and RSPs as microfinance providers, with 6.9 million active borrowers as of the first quarter
of 2019. However, there is still much unmet demand due to low penetration (34 per cent), especially in remoter and challenging
areas like Balochistan, where the MFI penetration is just 2 per cent. The fisheries sector and the youth in general remain
completely neglected. Lending to the youth currently stands at less than 1 per cent of the total portfolio.[9]
Private sector: The Private sector in Balochistan is under-developed especially rural economic activities. However, the industrial
estates in Lasbela District and the approximately 200 private sector fish processors and exporters can play an important role in
job creation, especially for male and female youth, and to provide improved incomes to the farmers and fishermen if meaningfully
engaged in win-win partnerships. The local expertise and capacity for marine infrastructure design and construction have
markedly improved over the last few years due to the execution of some large projects under CPEC/BRI. Other off-takers would
include micro and small rural enterprises dealing in agriculture and livestock products produced in the target districts and off-farm
enterprises taking advantage of the improved infrastructure and capacities. 
21.
5/25
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
22.
23.
24.
25.
Gender and social inclusion: According to the Global Gender Gap Index 2014, Pakistan stood 141 out of 142 countries
ranked[1]. This is reflective of substantial disparities that Pakistani women suffer on account of economic, political, education, and
health factors. Growing religious extremism, patriarchal social structures, poverty, economic disparities and poor public sector
social services all combined put women at disadvantage. Women in rural Pakistan general and in Balochistan in particular, have
been described as being the most socially excluded[2] and are the most deprived in terms of access to basic social services and
livelihood opportunities. National female labour participation rate at 25 per cent is much lower compared to countries at a similar
level of development.
Youth: Pakistan is demographically a young country with nearly 44 per cent of its population being 19 years of age or younger,
while almost 52 per cent of the population is between age 20 and 64. Among the 54 Commonwealth countries, Pakistan currently
ranks 22nd against the Commonwealth Youth Development Index (YDI), with a score of 0.63 (Commonwealth, 2013)[3]. Pakistan
also has one of the lowest youth employment rates and a fairly high (65.3 per cent) dependency ratio. The Youth Labour Force
participation rate for Balochistan (44.44 per cent) has been historically lower compared to other provinces[4]. Almost 60 per cent
of the youth in Balochistan cannot read and write. Divided further, only 18 per cent female and 56 percent male population of
ages 15 and older can read and write with understanding[5].
Nutrition: According to the Government’s Vision 2025, 60 per cent of the country’s population is facing food insecurity, and
nearly 50 per cent of women and children under five years of age are malnourished. Pakistan ranks 76 out of 107 on the Global
Food Security Index[6]. The situation of food insecurity and malnutrition is even worse in Balochistan as Prevalence of
Undernourishment (PoU) is 40 per cent. Lasbela has the highest prevalence of underweight women of reproductive age (38 per
cent) and Gwadar the second highest (32 per cent).
Climate Change: Pakistan is highly vulnerable to climate change as its economy is heavily reliant on climate-sensitive irrigated
and rain-fed agriculture as well as on subsidiary livestock and forestry sectors. In Pakistan, the annual mean temperature has
shown rising trends since the beginning of the 20th century. Climate change has a pronounced impact on the environment and
livelihoods in Balochistan. Rising surface temperatures have resulted in erratic rainfall patterns along with long periods of
drought which have severely impacted the availability of drinking and irrigation water, maintenance of underground aquifer and
production of rain-fed crops. Monsoon patterns have also become very unpredictable affecting the small fishermen’s access to
sea for a number of months.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
26.
27.
28.
The Gwadar and Lasbela districts suffer from very high multi-dimensional poverty despite a tremendous potential for agriculture,
livestock and fisheries and skills development of the youth and women. The development challenge is to sustainably improve
incomes and reduce poverty among the smallholder farmers and fisherfolk, with a gender, youth and climate sensitive approach
where IFAD can leverage specific in-country and global experience.
The IFAD-funded GLLSP I (2013-19), with the support of the NRSP and line departments, has physically covered 90 per cent of
the villages in Gwadar and Lasbela districts through a network of over 3,500 community organizations. The project developed
and implemented need-based and community driven development including poverty graduation, rural infrastructure and women
and youth development; however, resource limitations hampered a holistic coverage. The GLLSP I achievements offer a
foundation for complete coverage of all Union Councils and poor households, and increase of the resources and value chains for
enhanced impact and visibility. The inroads made through social mobilization, and existing social capital, augurs well for a quick
and effective implementation of the GLLSP II. 
The GLLSP during its initial phase, had gaps with respect to a more holistic coverage of the targets districts, limited degree of
coherence among the poverty graduation interventions and lacked a systematic engagement with government on the
institutionalization of participatory rural development. Moreover, a number of challenges hampered the full scale implementation
of the fisheries component notably the limited capacity available in-country with regard to designing and construction of jetties
and had only few interventions with fishermen. Going forward to have  more sustained and comprehensive poverty graduation, it
is important to expand coverage of the GLLSP II to all ultra-poor and poor households in the poverty band of 0-40 with an
appropriate mix of an integrated support package. A more nuanced approach to women empowerment and training of youth for
the job market and employment has been included in GLLSP II as against a training and skills development activity only.
Lessons learned from the experience gained during Phase I, together with enhanced capacities for design, emergence of
technologies and capacity for construction of support infrastructure now available, the due potential of fisheries sub-sector can be
exploited for enhanced incomes of poor small fishing households in a sustainable manner.
29.
Through investments in high priority rural infrastructure such as drinking water, sanitation and rain-water-harvesting etc. under
GLLSP I, huge dividends in the shape of improved health and nutrition, financial savings, reduced drudgery for women and
climate change resilience has been achieved. However, the scale of the challenge has been quite high with major needs still to
be addressed through GLLSP II.
30.
At the country level, the experiences of the National Poverty Graduation Programme (NPGP) a pillar of the national flagship
“Ehsaas” initiative and the South Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (SPPAP) will be leveraged in GLLSP II both in terms of
strategy and operationalization as well as building synergies especially with NPGP. The of mainstreaming priorities in the area
(nutrition, food security and climate change) will be realized through close collaboration between RBAs (FAO and WFP as per
their comparative advantage).
6/25
B. Lessons learned
31.
The main lessons learned during implementation of GLLSP I and elsewhere in other IFAD projects in the country can be
summarized as follows:
Lesson
Design Response
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Longer term time and resource commitment, together with
strategy and approach adjustments on the basis of lessons
learnt, is needed to make a serious dent in rural poverty.
Successful development models piloted under GLLSP I,
and lessons learnt on fisheries value chain, are leveraged
in GLLSP II design with enhanced financial commitment.
Most COs often represent only around half of the households
from an area and membership remains static and most poor
households are often not members of Cos/VOs.
All Cos/VOs would be revamped to ensure membership of
80 per cent hhs in a given location and compulsory
membership of all poor households (0-40).
Poverty Graduation ought to be a dynamic process covering all
poverty bands, and not just 0-11.
Distinct project interventions for all poverty bands, and
linkage to non-project sources to help the poor move
towards PSC 40 and above.
A well-defined strategy backed by properly resourced
interventions needed to address mainstreaming priorities
including women, youth, nutrition and climate change.
Mainstreaming priorities to be embedded in community
development processes, backed by adequately funded
interventions in collaboration with specialized partners
including SMP, WFP and FAO.
CO centered CPIs often do not reflect the overall village level
needs and priorities reducing impact and causing O&M
challenges.
CPI needs will be prioritized from a whole village lens and
with higher allocation per CPI for enhanced impact and
elaboration of an efficient O&M mechanism at the design
stage.
Rural Roads: Rural roads connecting fish landing sites and
agriculture production areas with main highways is a high impact
investment.
Phase-II would invest in critical rural road links to connect
beneficiaries with CPEC and national highway system for
efficient market access and social services.
Fisheries Infrastructure: Capacity and process issues in design
and implementation of Jetties and support infrastructure led to
slow progress.
Enhanced capacity in design and implementation over the
last few years in country and under CPEC to be proactively
sourced combined with capacity building and technical
assistance provisioned for Fisheries department under the
project. Feasibility of the sites to be completed under
GLLSP I.
Project Management: Weak strategic oversight, capacity gaps in
financial management and non-provision of counterpart fund on
a timely basis had been experienced under GLLSP-1. PMU
capacity and location in Gwadar has not conductive for effective
coordination.
Clear description of PSC responsibilities in FA and effective
follow-up during supervisions will be ensured and PMU
structure to provide all the necessary capacities, software,
hardware and to be located in Quetta.
Project Start-up delays due to delays in PC-I formulation and
approval.
Early preparation of PC-I with IFAD technical support.
10.
Monitoring and Evaluation – inadequate capacity within PMU for
effective monitoring, evaluation, impact assessments and
reporting.
Strengthened and financially resourced M&E wing to  be
provided in GLLSP II.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
7/25
32.
Project Goal is to develop a sustainable model of decentralized and integrated rural development that is poverty, gender, youth,
nutrition and climate change sensitive. 
33.
Project Development Objective is to sustainably increase the incomes and enhance the livelihoods of the rural poor fisherfolk
families and agricultural households in the project area.
34.
Project Coverage and Duration: Project will cover the two districts i.e. Gwadar and Lasbela in Balochistan directly benefitting
around 100,000 households out of total 133,087 households and will be implemented over a period of six-year (2020-2025).
35.
36.
Project Area: The Project will cover all 400 villages in 45 Union Councils in Gwadar and Lasbela districts. The extent and depth
of poverty is quite uniform throughout all Union Councils. Fisheries and allied services are the main means of livelihood for the
coastal communities and would be the major focus of project interventions. The large majority of fisherfolk operate small boats
(<18 feet and 22 – 25 feet) suitable for day trips. The fisheries value chain is currently poorly developed, fragmented, lack the
necessary infrastructure, facilities (at boat and the supply chain), underserved and is poorly organized. The supply chain is
characterized by seasonal access of small fisherfolk to the sea, high wastage (up to 50 per cent), and middlemen exploiting
fisherfolk (owing to the high levels of indebtedness and paying lower than market prices). The other important sources of
livelihoods are irrigated and rain-fed agriculture, livestock and daily wage labour. Only 8 per cent households in Gwadar have
any productive land while in the case of Lasbela only 10 per cent of the area is irrigated. Livestock rearing is widely practiced but
suffers from low production, absence of veterinary services, non-existence of artificial insemination, poor feeding and faulty
husbandry practices. Agriculture value chains are poorly organized. In terms of living conditions, the shared constraint among all
Union Councils in the target district is under-developed drinking water and irrigation infrastructure, sanitation, power-supply, rain-
water harvesting structures, farm to market roads, which coupled with lack of value addition, poor market linkages and lack of
access to finance and extension services undermine the potential of the available resources. Climate change induced variable
weather patterns and long periods of droughts interspersed with flash floods have made small-holder agriculture, livestock and
fisheries risky ventures warranting interventions that help the communities fulfill their due potential.  
Target Groups: The primary target groups for the project are the ultra-poor and poor (0-40) rural households of the two districts
(Gwadar and Lasbela) of the Balochistan province. Around 100,000 poor households (PSC 0-40) among farming, non-farming
and fishing communities would benefit from a range of interventions that helps them graduate to levels of enhanced economic
well-being. Women and male and female youth would be particularly targeted and around 10,000 women and 6,000 youth would
be provided with remunerative skills, training for enterprise development, access to micro-finance, in addition to 8,500
households that would directly receive productive assets. The recipient of the assets would also benefit from nutrition
interventions. Each of the 400 villages would benefit from at least two community infrastructure investments that would improve
the socio-economic conditions of the inhabitants – benefiting about 76,000 persons. Small-scale fisherfolk at eight notified landing
sites and 32 other landing sites would be organized into cooperatives to become an active partner in the development of the
fisheries value chain and in the operation of landing sites infrastructure – benefiting 50,000 fishermen. The Private sector will be
engaged and facilitated to enter into win-win partnerships - 4Ps with fisherfolk and agriculture/livestock producers (about 40 in
total). The capacity of partner departments will be built in terms of policy, regulations and delivery.
37.
IFAD alignment: The Project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-25 and its three Strategic Objectives i.e. (i)
increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation, and; (ii)
strengthen environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities. It also responds to the
IFAD11 corporate priorities that include, gender, youth, climate, nutrition and partnership building.  The project objectives and
interventions are also in line with the Strategic Objectives and Results Framework of the Pakistan COSOP (2016- 2021) and
contribute to the attainment of its quantified targets, including (i) promoting the economic transformation of poor rural households;
(ii) policy and institutional strengthening for community-led development; and, (iii) building resilience for sustainable nutrition and
food security.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
38.
Approach: GLLSP II will build upon the development interventions and lessons learnt under GLLSP I for enhanced impact. While
the target area and the overall scope of the project remain the same, the phase II differs in respect of its approach. Firstly,
GLLSP II, will have a more holistic poverty graduation approach covering all 0-40 hhs, by introducing poverty graduation as a
continuous process of support, to help target households sustainably escape poverty through productive assets, youth
employment, women empowerment and building resilient agriculture and livestock farming. Secondly, COs/VOs will be revamped
and amalgamated to have larger foot-print and assured participation of all 0-40 households as members. A more structured and
adequately financed approach will be pursued with GoB for union council development planning that mainstream priorities in
gender, youth engagement, nutrition/food security and climate change alongside conventional community needs. The women’s
active participation in development decision-making will be ensured in this process. CPIs will be prioritized from a holistic village
and Union Council development lens with larger investments and impact. Thirdly, a comprehensive three-pronged fisheries value
chain development will be pursued combining; value chain development package – 4Ps (fisherolk capacity building and private
sector engagement), infrastructure upgrading and policy and. The capacity of the Fisheries Department with regards to policy,
management and infrastructure construction will be enhanced through technical assistance and incremental staffing. Technical
Assistance will be strategically leveraged through grant funding to build partnerships with FAO and WFP for high-impact
interventions in policy and nutrition and climate change resilience. Complementarities will be sought with Government’s own
investments in jetties and fisheries development[1], as well as with those implemented by other donors and UN agencies.
39.
Components: The project will consist of three components i.e. community development; fisheries value chain development
and project management. The project will use community development as an entry point and focus on livelihoods options which
including agriculture, livestock and fisheries, the latter being a major source of livelihood for majority of the household in the target
districts and identified by GOB as a major priority. The community development will develop the foundation for rural development
and livelihood improvement to be promoted through interventions related to farm, fisheries and off-farm activities. Following is the
brief description of the components:
8/25
40.
Component 1: Community Development (US$ 29.037 million): The objective of the component is to enable the rural poor
men, women and youth to improve their livelihoods. GLLSP I covered around 90 per cent of the villages but household and rural
infrastructure delivery fell short in fulfilling the demands, due to resource limitations. The majority of villages still suffer from critical
deficits including water, road connectivity and income generating opportunities. GLLSP II, through comprehensive Union Council
Development Plans, and the leveraging of existing social capital[2] and capacities built under GLLSP I, will deliver a
comprehensive package of public and private goods in all 400 villages. Except for large infrastructure, all other community and
household level interventions will be identified, prioritized and implemented through COs/VOs. The main-streaming priorities
including gender, youth, nutrition, food security and climate change resilience would be largely addressed through this
component as part of social mobilization strategy and specific interventions. The component will be implemented by the social
mobilization partner in collaboration with the PMU, relevant line departments, FAO and WFP. A detailed community interaction
strategy, developed as part of the PIM, shall guide the implementation of activities.
41.
The component consists of three sub-components:
42.
1.1 Social Mobilization and Community Empowerment sub component:
43.
The objective of this sub component is to prepare and facilitate the transition of the institutionalization of the CDD approach in the
ongoing decentralization context in Balochistan. The approach will result in consolidating and evolving the GLLSP I approach as
follow:
Union Council Development Plans: A bottom-up development planning and need identification process will be extended to the
project area. CO level plans will feed into VO Plans that would be further consolidated into Union Council Development Plans
with a five-year perspective. Each plan will clearly identify project and non-project interventions pertaining to public and private
domains. Training will be imparted to village resource persons, SMP staff and government staff in UCDP formulation.
Standard formats will be developed by SMP for the plan. GLLSP II related interventions will be submitted by the SMP to the
PMU for approval and release of funds as per phasing indicated in the plan. Plans for all 45 Union councils will be completed
during the project year 1.
Capacity Building at 3-Tiers: Existing COs/VOs will be restructured and strengthened to ensure full membership of all poor
households. In principle, one larger CO will be promoted in each village for a more holistic understanding of village
development needs and priorities. SMP staff will be provided orientation training on organizational structures and need
identification and development plan formulation processes. Activists workshops and exposure visits will also be arranged.
Social Mobilization Partner: A social mobilization partner will be selected through competitive process. SMP will be paid on
output basis an agreed percentage of investment costs as per the norm under GLLSP I.
44.
45.
1.2 Economic Graduation of the ultra-poor, Women & Youth sub component: The subcomponent will support ultra-poor and
poor households, women and youth and increase their incomes through the provision of productive assets, skills, job market
preparation and facilitation of linkage to other sources of finance including NPGP. The selection of target beneficiaries will be
through the BISP Poverty Score Card. 
a) Productive Assets for Ultra-poor: The Poverty Graduation approach initiated under GLLSP I will be scaled-up. The
interventions will cover all remaining 0-11 PSC hhs (around 8,500), who will be provided training and suitable productive assets
to help graduate to the next level of economic well-being. About, 70 per cent of productive assets[3] will be provided to women.
Selection of asset will be on the basis of household capacity for management and location and income potential avoiding
crowding-in areas with limited market potential. These households will also receive nutrition and health packages developed with
the assistance from WFP.
1.  Women Empowerment: Women empowerment will be pursued both through community organizational processes and
specific targeted interventions. At least 50 per cent membership for women in COs/VOs and at least 30 per cent women
presence in CO/VO/LSO management positions will be ensured. Women development priorities will be ascertained separate
from those of men. At least 30 per cent technical training opportunities will be offered to women. Specific short vocational
courses will be offered to young girls and women in traditional embroidery and crafts, fish processing, and fishing net weaving
and repair. Women Resource Centers: 45 centers, at least one per Union Council, will be established in very poor villages that
have no public building or suitable private dwelling for women’s joint activities. These centers will serve as meeting place,
education centers, and joint enterprise activities for income generation. On average, about 250 women will be linked to each
resource center where these 10,000 women will benefit from additional income generation interventions and capacity
enhancement interventions. This will include kitchen gardening, food preservation, traditional crafts, nutrition, enterprise
development, numeracy and preferred vocational skills. A start-up kit will be provided to each woman who successfully
complete an enterprise or vocational training. As part of its assigned mandate, SMP will facilitate access for women to
microfinance in cases where women members of resource centers wish to start an individual or group-enterprise.  Women
with inclination and means (land, water) for kitchen gardening will be supplied with a basic package of inputs. These women
groups will also be engaged in afforestation around homesteads and on communal areas around water facilities. Feasibility for
one pilot Women Vegetable Processing Enterprise will be analyzed in one location in Lasbela District and, and if deemed
positive, one such enterprise will be implemented prior to MTR. The number would be increased if the outcomes argue for the
same. Technical assistance will be provided to GoB for development of an action plan to implement Gender Policy.
2.  Youth Job Market Readiness: A job-market survey and a youth census will be completed prior to project start-up under
GLLSP I. Two sets of trainings for youth will be available – one for youth with required educational qualifications and one for
those without. The first group will essentially be prepared for regular employment through training at accredited training
institutions, internship opportunities at project supported value chains and infrastructure and job placement support. The
second group will be trained at suitable institutions and/or work places to get skills for employment or start their own micro-
enterprises. Around 2,000 (actual based on final results of Youth Census) male and female youth from agriculture
communities will benefit from this activity. Financial inclusion of poor women and youth through a formalized arrangement for
access to interest free loans under the IFAD-funded NPGP as well as Government’s other Interest Free and subsidized Loans
schemes (Ehsas, Kamyab Naujawan etc.)[4] will also be facilitated for the implementation of which PPAF has agreed to
extend coverage to these two districts. A formal MOU between NPGP and GLLSP-II will be signed to operationalize the
arrangement (Operational guidelines are also explained in Para 14 of PIM). The Project will provide technical assistance to
GoB for the development of a comprehensive youth policy and action plan.
9/25
3.  Collaboration with FAO and WFP on Nutrition and climate Change Resilience: Technical Assistance support will be
provided by FAO and WFP, through IFAD Grant funding and own sources, for improved nutrition at household level and on-
farm climate change resilience respectively. WFP will focus on women and children nutrition and develop necessary training
modules for TOT and beneficiaries, nutrition packages and nutrition monitoring systems. FAO will provide technical assistance
for ToT, curricula development and training for small-holder farmers climate resilience. Climate Change Resilient Farming
and livestock Husbandry: On-farm support will be provided to equip the small holder farmers with knowledge, skills, crop
choices and practices to better cope with climate change induced challenges, 30,000 farmers will be trained also with in-situ
demonstrations. Food Security and Nutrition: the Project will support household level interventions for the ultra-poor and
poor (8,500 households) in improving food security and nutrition with the assistance of WFP. In addition, WFP will provide
technical assistance to the GoB in formulation of a food security and nutrition action plan for the province.
46.
1.3 Social and Economic Infrastructures sub-component
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
Community Physical Infrastructure. Community and UC Plans prepared under GLLSP I show an immediate need of around
800 priority community infrastructure schemes covering around 76,000 households. GLLSP II will provide funding to address
these needs in all 45 UCs/400 villages ensuring that at least two priority needs of each village are addressed. Existing CO/VO
plans will be updated to ensure that the project responds to the current situation. Women's priorities will be discussed and
identified in separate meetings.  In case male and female priorities should not match each other, preference will be given to the
priorities indicated by the women.  Based on the GLLSP I experience, the existing UCDP’s prepared by NRSP in 2016, and
mission observations, over 70 per cent of investments are likely to be for water provision for drinking, agriculture and fisheries,
followed by sanitation and solar power for households. Other investments are likely to be household solar power, RO plants,
street pavement and sanitation, fisheries related small infrastructure, check dams and flood protection structures. The project will
ensure that climate change resilience is made a central factor in CPI prioritization and selection. No targets are being specified
for various types of schemes to allow demand-driven identification under the union council development planning.
Rural Farm to Market Roads.  The main agriculture production areas will be connected to the national trunk road network and
the new road network which is being developed through CPEC/BRI through 80 km black top roads. Priority links will be identified
through the Union Council Development Plans, as per selection criteria, and the lengths may vary from 02 km to 10 km. Climate
change resilience will be built in the design of roads and support structures. Road side tree plantations will be integrated as part
of the road design process.
Implementation Arrangements: All activities under this component, except rural roads, will be implemented by the social
mobilization partner through a strategy and human resource availability specified in the contract between PMU and SMP and
PIM. Rural Roads, identified on the basis of selection criteria specified in the PIM, and identified through Union Council
Development Plans, will be implemented by C&W Department on standard farm to market road specifications. Household
nutrition and on-farm climate resilience interventions will be implemented in collaboration with WFP and FAO by SMP staff as per
the terms of collaboration agreed with the two agencies.
Component 2: Fisheries Value Chain Development (US$ 39.778 million): This component includes three sub-components:
(2.1) Establishing Fisheries 4Ps; (2.2) Economic Infrastructure for Fishery Development; and (2.3) Capacity building and
institutional strengthening. The Project’s primary target group is small fisherfolk (undertaking day trips in boats of less than 18
feet and 25 feet). A total of 50,000 fisheries households will be directly reached through this component. 2,300 poor young
women and men will be also supported to become entrepreneurs/staff responding to demand for products or services generated
by the 4Ps. This component will cover the overall 700 km of coast in Gwadar and Lasbela districts and all 40 current fishing
landing sites.
The objective of this subcomponent is to increase the income of the fisherfolk as well as the competitiveness of the Balochistan
fishery value chain by (i) increasing significantly the quality of the existing fish catch arriving at the factory door (price +5-10per
cent), (ii) reducing drastically the quantity of fish lost between the catch site and the factory door (+15per cent in quantity sold),
(iii) responding better to the international quality norms for export and consequently enlarge the access to market (+5per cent
price); and, (iv) sustainable management of marine fisheries resources. Women from fisherfolk families will be engaged through
Women Resource Centers to be provided with income generating skills, including fish and fish products processing, fish grading
and packaging, fishnet-making etc.
The approach to the fisheries sector will be holistic applying 4Ps model of value chain development to innovatively address the
priorities at all levels including micro, meso and macro. The component will be operationalized through a comprehensive value
chain package aimed at developing capacity of fisheries cooperatives, fishermen, consolidators and improving market links to the
processing industry, meeting the needs in terms of infrastructure, finance and creating the enabling environment. The PMU will
provide support through specialized staff and in conjunction with TA consistently to consistently build capacities of the
cooperatives to take the role forward successfully in the post-project scenario.
53.
Sub-component 2.1 - Establishing Fisheries 4Ps: the programme will support the establishment of market-driven 4Ps
between Organized Fisherfolk (1 cooperative per landing site/40 cooperatives established or revamped by the end of the project),
existing fishery processing factories (200 factories are currently operating within these 40 sites), Middlemen (as a market agent
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
in a first phase), banks (to initiate a first relation between fishermen and the formal banking system through only deposit, saving
account and mobile transfer) and the GoB through the GLLSP II project.
10/25
The project will operate in 2 phases: From start to the MTR, GLLSP II will focus on 11 landing sites (3 sites with jetty construction
plus 8 additional sites with and without jetties) to consolidate / adapt the 4P model to the site-specific requirements of the Gwadar
and Lasbela coastal area. After evaluation and at MTR, the upscaling of the approach to the other 19 landing sites (with the
necessary adjustment if needed) will be initiated.
Today, based on the official data from the Ministry of Fishery, a 20 feet boat (daily trip) catches, on average, 1.5 mt of fish per
year during a season which lasts from 6 to 8 months. After deducting expenses, the income is equally shared among the captain
and crew/labourers. The average income generated by each fisherfolk (4 to 5 fishers on one-boat) is consequently estimated at
the equivalent of USD 1 per day with considerable variations (rich catch one day and no catch on other). Middlemen are the link
between the fisherfolk and buyer/factory and pre-finance the necessary working capital (fuel, nets), investment capital (boats,
engines) as well as their social and consumption needs during off-season (health, food, festivals). This considerably weakens the
fishers' bargaining power and access to competitive markets.
To improve fisherfolk's bargaining power, they will be organized into legally recognized Cooperatives that will be managed by 3
professional staff recruited competitively with PMU assistance. Cooperatives will enter into collective sale contracts with factories
and other buyers on behalf of their members. The Cooperative will receive the catch of members, clean, grade and weigh the
different species of fish, generate a coupon to the fisherfolk with detail of quantity and will ensure prompt transport to the factory
(electric vehicle, like tricycle/motor-rickshaw, with cold box). The factory will assess quality, grade, and weight in presence of a
Cooperative representative and then, proceed with the payment – 90 per cent to the fishermen bank account, based on the pre-
agreed price with the cooperative and 10 per cent to the cooperative as commission.
The cooperative will be assisted by GLLSP II with some start-up funds for the working capital and capital investments (funds
allocated to eight cooperatives by GLLSP I will be taken into account). The amount of support for each cooperative will be
determined on the basis of a market study and business plan developed by GLLSP I before the project start up. The Cooperative
may provide to their members an advance for fuel, nets or other needs that they can pay back within a maximum period of one
month. These services will build Cooperative capacity and credibility and allow the fisherfolk to progressively become financially
less dependent on the middlemen. Alongside the cooperatives, the project will work with informal groups of fisherfolk,
partnerships, platforms and associations.
The cooperative will also finance poor youth of the community that want to become new fisherfolk, a set (boat, engine, nets) for a
maximum total amount of USD 5,000 that will be paid-back within 3 years to the cooperative, allowing for two cycles during
project life benefitting 4,000 youth. This will also allow these youth to access regular income and avoid indebtedness. A certain
amount will be dedicated for that per cooperative and will allow 4,000 youth to access new income (5 youth for 1 boat). The
cooperative will also assist all members to upgrade their boats so as to (i) have ice compartments to maintain fish quality up to
entry door of the factory, (ii) pre-grade the catch at the boat and (iii) respect the international hygiene standards. GLLSP II will
allocate a lump sum of USD 100 per boat to the cooperatives, based on the list of boat provided (10,000 boats to be upgraded).
The cooperative will pre-finance this amount to the fisherfolk that they will pay back within 4 months. The amount recuperated will
feed the working capital of the cooperative. The cooperative will benefit from and manage a small sorting/grading platform at the
landing site, allowing to clean, grade, weigh and transport the fish to the factory or large refrigerated carriers.
The fish factory will provide ice for the fisherfolk on an agreed price with the cooperative and will deduct directly the amount
before payment. A transparent detailed invoice will be provided by the factory to the cooperative every week. By adhering to this
4Ps, the factory will have better assurance to have regular supply of fish, both in quality and quantity, which will increase the
factory’s profitability and competitiveness.
Alongside the cooperatives, one or several banks with ongoing functional branches in Gwadar and Lasbela will be engaged to be
part of the 4Ps model to enable fisherfolk's access to a bank account (deposit and saving). The option of the mobile banking
facilities, e-commerce and e-money transfer will also be explored as well as leveraging the ongoing credit guarantee scheme of
the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP). After the MTR, when the bank will have a client history with the fisherfolk, access the formal
financial services at scale will be explored through a more robust engagement with the SBP and key participating financial
institutions. GLLSP II will also develop financial literacy modules for the fisherfolk which should allow them to better manage their
money during the periods of surplus.
61.
In the first phase, the middlemen will be part of the 4 Ps as a market agent of the cooperative. By this, the middleman will be able
to access and service more fisherfolk which would compensate for any loss due to the reduction in money lending business.
After the MTR, the evaluation of the 4P approach will make recommendations on the way forward and the type of relation to be
maintained with the middlemen.
62.
The Department of Fisheries will benefit from capacity building support from GLLSP II in the shape of equipment for Inspectors
and Quality Testing Lab, training and TA support for review and updating of the current fisheries policy and regulations in order to
ensure that the current marine resources of the Baluchistan coastal area are exploited in a sustainable manner.
63.
Sub-component 2.2, Economic Infrastructure for Fishery Value Chain Development: the project will finance enabling
infrastructure development for the Baluchistan Value chain Development through:
64.
Construction of Jetties and Allied Infrastructure. Of the 8 notified landing sites on the coast, jetties and allied infrastructure
are being constructed at 5 sites (2 by the GDA and 3 by the BCDA). The GoB has consequently requested GLLSP II to assist on
the remaining 3 priority sites which are currently under technical feasibility study by GLLSP I, to be completed by December
2019. Once the feasibility study becomes available, the PMU will initiate the procurement process for detailed design and
construction. The construction will be done in two phases: (i) first the jetties and break-water will be constructed, to be finalized
by the end of year two of GLLSP II. As soon as work on jetties starts, the allied infrastructure will be designed /customized per
site, based on the need of the fishermen, and construction initiated. 
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
Fish Market Access Roads:  The Project will support the development of 80 km (<10 km per road) black topped road links from
the landing sites to the nearest factory and/or trunk roads to facilitate safe and time-efficient transport of the catch. Today, the fish
are mainly carried on donkey carts, exposing fish to direct sunlight and other contaminating elements for one to two hours before
reaching the factory. Provision of proper roads will encourage motorized efficient transportation, adding to quality, reducing
wastage and allowing better returns for fisherfolks. Roads will be identified as part of Cooperative Business and Development
plan and constructed by C&W on provincial farm to market standards and climate proofed.
11/25
Cooperative Landing Site Platforms: These platforms will be supported at landing sites with no jetty to ensure efficient
cleaning, grading, weighing and transportation to the factory. The Project will initially support 8 such platforms at sites that have
the maximum catch and number of beneficiary fishermen/boats. This platform will have small solar powered RO plants for water
(to keep fish quality), a roof covering a concreate apron, a store (for the cooperative equipment), a garage and an office. A
concrete path from boat landing site on the beach to the platform will be part of the package. The design will be done by GLLSP I
and will be available by March 2020. 
Capacity building and institutional strengthening. The Department of Fisheries will be provided with support to formulate a
comprehensive sustainable Fisheries Management Policy for the province and to develop and approve a new Fisheries
Cooperative Law covering all landing sites in Gwadar and Lasbela. The Department of Fisheries will also be supported to
spearhead capacity building through its technical institute, undertake monitoring of the aquaculture resources, develop
mechanisms for dredging through PPP arrangements and to establish hatcheries in the coastal areas to serve the purpose of
conservation through restocking.
Hatcheries and Innovative Aquaculture. The project will support the establishment of 8 hatcheries along the coastline to run
on a commercially viable pattern. In addition, private sector will be assessed to start net culture. A total of 80 net culture sites will
be supported during the project implementation. Both hatcheries and net culture will be closely integrated with the value chain
package involving cooperatives and progressive fishermen.
Implementation: Implementation of the component will be directly managed by the PMU through a team of three professionals
including a Business/Banking specialist, a Fish Marketing specialist and an Institutional expert, with Fisheries Department related
aspects assigned to an Activity Manager and field team notified by the Department. The PMU Team will operate out of PIUs
based in Gwadar or Lasbela. The team will be supported by 4 field specialist animators (accountant profile) that will monitor and
follow the 11 cooperatives in the first phase (3 cooperatives per agent). 7 additional agents will be recruited after MTR. Each
agent will have a motorbike and a tablet as well a lump sum operational amount per month for internet/phone and POL. All
procurement will be handled by the procurement unit of the PMU. The Team in charge of this component will be responsible for
all the M&E aspects of the component. Each cooperative will provide monthly operational and financial reporting to the PMU.
Every quarter, a meeting with the Department of Fisheries will be organized in Quetta to report on the progress and difficulties of
this component.
70.
Component 3: Project Management and Policy Support (US$ 3.987 million):
71.
Project Management Unit:   The Project Management Unit will be established in Quetta and will be responsible to plan,
implement, manage and coordinate all project activities. Two PIUs will be set up, one in Lasbela and one in Gwadar, which will
house the field technical staff for district level implementation, coordination and monitoring. Each PIU will be headed by a
competitively selected Deputy Project Director from the provincial management services. The key staff of the GLLSP I PMU,
whose positions are in the new GLLSP II organigram and whose profiles correspond to the requested qualifications, will be
transferred into the PMU for GLLSP II after an assessment, to retain the institutional memory and to leverage the capacities
already built. GLLSP II will finance the necessary requirements for vehicles, equipment, operational expenses and salaries of
staff. Details of staff, their TOR and PMU/PIU inputs are in the PIM.
72.
Policy Support and Advocacy: Part of the IFAD grant will be utilized to support the provincial government on policy aspects
related to project's key components and mainstreaming priorities. In coordination with concerned government departments and
agencies, the project will engage technical expertise to assist the provincial government with regards to:
Youth Development Policy and Action Plan: In order to help the GoB address the current challenges of the poor youth in the
province, the project will provide 6 person-months of national technical assistance to formulate a Youth Development Policy
and action plan for the province. Resources will also be provided for district and province level consultative workshops to
develop consensus on principles and activities.
Nutrition and Food Security Policy and Action Plan: Building on existing studies carried out on the current nutrition and food
security situation in the province, GLLSP II will engage 6 person-months of national technical assistance in collaboration with
WFP and FAO to assist the GoB in the development of a comprehensive nutrition and food security policy and action plan.
Climate Resilience and Mitigation for Agriculture Action Plan: Based on the National Policy for Climate Change mitigation and
resilience, the GoB will be assisted to develop a provincial action plan. 4 person-months of national technical assistance will be
provided with possible additional support from WFP and FAO.
Fisheries Policy Updating and Sustainable Management Plan for Marine Fisheries: 8 person months of TA will be provided to
the Fisheries Department for updated of its existing fisheries policy to respond to the current needs and challenges. And
based on that, a comprehensive management plan for sustainable exploitation of marine resource will be developed. It will
also include the development of a system for resource availability data, catch data etc. for management decision-making. In
addition, 2 person months of TA will be provided for the finalization of the new Fisheries Cooperatives Act.
Institutionalization of CDD Approach for Rural Development: 9-person months of TA (legal expert, finance expert and
institutional development expert) will be provided to the P&D, Finance and Local Government Departments to develop rules,
regulations, budget allocation processes, flow of funds and accounting mechanisms etc. to put in place a comprehensive
mechanism to facilitate, on the basis of the New Local Government Act, the commitment of 30 per cent of the annual
development funds to rural councils and village organizations.
73.
Provincial Knowledge Sharing and Consultation Platforms: Annual provincial knowledge sharing and consultation platforms will
be organized with key stakeholders and opinion makers on progress, issues and prospects with regards to projects areas of
interventions as a feeding channel for provincial policy and resource allocation decisions. 
12/25
E. Theory of Change
74.
The GLLSP II’s theory of change is informed by the GLLSP I’s successful interventions in poverty reduction and rural
development as well as lessons learnt, in particular regarding fisheries infrastructure and value chain development. The
development challenge is to sustainably improve incomes and reduce poverty among the smallholder farmers and fisherfolk, with
a gender, youth and climate sensitive approach, in the project area. At project completion, the project outcomes aimed at are:
zero 0-11 (ultra-poor) households in the project area and 60 per cent of 12-40 households graduate to the next band of economic
well-being; all priority community infrastructure needs, particularly water security, are addressed and all main fisheries and
agriculture production areas are linked by roads to the main CPEC/national highway network; the registered fisherfolk reduce
their waste by 30 per cent and improve their incomes by 50 per cent through better capacities, a well-functioning value chain and
support landing site infrastructure; and rural Union councils and villages have guaranteed access to government’s annual
development funding for sustained development.       
75.
GLLSP I’s lessons that inform the theory of change include: The areas of entrenched poverty need sustained longer-term
engagement, by providing an integrated and responsive package of community level and household level interventions, to lift
such areas out of poverty. A project area consisting of two distinct groups of beneficiaries with different livelihood sources needs
a more flexible and nuanced approach and interventions – coastal fishing communities and agricultural hinterland smallholder
farmers – to develop multiple pathways for the achievement of the project outcomes of enhanced incomes and reduced poverty.
Specialized expertise needs to be engaged to develop local capacities along with distinct investments for mainstreaming
priorities. The GLLSP II design accordingly:
Restructures the existing social capital (COs/VOs) in target villages to become inclusive organizations covering all 0-40
households with special focus on women and youth;
Introduces a dynamic poverty graduation approach that covers all 0-40 PSC households and links them to other available
poverty graduation interventions apart from project support;
Approaches community infrastructure needs from a holistic village and Union council perspective with a larger resource
envelope to address at least two priority needs in every village;
Mainstreams food security, nutrition, women and youth empowerment and climate resilience;
Promotes a holistic start-to-end value chain development -based on 4Ps approach for improved incomes of fisherfolks and
assists 30,000 smallholder farmers and livestock owners to have improved access to irrigation and drinking water and
improved production/incomes through adoption of climate resilient practices;
Provides critical road links to isolated rural fishermen and agricultural communities;
Addresses climate change challenges through an integrated and mutually reinforcing set of interventions;
Provides a comprehensive package of awareness, knowledge and inputs for nutrition, especially of women and children from
poor households, backed up by water and sanitation CPIs;
Assists the government in the institutionalization of decentralized rural development[1].
76.
Assumptions for Theory of Change: Communities in almost all target Union councils have been organized into COs, VOs and
LSOs by NRSP and the project will not be required to start the process afresh except for ensuring that all poor target households
are duly represented in these organizations. Full development potential of these organizations has not been realized so far due to
a patchy and mostly project driven provision of development resources. Poverty Graduation will be adopted as a continuous
process helping all 0-40 households to move beyond 40 on the Poverty Score Card. A different set of flexible interventions would
be available for Ultra-poor (0-11), very poor (12-18), poor (19-24), vulnerable (25-34) and transitory poor (35-40) respectively.
Public Goods in the shape of CPIs will be prioritized for each community with full representation of women and youth. Adequate
resources are provided for the attainment of objectives of mainstreaming priorities including climate resilience and nutrition. Road
linkages will be determined through a transparent selection-criteria. Fishermen organization into cooperatives would provide
effective forums for capacity building, support infrastructure management and collective bargaining. Engagement of social
mobilization partners will ensure close supervision and handholding for the community and household level activities. 
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
77.
78.
79.
Government of Balochistan Priorities:    The Government of Balochistan gives a high priority to the socio-economic development
of the two coastal districts to enable the people to actively engage with and benefit from major investments planned under
CPEC/RBI. Another priority is the development of fisheries due to its huge potential for the provincial economy and the coastal
communities. The Planning & Development Department’s current approach is to assign clear/focused sectors and regions to
donor agencies and pursue full development coverage of such assigned areas for visible impact.
SDGs:  GLLSP II objective and interventions are fully aligned with at least seven SDGs including Poverty (SDG 1), Zero Hunger
(SDG 2), Gender Equality (SDG 5), Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6), Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG 7), Reduced
Inequalities (SDG 10) and Climate Action (SDG 13). 
Government of Pakistan Vision 2025:   GLLSP II will also directly contribute to the achievement of the targets under the
Government of Pakistan Vision 2025, including: Pillar I, Goals 4 and 6 (Improved sanitation and reduced disease burden); Pillar
II, Goal 9 (Reduce Poverty by half); Pillar IV, Goals 14, 15 and 16 (affordable energy, increase water storage and reduced food
insecurity), and; Pillar VII, Goal 24 (increased road density).
80.
Poverty Graduation Priority of the Government:  The Government has identified poverty graduation as a priority. The project is
aligned with the Government’s Poverty Graduation Programme “EHSAS” and also complements the National Poverty Graduation
Programme and the Prime Minister’s Loan Programme for Youth “Kamyaab Naujawan”. The envisaged collaboration between
GLLSP-II and NPGP as well as other Ministry of Social Protection interventions will create opportunities for sharing successful
approaches and models for poverty graduation and women and youth empowerment for scaling-up.
13/25
81.
82.
83.
IFAD's Strategic Framework:   The project is aligned with IFAD's Strategic Framework (2016-25) and corporate priorities. It
responds to the strategic vision of inclusive and sustainable rural transformation to eliminate extreme poverty by focusing on the
poorest communities and ultra-poor households with a holistic set of interventions to help them graduate out of poverty.
CPEC/BRI:   The project will enable the beneficiary communities, particularly male and female youth, to better integrate with and
take benefit of the infrastructure and economic opportunities being created by the CPEC/BRI related infrastructure. Improved
production and market links will enable communities to enhance their incomes by meeting the increasing demand in upcoming
CPEC industrial estates and residential colonies; providing the youth with skills will enable them to find employment in CPEC
infrastructure and economic projects.
FAO and WFP Partnership:  The existing presence and programmes of FAO and WFP in Balochistan covering agriculture value
chain development, climate change resilience and nutrition/food security offer opportunities for partnerships between Rome
Based Agencies in these vital areas. GLLSP II will make specific financial provisions under the IFAD Grant Component to
engage FAO for on-farm climate resilience and fisheries value chain development and WFP collaboration in household nutrition
and food security. FAO has ongoing and pipeline Technical Cooperation Project’s with Government of Balochistan and Ministry
of National Food Security and Research. Partnership with FAO will offer opportunities for policy level engagement and dialogue
on sustainable management of fisheries as well as food security and climate resilient agriculture.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
84.
Total project costs are estimated to be US$ 72.801 million to be invested over six years of project implementation period. The
IFAD contribution will be a loan of US$ 60.155 million on blend terms from the IFAD11 allocation, and an IFAD Grant amounting
to US$ 3 million. The Balochistan Government and beneficiary contribution amount to US$8.654 and 0.992 million respectively.
85.
Table 1: Programme Cost by component (and sub-components) and financier:
86.
(Thousands of United States dollars)
87.
Table 2: Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier:
88.
(Thousands of United States dollars)
14/25
89.
Table 3: Programme/project costs by component and year
90.
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
91.
The project will be financed through an IFAD loan of US 60.155 million (83 per cent), on blend terms from IFAD11 for which the
availability of resources is confirmed. In addition, an IFAD grant of US$ 3 million (4 per cent) will be provided for all technical
assistance support for policy and regulatory aspects as well as for nutrition, climate resilience and institutionalization of CDD
approach. The Government of Balochistan will contribute US$ 8.654 million (12 per cent) as counterpart financing to meet the tax
obligations and some counterpart financing for community development and project management. Beneficiaries will contribute
US$ 0.992 million (1 per cent) in matching cash, in-kind materials, land and labour under the CPIs and the fisheries value chain
development.
c. Disbursement
92.
The project will have segregated, but integrated, systems of funds flow, budgeting and accounting to ensure a clear, verifiable
audit trail. This will be ensured by establishing a Designated Account each for the (i) IFAD Loan; and (ii) IFAD Grant and a
dedicated account for the government’s counterpart funds. The beneficiaries’ contribution would be recorded and reported by the
Social Mobilization Partner (SMP) as per the contract agreement between the PMU and the SMP. The PMU will maintain
updated information on the use of all sources of funds—including the beneficiaries’ contributions in its accounting system.
93.
Main categories will be as follows:
94.
(1) Investment Expenditure Accounts; (i) Civil Works/Community Infrastructure; (ii) Vehicles; (iii) Computer and Equipment; (iv)
Technical Assistance, Training and Studies; and (v) Grants and Subsidies.
15/25
95.
(2) Recurrent Expenditure Accounts; (i) Salaries and Allowances; (ii) Operating Cost.
96.
Total project cost is estimated at USD 72.6 million which includes approximately USD 67.3 million (93%) investment expenditure
and USD 5.3 million (7%) recurrent expenditure. The project duration is 6 years. IFAD loan and grant will be USD 60 million and
USD 3 million (respectively) while government contribution is estimated to be USD 8.6 million and beneficiary contribution to be
0.99 million.  
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
97.
The Project is designed to contribute to the achievements of the SDG and the Vision 2025, more specifically the targets regarding
poverty reduction, food security, and nutrition. The components are designed in such a manner that rural communities have
improved road access, water security, both for irrigation and domestic purposes, and improved livelihoods. The project also
addresses the gaps in the priority sector of fisheries in the districts of Gwadar and Lasbela with the aim to improve income of
small fisherfolk through improved infrastructure, enhanced capacities, access to market and financial services and enhanced
governance.
98.
GLLSP II will accrue quantitative and qualitative benefits to households in the target areas under its various sub-components.
The physical outputs and outcomes of the project are briefly summarized below:
Almost 100,000 households will be organized  and benefitting of which at least 50 per cent will be poor (0-40) and over 50 per
cent will be women members. At least 30 per cent of the management positions will be allocated to women.
Union Council Development Plans: 45 Union Council Development Plans, duly costed/budgeted, will be prepared to identify
the priority infrastructure, social and economic needs of the communities and villages within the UC. Parallel to that, profiling
and livelihoods development plans for the ultra-poor and poor households will be prepared to guide and deliver productive
assets and other poverty graduation interventions.  
Poverty Graduation. A total of 50,000 ultra-poor and poor households will benefit from poverty graduation interventions to
move to the next level of economic well-being. These include 8,500 of ultra-poor eligible for a productive asset (at least 60 per
cent of productive assets will be given to women). and nutrition support, support to 6,000 youth in agriculture and fisheries
communities for remunerative employment, 10,000 women to be provided with capacity, skills and starter kits for improved
incomes and nutrition, 30,000 households to be trained in climate resilient agriculture and livestock and 50,000 fisherfolk
assisted in improving incomes through participation in 4-P value chains. Of the total persons benefitting, about 35 per cent will
be from common households.
Community Physical Infrastructure. This sub-component will benefit around 76,000 hhs directly through investments in water
(drinking and irrigation), solar energy, women enterprise centers, sanitation, flood protection, green/afforestation schemes,
inter-village roads/street pavements etc.
Market access roads. A total of 80 km of rural roads will benefit 200 villages/16,000 households ensuring them reduced
transportation.
Fisheries value chain development. Three fish jetties and allied infrastructure, a value chain package covering ultimately all
the land sites in Gwadar and Lasbela as well as improved enabling environment will positively impact the income of 50,000
small fisherfolks directly and all the fisheries related businesses and services indirectly. 80 km of link roads for jetties and
production platforms will benefit 50,000 fisherfolk households in accessing market for better prices, reducing waste and
improving incomes.
99.
The financial analysis of the GLLSP II investment over a period of 20 years indicates a positive net present value of US$40.60
million while the internal rate of return is noted to be 20.94 per cent, which is well above the discount rate of 11.17 per cent
(Average discount rate between 1992 - 2019 (Source: tradingeconomies.com/State Bank of Pakistan). The economic internal
rate of return shows viability of the proposed project investment being 29.05 per cent while NPV has been found to be US$73.74.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
100.
Exit Strategy: Several elements have been built in the programmes design and approach to lead to an organized exit (See
Annex 10 for details). The first key element is using the existing structures and arrangements as far as possible and not creating
any new project specific structures except where necessary e.g. the PMU. All community development interventions use existing
social capital in the target villages in the shape of COs/VOs/LSOs which have been in existence for over 20 years and have a
mentor RSP that will continue to operate and support these institutions. The project would assist the provincial government to
establish an institutionalized mechanism and supportive laws and rules for the New Local Government Act which calls for regular
annual transfer of development funds to villages and Union councils.
101.
Fisheries Value Chain interventions are underpinned by the fisherfolk being organized into business cooperatives that have
contractual relationships with the private sector and a collaborative relationship with the Fisheries Department for the operation of
jetties and support infrastructure.
102.
Key factors of programme sustainability.  Key factors that promise a high probability of sustainability for the programme
interventions are: 
Sustainability of Three Tier CO/VO/LSO Structure: CO/VO/LSO existed even before GLLSP I in the project area and would
remain there after the conclusion of GLLSP II, as their support organization, NRSP, will continue to operate and deliver
16/25
various interventions.
Poverty Graduation: The project will introduce a more dynamic poverty graduation approach that covers all 0-40 households
and links them with the Government’s National Poverty Graduation Imitative (Ehsas) and other pro-poor programmes.
Community Led, Owned and Maintained Infrastructure: All infrastructure will be selected and implemented on the basis of
consensus-driven community priorities and the communities will commit to ensure the O&M after completion.
Fisheries Value Chain and Infrastructure: a 4-P approach to fish marketing, under-pinned by buyer-supplier contracts,
enhanced fisherfolk capacities, strong cooperatives and government-cooperative co-managed landing site facilities offer
strong promise for sustained operation of the value chain and support facilities
Rural Roads: The component will be implemented through the Communication & Works Department. As per Government
regulations, maintenance of all roads executed by C&W also becomes the responsibility of the same through annual
maintenance budgets.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
103.
Inherent Risks: GLLSP II faces certain inherent risks that can be categorized as “Medium”:
104.
Macro-Economic Stability:   Pakistan is going through a difficult macro-economic situation over the last year or so due to
adverse balance of trade and current account deficit leading to a bail-out package of US$ 7.2 billion from IMF. Existing
projections point to continuing economic challenges in the medium term. The Government has initiated various steps to control
government expenditure and widen the tax net for improved revenues. Relevant to the project are also the weak coordination
between federal and provincial institutions especially in the area of policy coherences and integrated development of regulatory
framework – notably marine fisheries policy. The collaboration with FAO will address this through its ongoing assistance to the
federal government for developing marine fisheries regulatory framework.
105.
Country Fiduciary Risk: The country’s inherent fiduciary risk rating continues to be Medium. Pakistan is the 117 least corrupt
nation out of 175 countries, according to the 2018 Corruption Perceptions Index reported by Transparency International.
Pakistan’s score against the World Bank’s Transparency, Accountability, and Corruption Index for the public sector has been 3
out of 6 since 2015. The World Bank’s Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report of 2017 for Baluchistan
identified several performance gaps in the PFM system. A World Bank funded PEFA Project is currently being implemented to
help provinces address these challenges.
106.
Security Situation in Balochistan: Balochistan has experienced security related challenges over the last few years that result
in restricted movement of international staff for supervision and implementation support. This risk however can be addressed as
there is sufficient qualified national expertise available to supervise the project in any such eventuality.
107.
Operational Risks: Following table lists the operational risks and mitigation measures that can be adopted to address them:
Risks
Risk Level
Mitigation Measures
Management Capacity Issues and High
Staff Turnover: The province has staff
capacity issues in effective project
management and project’s often experience
high staff turnover affecting project
performance
Medium
Engagement of a capable RSP for most of project interventions at
community level would largely compensate for any staff capacity
issues on government side. In the Financing Agreement, staff
selection and any future transfers would be made contingent upon
IFAD concurrence
Financial Management Capacity is weak
and competent personnel difficult to find in
project area
Medium
Moving the PMU to Quetta would grant access to more competent
personnel and the procurement of a proper accounting software
like Tompro would greatly increase the quality of financial
management
Procurements have faced the issue of
efficiency, timeliness and conflict of interest
Medium
Provision will be made in the PMU budget to hire competent and
dedicated Procurement Staff
Start-up Delays: Past IFAD projects have
experienced considerable start-up delays
Medium
Technical Assistance would be engaged by IFAD to assist in the
quick formulation of the PC-I parallel to the finalization of Project
Design. It has been agreed to maintain the GLLSP PMU till
approval of new project so as to take responsibility for the PC-I,
staff recruitment etc.
Hijacking of Project Benefits/Corruption
Low
17/25
Project design contains specific targeting criteria for the Union
Councils and villages, based on credible BISP Poverty Data.
Households level interventions (individual goods) and community
level interventions (Public Goods) will also be subject to selection
criteria ensuring benefits for the poorest. 
FM risk category
A.     Inherent Risks
Initial
risk
rating
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures
Residual
risk rating
Entity and Project design
i. Weak targeting—and inappropriate criteria for the
use of IFAD TA Grant could leave institutional gaps
intact, increasing fiduciary/ delivery risk
M
ii. Late completion of the feasibility studies would
increase risk that the construction of jetties would not
complete within project lifetime.
Existing mitigations
i. TA Grant component has been included to
address institutional and capacity constraints—
especially within the fisheries sector. Suitable
criteria and process for use of TA Grant needs to be
established to ensure effective use of this funding
as per the PDR.
L
ii. Procurement actions to engage the National
Institute of Oceanography (a public sector
organization) for pre-/feasibility study and selection
of SMP need to start without waiting for the
Financing Agreement to be signed
B.    Project Control Risks
1. Organization & Staffing
 i. Delay in the appointment of the core staff would
decelerate implementation in the start-up phase.
 ii. Weak FM team increases the risk of project
financial management not being effective, thereby
increasing fiduciary risks for IFAD’s funds.
2. Budgeting
 i. Project execution virtually comes to a halt if AWPB
is not approved on time;
ii. Lack of provisioning of counterpart funds for the
project in government’s budget—for example, can
make taxes not being paid to the tax authorities—
increasing risks for the government and IFAD.
H
M
Existing mitigations
i. Core staff of the PMU—Project Director, Finance
Manager need to be engaged within eight (8) weeks
of the date of signing of the Financing Agreement;
ii.A stronger finance team led by a full time Finance
Manager and supported by two Budget and Finance
Officer in PMU and one Budget and Finance Officer
each in SPMU.
Existing mitigations:
i. Early approval of the AWPB & Procurement Plan
by the PSC (by 31 March each year);
ii. Work out the share of the counterpart funds for
AWP/B each year and ensure its inclusion in the
provincial government’s budget;
M
L
3. Funds Flow & Disbursements
18/25
Existing mitigations:
i. Delayed opening of the Designated Accounts would
disrupt the project start-up, contributing to low
disbursement, and other effects;
 ii. Lack of availability of counterpart funds for the
project can prevent the project from carrying out
transactions involving this source of fund—thereby
delaying implementation or causing complication as
stated earlier.
M
- Designated Account for the project will be opened
within eight (8) weeks of the date of signing of the
Financing Agreement;
L
 - The P&DD will be required to ensure the release
of the counterpart funds as per the requirement of
approved AWP/B—starting from the first quarter of
a financial year.
4. Internal Control
i. Internal controls may not be consistently
understood and complied with if they are not formally
approved and notified;
ii. In the absence of suitable criteria and due diligence
process, the risk of funds not being used effectively
and for its intended purpose. 
M
iii. Weak controls over Implementing Partners (SMP,
Cooperatives etc.) increase risk of money being
syphoned off without the PMU detecting it.
Existing mitigations:
i. Financial management procedures as part of the
PIM need to are approved by the PSC and shared
with IFAD within eight (8) weeks of the date of the
signing of Financing Agreement;
ii. Suitable criteria—and due diligence mechanism
for the provisioning of financial services
(cooperative model/digital finances) will be
established;
L
iii. Specific internal control checks have been
recommended for Social Mobilization Partner
(SMP, Cooperatives) should be applied rigorously
and documented for IFAD’s missions.
5. Accounting Systems, Policies & Procedures
Existing mitigations:
i. The risk that the project would not be able to
manage IFAD’s funds and comply with IFAD’s
reporting requirement effectively;
i. An appropriate Accounting Software i.e.
TOMPRO needs to be procured, installed and the
finance team trained in its use;
ii. Financial management policies and procedures
may not be consistently complied with if they are
formally approved and notified;
M
ii. Financial Management Manual needs to be
finalized and the finance team exposed to related
IFAD’s requirements;
L
iii. The accounting system not reflecting the full cost
of project interventions & project financial
statements/reports are not complete.
iii. Accounting system needs to record and report on
government’s counterpart funds and beneficiaries’
contribution.
6. Reporting & Monitoring.
i. The risk that the project is unable to detect, prevent,
and rectify significant deviations between planned
and actual performance under any project
component;
M
ii. The risk that the project—especially work under the
fisheries component, does not off-track once again as
it did under the GLLSP-I
Existing mitigations:
i. Interim Financial Reports—on agreed format,
need to be submitted to IFAD on quarterly basis;
L
ii. Monthly monitoring meetings with stakeholders
need to be held during the first year to overcome
teething problems and put the project on track
7.     Internal Audit
i. Weak follow-up increases the risk that critical
agreed actions are not implemented, and related
improvements in implementation not realized;
ii. Without internal auditing within project financial
management, the risk of internal controls, risk
management, and governance arrangements
constantly being reviewed and improved goes up
alarmingly.
8. External Auditing
i. Lack of proper engagement with the external
auditor increase the risk that either the audit would
not be completed on time or the audit report would
not be of high quality;
ii. In the absence of established timeline for settling
audit observations, the risk of significant audit
recommendations not being implemented/settled
increases significantly.
OVERALL FM RISK
I. Environment and Social category
19/25
Existing mitigations:
i. A monthly report on compliance status of the
decisions taken in official meetings is prepared and
discussed with PD;
ii. A position of Manager Internal Audit is provided;
M
iii. A firm for the internal audit of the project—
focusing largely on the working of Implementing
Partners (SMP, Cooperatives, Community Managed
Financial Services etc.) would be engaged by end
of July 2020.
Existing mitigations:
i. PMU needs to engage with Director General Audit
(Baluchistan), through P&DD for timely completion
of audit;
L
ii. Audit observations should be settled within six (6)
months after the Audit Report has been shared with
the P&DD to avoid backlog.
H
M
M
108.
The project districts have a varying topography consisting of a long coastal belt, extensive arid plains, small irrigated oasis, some
rain-fed agriculture and low to medium height hills. Population density is very small and rural settlements are scattered. The area
is interspersed with a number of hill torrents and rivers with seasonal flows and prone to flashfloods in the event of rains. The
population is mostly of Baloch ethnicity. Over 80 per cent fishermen operate in own small boats or work as labour on larger
boats. The large majority of farmers are small-holders, mostly dependent on rains, and supplement their incomes through
livestock rearing.
109.
Household level interventions for poverty graduation are aimed at building capacity and skills of the small households to generate
more incomes for themselves through small ruminants, small enterprises, skill development for remunerative jobs or services.
Community infrastructure will be mostly in the form of water resource development, access roads/tracks, sanitation, solar-power,
flood protection etc. Interventions with fisherfolk follow a value chain approach and are aimed at improving the quality of their
catch and minimizing wastage which would have positive impact on the quantity of catch harvested, as reduced wastage and
better pricing will eliminate the need for excess catch. No displacement of population or forced acquisition of productive land is
foreseen for project activities. All roads will be built on state-land and in case of any small portions belonging to a community, the
land will be procured under the Land Acquisition Act after payment of fair compensation. Approval of all road alignments and
design would be subject to an environmental screening process to ensure that the construction does not have adverse social or
environmental impact. Based on this, the environment and social category of this project is “B”.
J. Climate Risk classification
110.
The climate of the project area is generally arid with low annual rainfall and water availability for household consumption,
livestock and crops is generally at a premium. Large swaths of area along the coast received no rains during 2013-2018.  The
area is also prone to flashfloods when it rains. The coastal areas are also susceptible to cyclones and strong winds, particularly
during monsoon season. Current projections by the Pakistan Meteorological Department show high possibility of rising surface
temperature in project area over the next thirty years and an erratic rain pattern with serious implications for water availability for
crops, livestock and household consumption. Long periods of drought interspersed with heavy rains and flashfloods are
anticipated. Project approach and interventions are aimed at improving the communities’ resilience for climate change.
Community level activities and investments cover improved understanding of climate change risks, adopting appropriate cropping
and livestock husbandry practices, improving water security for domestic and crop-use, improving infrastructure specifications
and designs for better climate resilience and construction of flood protection works etc. All these interventions are designed to
contribute to improved climate resilience. None of project interventions is of type and scale that would adversely contribute to
climate risks. Based on above analysis, the project is classified as “high” risk project.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
20/25
a. Project management and coordination
111.
GLLSP II will follow the same implementation modality as Phase-I with slight differences to further strengthen the planning,
coordination and implementation aspects. The Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan will be the coordinating
agency for this project at Federal level. A Provincial Project Steering Committee, chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary and
housed in the Planning & Development Department, and with representation of key departments and social mobilization partners,
will be responsible for handling the project’s policy aspects, recruitments, inter-agency coordination, minor-budgetary
reallocations and cost revisions and approval of annual work plans/budgets. The Planning & Development Department of the
Government of Balochistan will be the lead implementing agency/administrative department for the project.
112.
A Project Management Unit, headed by a Project Director, will be responsible for planning, coordination, financial management,
procurement and M&E of the project activities. The existing Project Management Unit of GLLSP I will be transitioned to take
charge of GLLSP II and ensure a quick start and will be shifted to Quetta at an appropriate time during start-up. Two satellite
Project Implementation Units will be established at Gwadar and Lasbela to plan, coordinate and monitor project activities in their
respective districts.
113.
The Project Director will preferably be a civil servant of appropriate seniority, selected through a competitive process and in
consultation with IFAD. Once selected, the Project Director will serve for at least three years and any replacement will be subject
to IFAD concurrence. A Project Coordination Committee (PCC), consisting of the PD, key PMU staff, Social mobilization Partner
and government implementing agencies involved in project will be notified to meet every month to review project progress and
approve the monthly plans of activities. The PCC will also formulate projects quarterly and annual plans and assign
responsibilities.
114.
Each implementing partner will designate a focal person/Activity Manager at Departmental and District level to be responsible for
all project related activities. This includes Fisheries Department, C&W Department, Social Mobilization partner, FAO and WFP.  
115.
A District Development Coordination Committee will be notified by P&D Department for each of the two participating districts to (i)
ensure required administrative support for the implementation of project activities; (ii) Review Union Council Development Plans
and recommend to GLLSP II (for project related interventions) and provincial Government for non-project sectors. Detailed TOR
and guidelines will be issued by P&D for this purpose.
116.
Project Implementation Manual (PIM): A PIM is being developed and will be notified at the start of the project to articulate in detail
projects planning, coordination, financial management and reporting requirements covering PSC, PMU and all implementing
partners.    
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
117.
Arrangements for Financial Management: The PMU will have a Finance Wing staffed with properly qualified and experienced
staff and headed by a full time Finance Manager. The Finance Wing will have one Budget and Finance Officer in each of the two
satellite SPMUs but disbursements will be managed centrally from the PMU. The Finance Wing will prepare its AWP/B as per
IFAD’s guidelines/procedures while following the country’s PFM cycle.
118.
Accounting: A full set of accounts will be maintained by PMU as per IFAD requirements and internationally recognized
accounting standards and qualified staff for this purpose will be positioned in PMU. The accounting system will (i) ensure the
proper disbursements from the IFAD proceeds for efficient and economical implementation of the project; (ii) allow performance
evaluation of the project and comparison of actual implemented budget versus estimated, and reasons for the discrepancy, and
(iii) allow internal controls for ensuring protection of project funded assets. The PMU will use a suitable accounting software for
this purpose.
119.
Reporting: The project will submit detailed financial statements for each financial year within four (4) months of the end of each
financial year (by the end of October). In addition, the project will submit Interim Financial Report indicating progress against
components/categories vis-à-vis AWP/B and issues that may require IFAD’s intervention to keep project on track.
120.
Internal Audit: The project will have a Manager Internal Audit to lead internal audit activity which would be outsourced to focus
more specifically on the activities of the Social Mobilization Partner(s). In addition, the IA Manager will ensure compliance with
the recommendations of the supervision missions, external audit, and other direction issued by the government etc.
121.
Audit. Audit of Project Accounts will be carried out within three months of close of financial year by Auditor General of Pakistan
through its provincial Director General Audit (Quetta) Report of each Audit will be conveyed to P&D Department and IFAD within
six months of the close of financial year.
122.
Learning from the GLLSP I experience, a strengthened Finance Wing will be established at the PMU, headed by a Finance
Manager who will be responsible for the management of project budgets and finances.
123.
Flow of Funds. IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant and Counterpart Funds will have a separate, but integrated, systems of funds flow,
budgeting and accounting to ensure a clear, verifiable audit trail. The beneficiaries’ contributions would be accounted and
reported by the Social Mobilization Partner for each activity. The flowchart depicts how these funds—except for the beneficiaries’
contribution, would flow through the project and accounted for separately for proper traceability and reporting.
21/25
124.
IFAD will disburse funds against Withdrawal Applications of the PMU, to the project Designated Accounts using the imprest fund
methodology. For this purpose, the PMU will open Designated Accounts—one for the IFAD Loan and the other for IFAD Grant in
USD in the National Bank of Pakistan, Quetta. Parallel assignment account in PKR will be opened in the same branch of the
bank which will be used as expenditure account for the funds received from IFAD. An initial advance (Imprest Fund) to cover
approximately six months of planned project expenditures would be released to the Designated Accounts.
125.
A separate Imprest Account will be opened for the management of the Government Counterpart Funding and will be governed by
government instructions on the operation of such accounts. The PMU would estimate the requirement of Counterpart Funding
during AWPB exercise and request allocation for the Counterpart Funding in the budget. (Detailed flow of fund procedures from
IFAD to Project and to implementing partners and service providers can be seen in the PIM). 
126.
Work Plans and Budgets. Based on the Project Design Report and the Government’s Project PC-I, the PMU will prepare the
AWPBs which will be the main instrument for financial management, expenditure control, reporting and fund releases. AWPB will
be participatory involving the SMP, Fisheries Department, C&W Department, P&D, target communities etc. and it will be shared
with IFAD for No Objection by the end of March for the financial year starting in June of the same year. IFAD’s funds will not be
used for the activities not included in the approved AWPB.
127.
Financial accounting. A full set of accounts will be maintained by the PMU as per IFAD requirements and internationally
recognized accounting standards and qualified staff for this purpose will be positioned in PMU. The accounts will be maintained
in line General Financial Rules, suitably adjusted to reflect the multi-sector participatory nature of the project. The accounts will
be reconciled with the National Bank on closure of each month.
128.
A suitable accounting software will be procured and installed upfront with capability to manage separate activity accounts to
monitor the progress of implementation, identify the works, goods and services financed from the loan and disclose their use
under the GLLSP II. The accounting system will (i) ensure the proper disbursements from the IFAD proceeds for efficient and
economical implementation of the project; (ii) allow performance evaluation of the project and comparison of actual implemented
budget versus estimated, and reasons for the discrepancy, and (iii) allow internal controls for ensuring protection of project
funded assets.
129.
Reporting. The project will submit detailed financial statements for each financial year within four (4) months of the end of each
financial year (by the end of October). In addition, the project will submit Interim Financial Reports indicating progress against
components/categories and issues that may require IFAD’s intervention to keep the project on track. A reporting template has
been proposed in the Working Paper (Fiduciary Risk Assessment) for this purpose.
130.
Internal Audit. For internal audit, the PMU shall engage the services of an auditing firm which would supplement the work of the
external audit. The PMU shall seek No Objection from IFAD for the TORs, subsequent to which the auditing firm will be
appointed within two months. The auditing firm will be required to submit quarterly reports on the activities of the SMP which
would be shared with IFAD as part of the project’s QFRs.
22/25
131.
Audit. Audit of Project Accounts will be carried out within three months of close of the financial year by Auditor General of
Pakistan through its provincial Director General Audit (Quetta). The Report of each Audit will be conveyed to the P&D
Department and IFAD within six months after the end of the financial year. The PMU will prepare the TORs for the external audit
by the Auditor-General’s Office to ensure that IFAD’s requirements are clearly documented and understood. The PMU will
coordinate and follow up with the Departmental Accounts Committee to resolve the observations in the IFAD management letters
each year.   
132.
Procurement: Project procurements will be carried out in accordance with the Balochistan Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority (BPPRA) Rules, to the extent of their consistency with IFAD'S Procurement Guidelines and the Financing Agreement.
An assessment of procurement functions under GLLSP I revealed serious inadequacies including limited procurement and
contract management capacity. GLLSP II will have a dedicated Procurement Wing headed by a Procurement Specialist (PS),
reporting to the Project Director. The PS will be responsible for undertaking all procurement activities within the defined
thresholds, except community implemented activities, and shall prepare procurement documents for the purpose. All common
items like vehicles and equipment will be bulked together and procured by the PMU. All procurements shall have to be consistent
with the Annual Procurement Plan and approved AWPB provisions. The first project Procurement Plan shall be for a period of 18
months and shall be part of the PIM and the first AWPB[1].
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
133.
At the start of the project, a survey will be undertaken with the help of the social mobilization partner to establish a baseline for
key results and outcome indicators covering incomes, production, food security, labour market, skills, women and youth
empowerment, nutrition status and climate change resilience.
134.
The Annual Work Plan and Budget, approved by PSC and IFAD, will be the main instrument for project planning and
implementation.  The AWPB, based on the PDR's and PC-I's indicative phasing and budget allocations, will be finalized during
the last quarter of each financial year and approved by PSC and IFAD by 31 March.
135.
The AWPB formulation process will involve two distinct streams: a) Stream one is related to the community-based interventions
like rural roads, large Fisheries infrastructure and Fishermen’s Cooperatives that will be planned by the PMU in consultation with
concerned line departments and focal persons; b)  Stream two will cover all community-based interventions including fishermen
capacity and value chain related interventions.  This process will be the culmination of a bottom-up participatory planning
process, starting from the CO/VO, consolidated into a Union Council Development Plan by the LSO.  UC Plans will be submitted
to the District Development Coordination Committee for review and endorsement, where they will be technically appraised and
consolidated and afterwards forwarded to the PMU. The PMU will finalize the AWPB in close coordination with all partners
including the social mobilization partner and line agencies in the course of a comprehensive annual planning and progress review
workshop.
136.
The AWPB will follow the programme logical framework format with clearly spelled out monitoring indicators that are aligned to
IFAD's Corporate indicators, COSOP indicators and project log frame indicators. The PDR phasing, targets and estimated costs
for CPIs will be treated as indicative and actual targets will be determined every year on the basis of ground realities and needs
for logical sequencing of various interventions.
137.
Quarterly and Annual Planning & Progress Reviews. The PMU will convene regular quarterly and annual planning and progress
reviews involving all stakeholders to take stock of existing progress and constraints and plan for the next quarter and next year
work. The Project Steering Committee will meet twice a year for progress review and the plan approval purpose. The mid-year
review will be conducted in December to assess the programme progress against the AWPB.
138.
M&E: Project results will be measured at output, outcome and results levels and will be measured against indicators provided in
project logical framework. The system will be guided by IFAD's Corporate Results indicators and COSOP indicators. An M&E
plan will be formulated at the start of the project, as part of the PIM, which would provide the basis for annual M&E plans and
activities contained therein. Standardized formats will be developed and issued by the PMU for monthly, quarterly and annual
progress reports and measurement of outcomes and results.
139.
The overall responsibility for the M&E activities will lie with the PMU/PIUs in collaboration with implementing partners. The
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation System (PME) will be finalized and made operational within the first six months of project
start-up. The PME will be part of an overall Information, knowledge management and communication system that will provide
timely and accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management decision making. All indicators will be
disaggregated by gender to the extent possible.
140.
The Project PME system will consist of simple planning formats with a limited number of key monitoring indicators that can be
easily monitored and reported at all implementation levels to ensure time and cost efficiency. The design will be aligned with the
Government/P&D monitoring and reporting structures for foreign funded projects to minimize the duplication of effort. The
baseline information will provide the basis for all measurements of project outcomes and impacts.
141.
Impact Assessments and Studies. Apart from regular internal monitoring and evaluation of programme interventions, quality
and impacts, GLLSP II will carry out periodic impact assessment studies for key interventions with internal resources and external
assistance, if need be.
23/25
142.
Learning, knowledge management & Communication: A PMU Knowledge Management Specialist will be responsible for
developing a Project KM and Communication Strategy within the first six months of project implementation. The KM strategy will
adhere to IFAD's newly released Knowledge Management Strategy (EB May 2019). The KM system will enable the Programme
to generate, capture, share and disseminate relevant information and knowledge to various stakeholders in a timely manner. The
Programme website will be completed within the first year of implementation and used as a knowledge sharing tool, and will also
be linked to IFAD Asia website. The Project will create provincial knowledge sharing platforms through annual events as a policy
and strategy input for government and development agencies.
143.
The IFAD Country Office will facilitate close lesson learning and exchange of experience between GLLSP II and other IFAD
funded projects in the country, in particular SPPAP, ETI-GB and NPGP that have strong poverty graduation approaches and
relevant experience in community centered development in partnership with social mobilization partners. In addition, IFAD under
COSOP will facilitate experience sharing/exposure to best practices related to institutionalization of CDD, poverty graduation and
4Ps models through South-South and Triangular Cooperation.
b. Innovation and scaling up
144.
GLLSP II itself is a scaling up of some of the innovative and successful rural development and poverty graduation models
developed under GLLSP I. Based on those lessons, the current project approach and design contains additional innovative
features with high potential for scaling-up. It addresses the current challenge of lack of a participatory, evidence based and
holistic approach to socio-economic development of rural poor Union Councils. It proposes to demonstrate the viability of an
institutionalized system for the transfer of development funding to community/village organizations through participatory Union
council Development plans under the oversight of the district administration. The project design also intends to develop a 4-P
value chain for the fisheries sector that engages the fishermen, the government and the private sector into win-win partnerships
that would address the current sub-optimal performance of the sector as well as the poor returns for the small fishermen.
145.
The project pilots innovative technology-based approaches for improving rural smallholder farmers' and fisherfolk's access to
distant markets for their inputs and outputs and for improved returns and savings through reduced reliance on middle-men and
retailers. The project shall also pilot e-financing and e-banking to enable the smallholder farmers and rural poor to easily access
micro-finance and utilize banking facilities.
146.
The project also intends to challenge the established model of CO formation, whereby a certain number of households, in a given
area, considered suitable can be grouped into a new CO which would eventually become a close institution for the benefit of the
original members. The project will restructure these COs to ensure that not only they represent at least 80 per cent of the
households but that all 0-40 PSC households are made members, even if it calls for relaxing the membership qualifications.
147.
The project combines household, community and area-based interventions into a mutually reinforcing and integrated whole that
combines to uplift entire communities in terms of incomes, socio-economic development, economic integration and food security. 
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
148.
The Government of Balochistan intends to maintain the existing PMU of GLLSP I till 31 March 2020 and necessary budgetary
provisions have been secured for that. The PMU of GLLSP will be a focal facilitator and financier for a number of preparatory
activities for GLLSP II. A Labour Market Survey and a Youth Census will be carried out during the last quarter of 2019 that shall
help the project develop/implement women and youth related technical, vocational training and job placement activities.  The
latest PSC Poverty Data will be obtained from the BISP for the project use as soon as it will be ready in December 2019.
 Prefeasibility of three Jetty Sites will be completed during this phase with the help of the National Institute of Oceanography (a
state institution); the related required funding has been made available in the GLLSP I budget. This should give a head start to
Jetty Construction activities. The work with already established eight fishermen cooperatives on Business Plan Development and
institutional strengthening will continue and the revolving seed funds allocated for these cooperatives will be made available for
use during Phase-II.
149.
As mentioned before, The Government of Balochistan has agreed to transfer the existing GLLSP I PMU to the GLLSP II PMU
upon the closure of the previous project in March 2020. This shall preserve the institutional memory of phase I and also bring in
core staff well familiar with the IFAD procedures and project management requirements. The PMU will start the advertisement
process for additional staff and service providers before the actual start of the project so as to complete the preliminary activities
well in time.
150.
Delays in PC-I formulation and approval from the Executive Committee of the National Economic Council (ECNEC) has been a
recurrent feature leading to delays in project start-up. Parallel to the approval process of the Project Design Report in IFAD and
by Government, an experienced national consultant will be mobilized by IFAD to assist the government in the formulation of the
PC-I and its timely submission to the Planning Commission/ECNEC.  The GLLSP I PMU will follow up on its clearance and final
submission to ECNEC for approval by December 2019. 
151.
The Project Steering Committee for the new project will be notified as soon as the PDR goes through IFAD’s internal approval
process so as to provide the project required leadership and decision-making for preparatory and start-up activities.  
152.
The opening of Project Accounts often involves considerable delays. A possibility worth exploring is whether the existing account
of GLLSP I could be used for the new project. If that is not possible, then the process for account opening would have to start
well in time and actively followed up.
24/25
153.
Another problem area for initial project functioning is the delayed and/or inadequate availability of government counterpart funds.
This time, the Government of Balochistan has already allocated counterpart funds in the next budget in anticipation of the GLLSP
II becoming operational early next year.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
154.
Supervision: The Project will benefit from two annual IFAD supervisions – a full supervision and an Implementation Support
Mission, to follow up on the full supervision agreements and actions.
155.
Mid-Term Review: A Mid-Term Review will be conducted at the end of the third year to take stock of progress, learn from
experience and carry-out any required mid-way course corrections for enhanced performance and impact.
156.
Project Completion: The Project Completion Report will be undertaken towards the end of Project Year 6. The report will be
essentially a self-assessment/evaluation done by the project on its progress, impacts and results as compared to project
objectives and interventions. Required resources for the exercise have been budgeted in the PDR.
Footnotes
Executive Summary
[1] UNDP Human Development Index. 2017.
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
[1] Economic Indicators 2018, Pakistan Finance Division
[2] data, World Bank/country/pakistan (accessed on 25 Nov 2016)
[3] 6th Population Census, Population Census Organization, Government of Pakistan. 2017.
[4] UNDP Human Development Index. 2017.
[5] UNDP, Pakistan. Update on Security and Political Situation in Pakistan (Feb 2015)
[6]Multi-dimensional Poverty Index (MPI) as a proxy for vulnerability to food security derived from Pakistan's Social and Living
Standard Measurement Surveys.
[7]IPC Acute Food Insecurity Analysis, January – November 2019, Balochistan, Pakistan.
[8] Development Update Pakistan – Balochistan: Challenges & Opportunities, UNDP, December 2018 
[9] Pakistan Microfinance Connect: http://www.microfinanceconnect.info/assets/articles/f06cb03452cffb78df8aaaa26f02a02a.pdf
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
[1] Pakistan Economic Survey 2013-14
[2] Ibid
[3] Pakistan Population Council. Youth in Pakistan – Priorities, Realities and Policy Responses. 2016
[4] ILO, 2017, Based on Pakistan Labour Force Survey, 2015/16.
[5] Being young in Balochistan, Dailytimes by Hammal Baloch, 25 May 2018.
[6] WFP, Pakistan 
2. Project Description
D. Components/outcomes and activities
[1] See Annex 10, Appendix 3 for detail of ongoing rural development projects in Balochistan
[2] consisting of 3,545 COs (1,831 female and 270 mixed), 547 VOs and 37 LSOs with a membership of 53,363 households (around
50per cent of total households)
25/25
[3] In the past most households received assets in the form of livestock, rural shop, means of transport, small machines, small boats,
fish net etc.
[4] ‘Ehsas” is a national poverty graduation programme consisting of 9 interventions one of which is interest free loans of PKR 50,000.
‘Kamyab Naujawan’ is a subsidized loan programme for the youth whereby they can borrow up to PKR 0.5 million at 6 per cent
interest. 
E. Theory of Change
[1] The new Government of Balochistan Local Government Act reserves 30per cent of annual development resources for the village
development.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
[1] Average discount rate between 1992 - 2019 (Source: tradingeconomies.com/State Bank of Pakistan)
K. Organizational Framework
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
[1] See PIM on Financial Management and Procurement for IFAD Procurement Guidelines
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Logical Framework
1/5
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Baseline survey,
surveys
annual,
Mid-Tern,
completion
PMU, SMP,
IFAD
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous people
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
78000 110000
52000 100000
65000 105000
65000 105000
130000 210000
A baseline survey is
conducted to
establish the baseline
Project approach and
timelines are adhered
to An efficient M&E
system is developed
and implemented
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed
households
Households
40000 100500
Baseline survey,
surveys
annual,
Mid-Tern,
completion
PMU, SMP,
IFAD
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Baseline survey,
surveys
annual,
Mid-Tern,
completion
PMU, NRSP,
IFAD
Household members
191400 641000
No. of organized villages with access to annual government
development funding for their development plans
completion
survey
end of
project
PMU
organized villages
50
90
All ultra-poor and
poor households are
members of COs
Security situations
remains stable
Project Goal 
A sustainable model of decentralized and integrated rural
development that is poverty, gender, youth, nutrition and
climate change sensitive
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Development Objective 
Increase in a sustainable manner the incomes and
enhance the livelihoods of rural poor fisherfolk and
agriculture households in the project area
2/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
No. of small holder farmer and fishermen hhs reporting
improved incomes and food security
households
30000
75000
1.2.8 Women reporting improved quality of their diets
Women reporting improved
quality of their diets
M&E surveys,
NRSP records,
progress reports
annual, ad
hoc
assessment
PMU, NRSP,
IFAD
M&E surveys,
NRSP records,
progress reports
annual, ad
hoc
assessment
PMU, NRSP,
IFAD
Percentage
30
60
Outcome 
1. Improved capacity of ultra-poor and poor hhs and
small holder farmers and fishermen to increase incomes
and improve livelihoods
Output 
1.1 Holistic UC Development Plans prepared
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
outcome survey
annual
PMU
Households
50
70
UC Development Plans developed
progress reports quarterly
PMU, NRSP
development plans
45
45
and annual
Output 
1.2 Training and productive assets provided to ultra-poor
households (0-11)
Rural Households provided with productive assets
rural hh
8500
8500
NRSP reports,
invoices from
providers, PMU
reports
quarterly
and annual
PMU, NRSP
Updated BISP data
on poverty available
for targeting.
Targeting guidelines
available, NRSP staff
trained and
transparent targeting
process implemented
Political and
economic stability
and security
communities are
willing to participate
in project activities
Capable Social
Mobilization services
providers available
and engaged upfront
Careful assessment
of each household's
potential and
endowments
Output 
1.3 Skills and enterprise training and start-up packages
provided to poor households (12-34) for climate smart
agriculture
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
Not young people trained in
crop
Total persons trained in crop
20000
30000
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
Females
Males
8000
10000
NRSP reports,
invoices from
providers, PMU
reports
quarterly
and annual
PMU, NRSP
Careful assessment
of each household's
potential and
endowments
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
1.4 Women empowerment facilitated through awareness
/training on nutrition, climate change, food security and
entrepreneurship development
Young
20000
30000
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve
their nutrition
Households
Females
8500
8500
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or
business management
Females
5000
10000
Outcome 
2. Improved socio-economic infrastructure
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
Output 
2.1 Community prioritized infrastructure
Drinking water/irrigation/sanitation and innovative schemes
constructed
Households reporting
improved physical access to
markets
42300
72800
total schemes
irrigation schemes
sanitation schemes
drinking water schemes
400
800
NRSP reports,
invoices from
providers, PMU
reports
NRSP reports,
invoices from
providers, PMU
reports
Assessments,
PMU, NRSP
reports
contract
registers, UC
Development
Plans
quarterly
and annual
PMU, NRSP
quarterly
and annual
PMU, NRSP
Project strategy for
gender, youth,
climate and nutrition
prepared No social
and cultural barriers
that prevent poor
women from
participating in COs
quarterly,
annual
PMU, NRSP
Baseline established
quarterly,
annual
NRSP, PMU
Transparent
selection/prioritization
criteria established
Output 
2.2 Priority roads from farm or landing sites to markets
identified and constructed
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
80
160
contract
registers, UC
Development
Plans
quarterly,
annual
NRSP, PMU
Transparent
selection/prioritization
criteria established
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
3. Small fisherfolk benefit from upgraded and inclusive
value chain leading to reduced waste and improved
incomes
Output 
3.1 Jetties and allied infrastructure
constructed/rehabilitated/upgraded
4/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
30
70
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
Ad hoc, mid-
term and PCR
assessments
Ad hoc, mid-
term and PCR
assessments
annual,
completion
PMU, NRSP
annual,
completion
PMU, NRSP
Number of POs
Percentage of POs
number of infrastructure sites upgraded
fish landing platforms
sites jetties and allied
infrastructure
11
40
8
3
30
3
contract
registers,
assessments
quarterly
and annual
PMU/Fisheries
Department
Output 
3.2 Fisherfolk Organized in Cooperatives, 4-P based
value chains developed and youth facilitated to develop
fisheries income streams
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
M&E reports,
NIRSP reports
quarterly,
annually
PMU, NRSP
Men trained in fishery
20000
50000
Women trained in fishery
Young people trained in
fishery
Output 
3.3 Access to finance and market
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
M&E reports,
NIRSP reports
yearly
PMU
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
No significant
reduction in fish catch
from disease or fish
stocks in the project
districts;
Implementation as
per planned
schedule;
Communities actively
participate in entire
cycle
Fisheries Department
is responsive with
efficient staff
No socio-cultural
barriers for the
participation of
poorest and
marginalized
households
beneficiaries willing
to use financial
services
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
1000
20000
Outcome 
4. Policy reform/dialogue, communication and knowledge
sharing
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or
amendment
PMU reports
yearly
PMU
dedicated KM team is
in place
Number
5
Knowledge and communication products
products
6
15
PMU reports,
mass media
yearly
PMU
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2. Theory of Change  
Challenge   
Interventions  
                Outputs/Int. results 
     Outcomes                      Goal/Objective 
Link  the  rural  poor  to  a 
sustained and responsive 
development process  
Rural  poor  are  not 
organized  
Poor lack productive 
assets and skills  
Lack social, production 
and economic 
infrastructure 
Low production and low 
returns 
Lack of remunerative 
skills among youth and 
women 
Gender disparities 
Climate change risks 
Lack access to 
government 
development funding 
High rates of poverty 
Food insecurity and 
malnutrition 
Low productivity of 
land and labour 
Organizing the rural 
poor into COs/VOs and 
linking them to dev 
resources 
Provision of productive 
assets and income 
generation skills to ultra-
poor women and youth 
Climate resilient 
Infrastructure (roads/CPIs) 
Production enhancement 
through extension, value 
chains and access to 
micro-finance and 
digital technology 
Market linkages  
through farm to 
market roads 
Improved water availability 
for household and productive 
uses 
Training/awareness in 
climate change, nutrition, 
food security and gender 
rights 
Policy on institutionalized 
UC level planning & access 
to government 
development funding 
All target rural poor 
hhs organized into 
viable COs/VOs 
Poor households have 
productive assets and 
skills 
Fisheries related 
constraints addressed 
Youth acquire skills 
for employment  
Fishermen organized 
into coops, linked to 
markets and finance, 
getting improved 
production and incomes  
Farm to market roads 
provide access to 
markets and services 
Community 
infrastructure deficits 
addressed 
Provincial policy on 
annual financing of 
UC Development 
plans 
Rural poor hhs 
graduate to higher 
levels of well-being 
Smallholder fishermen 
and farmer hhs have 
improved incomes 
through strategic 
investments to 
enhance production 
and market linkages 
(jetties, irrigation, 
roads, value chains, 
microfinance etc.) 
Women from poor hhs 
achieve socio-
economic 
empowerment 
Youth have 
productive skills and 
access to finance 
Decentralized UCs 
planning and 
allocation of assured 
resources from 
government sources 
on a sustained basis is 
institutionalized  
Goal: Develop an 
effective and 
sustainable 
development model 
for poor coastal and 
agriculture 
communities 
Development 
Objective: increase 
the incomes and 
enhance the 
livelihoods of the 
rural poor 
households in 
Gwadar/Lasbela 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
A.  Costs, benefits and financing  
a.  Project costs 
Total project costs are estimated to be US$ 72.801 million to be invested over six years of 
project  implementation.  The  IFAD  contribution  will  be  a  loan  of  US$  60.155  million  on 
blend terms from the IFAD11 allocation, and an IFAD Grant amounting to US$ 3 million. 
The  Balochistan  Government  and  beneficiary  contribution  amount  to  US$8.654  and 
US$0.992 million respectively. 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 2: Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
 IFADBeneficiary IFAD LoanGoBGrantContributionTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountA. Community Development Capacity Building for Participatory Development 37313--387Youth Employmnet 2 653---2 653Asset Transfer 6 350---6 350Women Empowerment 8240-62887Farm to Market Roads 5 769973--6 742Community Physical Infrastructure 6 4610-7157 176Collaborative Interventions -02 490-2 490Social Mobilization Support 1 999353--2 351Subtotal 24 4291 3402 49077829 037B. Fisheries Development Jetties and Allied Infrastructure 7 6821 369-759 126Fisheries Value Chain Development 18 7063 319-10022 125Fish Market Access Roads 5 591970--6 561Capacity Building - Department of Fisheries 110951440-1 502Hatcheries and Innovative Aquaculture 40817-40464Subtotal 32 4976 62644021439 778C. Project Management Project Management 3 17844570-3 694Institutional Development Support 50243--293Subtotal 3 22868970-3 987Total PROJECT COSTS 60 1558 6543 00099272 801 (US$ '000) IFADBeneficiaryIFAD LoanGoBGrantContributionTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountI. Investment Costs A. Civil Works/ Community Infrastructures 25 2103 261-79029 261B. Vehicles 231148--379C. Computer and Equipment 109783--893D. Technical Assistance, Trainings and Studies 3 9573132 7841017 155E. Grants and Subsidies 26 0023 24321610129 562Total Investment Costs 55 5097 7483 00099267 249II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 1 70081--1 781B. Operating Costs 2 946825--3 771Total Recurrent Costs 4 646906--5 552Total PROJECT COSTS 60 1558 6543 00099272 801 
Table 3: Programme/project costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
The Project will be financed through an IFAD loan of US 60.155 million (83 per cent), on 
blend terms from IFAD11 for which the availability of resources is confirmed. In addition, 
an IFAD grant of US$ 3 million (4 per cent) would be provided for all technical assistance 
support for policy and regulatory aspects as well  as for nutrition, climate resilience and 
institutionalization of CDD approach. The Government of Balochistan will contribute US$ 
8.654 million (12 per cent) as counterpart financing to meet the tax obligations and some 
counterpart financing for community development and project management. Beneficiaries 
will  contribute  US$  0.992  million  (1  per  cent)  in  matching  cash,  in-kind  materials,  land 
and labour under the CPIs and the fisheries value chain development. 
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)202020212022202320242025TotalA. Community DevelopmentCapacity Building for Participatory Development1648290429-387Youth Employmnet348886966452--2 653Asset Transfer1 3542 5822 414---6 350Women Empowerment126318245198--887Farm to Market Roads1 6883 3641 691---6 742Community Physical Infrastructure7522 7332 6541 0362-7 176Collaborative Interventions4174764894274502312 490Social Mobilization Support3357908303941-2 351Subtotal5 18311 2319 3792 54946323129 037B. Fisheries DevelopmentJetties and Allied Infrastructure1233 0705 7217270709 126Fisheries Value Chain Development2 0973 8112 1554 1038 0951 86422 125Fish Market Access Roads1 6913 2421 628---6 561Capacity Building - Department of Fisheries1 211290----1 502Hatcheries and Innovative Aquaculture-101110121132-464Subtotal5 12210 5159 6144 2968 2971 93439 778C. Project ManagementProject Management1 0095135345355505533 694Institutional Development Support404346505460293Subtotal1 0495555805856046143 987Total PROJECT COSTS11 35422 30119 5747 4309 3632 77972 801 
Additional tables: 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan Gwadar Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project - Phase II (PKR '000)(US$ '000)Expenditure Accounts by Financiers BeneficiaryIFADBeneficiaryIFAD LoanGoBIFAD GrantContributionTotalIFAD LoanGoBGrantContributionTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountI. Investment Costs A. Civil Works/ Community Infrastructures 4 203 085542 490-132 8524 878 42725 2103 261-79029 261B. Vehicles 36 98523 636--60 621231148--379C. Computer and Equipment 17 458125 563--143 022109783--893D. Technical Assistance, Trainings and Studies 666 03452 552472 36917 7051 208 6593 9573132 7841017 155E. Grants and Subsidies 4 458 512562 83135 87517 1245 074 34326 0023 24321610129 562Total Investment Costs 9 382 0741 307 072508 245167 68111 365 07255 5097 7483 00099267 249II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 291 64813 896--305 5441 70081--1 781B. Operating Costs 498 492140 600--639 0912 946825--3 771Total Recurrent Costs 790 140154 496--944 6354 646906--5 552Total PROJECT COSTS 10 172 2141 461 568508 245167 68112 309 70860 1558 6543 00099272 801 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan Gwadar Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project - Phase II Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies Community Development(PKR Million) CapacityBuilding forFarm toCommunitySocialParticipatoryYouthAssetWomenMarketPhysicalCollaborativeMobilizationDevelopmentEmploymnetTransferEmpowermentRoadsInfrastructureInterventionsSupport I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works/ Community Infrastructures ----1 082.51 204.0--B. Vehicles --------C. Computer and Equipment --------D. Technical Assistance, Trainings and Studies 64.0381.720.619.830.0-389.8-E. Grants and Subsidies -63.61 032.4129.1--35.9-Total Investment Costs 64.0445.31 053.0148.91 112.51 204.0425.7-II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances --------B. Operating Costs -------394.4Total Recurrent Costs -------394.4Total PROJECT COSTS 64.0445.31 053.0148.91 112.51 204.0425.7394.4  Taxes 2.2--0.1160.5--59.2Foreign Exchange ------168.2- 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN  
GWADAR-LASBELLA LIVELIHOOD SUPPORT PROJECT – PHASE II 
GLLSPII 
PROJECT DESIGN REPORT 
ANNEX – 04:  FINANCIAL AND EOCNOMIC ANALYSIS 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .............................................................................................................. I 
I.  INTRODUCTION..................................................................................................................1 
II. THE PROJECT, ITS BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES ............................................2 
A.  PROJECT BENEFICIARIES ......................................................................................................2 
B.  PROJECT BENEFITS ................................................................................................................3 
III.  FINANCIAL ANALYSIS .................................................................................................4 
A.  METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH ..........................................................................................4 
B.  THE FINANCIAL BENEFITS ....................................................................................................4 
C.  THE FINANCIAL COST ............................................................................................................5 
D.  KEY ASSUMPTIONS FOR FINANCIAL ANALYSIS .................................................................5 
E.  FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................6 
IV.  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS .....................................................................................................8 
A.  METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH.............................................................................................8 
B.  THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS ....................................................................................................8 
C.  THE ECONOMIC COST ............................................................................................................8 
D.  KEY ASSUMPTIONS FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS .................................................................8 
E.  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................8 
V.  SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS .............................................................................................. 10 
VI.  CONCLUSION .................................................................................................................. 10 
i 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
This  annex  (financial  and  economic  analysis)  was  prepared  at  the  project 
formulation stage of the Gwadar-Lasbela Llivelihood Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-
II) to be co-financed by the Government of the Balochistan and the International Fund for 
falling 
Agriculture  Development  (IFAD).  The  project  will 
administratively under 45 Union Councils with the two districts of Gwadar and Lasbela of 
the  Balochistan  province  of  Pakistan.  The  GLLSP-II  Development  Objective  is  “to 
sustainably increase the incomes and enhance the livelihoods of the rural poor fishermen’s 
and  agricultural  households  in  the  project  area”.  It  will  benefit  around  100,000  HHs 
through intervention spanning six years of project implementation (2020-2025). Women 
and  youth  will  be  particularly  targeted.  Necessary  socio-economic  infrastructure  will  be 
financed  both  for  agricultural  and  fishermen  communities  including  community 
infrastructure,  roads  to  markets,  jetties  and  landing  sites.  All  project  interventions  are 
aligned with IFAD Strategic Framework and IFAD 11 corporate priorities. 
target  400  villages 
2. 
The  project  consists  of  three  complementary  components.  Component  1, 
Community Development (US$ 29.037 million) is aimed at enabling rural poor men and 
women to sustainably improve their incomes and livelihoods. This component consists of 
interventions that facilitated the development of participatory planning more specifically 
the  facilitation  of  the  development  of  union  council  level  development  plans;  poverty 
graduation through provision of productive assets, skills and entrepreneurship promotion 
primarily focused on women and youth from extremely poor and poor households; rural 
infrastructure development and collaborative interventions in the area of climate resilience 
and improving nutritional status of the ultra-poor. The second component which is fisheries 
value chain development (US$ 39.092 million), is aimed at improving small fishermen’s 
incomes (46,000 fishermen). The focus under this component is to improving the value 
chain operations and interrelationship through 4-P business framework to be established 
at  30  out  of  the  total  40  landing  sites  along  the  700  km  coastline  of  the  province.  The 
second  major  intervention  is  the  design  and  construction  of  3  jetties  and  allied 
infrastructure  prioritized  by  the  government  linked  to  which  is  the  construction  fish  to 
market  roads  of  about  80  km  to  be  constructed  to  link  landing  sites  and  jetties  with 
factories  and  trunk  roads.  The  component  will  also  undertake  capacity  building  of  the 
Fisheries Department’s through several institutional strengthening activities.  
3. 
The third component - Project Management and Policy Support (US$ 4.5 million) 
will necessarily support the implementation of the two programme components and will 
create the enabling condition for the smooth, effective and efficient implementation of the 
project. The cost of project management is allocating to the sub-component on a pro-rata 
basis for the purpose of economic and financial analysis. 
4. 
The  financial  modelling  covers  a  period  of  20  years  for  the  intervention.  The 
economic  analysis  looked  at  the  viability  of  the  investments  and  recurrent  costs  of  the 
proposed project in comparison to the incremental economic benefits pertaining to each 
sub-component.  The  economic  values  of  project  cost  and  corresponding  benefits  have 
been  used  in  the  economic  analysis.  The  analysis  takes  into  account  benefits  such  as 
increased  households’  income,  decreased  expenditures/cost  saving  and  reduction  in 
wastages. A reduction in expenditures will have more disposable income thus contributing 
to better livelihoods as well as asset building capacity of poor households. The analysis is 
based on first-hand information collected during field visit to the project sites, discussion 
with  stakeholders  including  staff  of  GLLSP-I  and  secondary  sources  where  applicable. 
1 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Standard conversion factor (SCF)1, conversion factors for outputs and inputs and labour 
were worked out for the 2014/15 – 2018/19. 
5. 
Different financial and economic models were prepared in the context of the project 
sub-components.  The  income  and  expenditure  models  are  at  the  household  level  while 
farming and fisheries model have been worked out keeping in view the prevailing practices.   
II. THE PROJECT, ITS BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
6. 
The  overall  goal  of  the  GLLSP-II  is  “A  sustainable  model  of  decentralized  and 
integrated rural development that is poverty, gender, youth, nutrition and climate change 
sensitive.  The  GLLSP-II  covers  2  districts.  The  target  districts  have  been  experiencing 
high-poverty  incidence,  unsustainable  natural  resource  exploitation  and  high  rates  of 
unemployment  and  low  well-being  status.  The  project  intervention  will  enable  poor 
household especially women and youth to improve livelihoods and move up on the poverty 
ladder. 
A. 
Project Beneficiaries 
7. 
The Project beneficiaries includes households from 400 villages (45 union councils) 
of  the  targeted  districts.  The  beneficiary  selection  within  community  development 
component will be guided by the poverty score card. Under this component the targeted 
households benefiting from provision of assets will specifically fall under the category of 
ultra-poor (PSC 0 – 11) while those receiving other support will fall in the category of poor 
(PSC 12 – 40).  This category of beneficiary household plus the entire community will also 
benefit  from  physical  infrastructure  schemes.  Summary  of  the  target  beneficiaries  of 
GLLSP-II is given Table 1. 
Table 1: Household Beneficiaries of the GLLSP-II 
The total outreach will be  201,000 person benefiting from the project assistance 
8. 
which  translate  into  a  total  100 500  households  (50%  of  beneficiaries  coming  from 
common households). The total number of household members reached is anticipated to 
be 641,000. 
1 The calculation of the Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) and conversion factors for output and inputs are given 
in Annex I, II and III. 
2 
Components Beneficiaries Per Intervention Year-1Year-2Year-3Year-4Year-5Year-6Total HHsAffectiveCommunity DevelopmentAssets Transfer                                      1 2 0003 5003 0008 500              Adjusted (adoption rate)1 400                2 450                   2 100         -                 -                 5 950              Youth Employment                                      1 300                   700                      7003002 000              Adjusted (adoption rate)240                   560                      560            240                 1 600              Women Empowerment                                      1 1 400                3 000                   4 0001 60010 000            Adjusted (adoption rate)910                   1 950                   2 600         1 040              -                 -                 6 500              Food Security and Climate Resilient Farming System                                      1 6 000                6 000                   6 000         6 000              6 000              30 000            Adjusted (adoption rate)4 800                4 800                   4 800         4 800              4 800              24 000            Nutrition Support1                                     2 000                3 500                   3 000         8 500              Adjusted (adoption rate)1 600                2 800                   2 400         6 800              Fisheries Value Chain DevelopmentInvestment in Fisheries Value Chain /a1                                     1 500                3 000                   3 000         12 000            15 500            15 000            50 000            Adjusted (adoption rate)1 050                2 100                   2 100         8 400              10 850            10 500            35 000            Physical InfrastructureCPIs95                                                   1 900                  14 250        28 500             31 350 76 000            Adjusted (adoption rate)1 520                11 400                 22 800       25 080            60 800            Access/Linkage Road200                                                 4 000                    8 000          4 000 16 000            Adjusted (adoption rate)3 600                7 200                   3 600         -                 14 400            Total Persons Benefited /b-201 000          155 050           
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
B. 
Project Benefits 
9. 
Project  is  designed  to  contribute  to  attainment  of  SDG  and  Vision  2025  more 
specifically  the  targets  in  terms  of  poverty  reduction,  food  security,  and  nutrition.  The 
components are designed in such a manner that rural communities have improved road 
access, water security both for irrigation and domestic purposes and improved livelihoods. 
The  project  also  addresses  the  gaps  in  the  priority  sector  of  fisheries  in  the  districts  of 
Gwadar and Lasbella with the aim to improve income of small fishermen through improved 
infrastructure, enhanced capacities, access to market and financial services and enhanced 
governance.  
10. 
Households in Gwadar and Lasbela disticts are predominantly dependent on marine 
fisheries and marginal agriculture and livestock production. Almost all household in rural 
areas have one or two family member(s) engaged in fishing or related business. Women 
are  involved  in  agriculture,  livestock,  handicraft,  services  and  also  offer  support  role  in 
fisheries sub-sector (including net making and repairing and could be potentially involved 
in fish processing). 
11. 
GLLSP-II  will  accrue  quantitative  and  qualitative  benefits  to  households  in  the 
target areas under its various sub-components. The physical outputs and outcomes of the 
project are briefly summarized below:  
a.  Almost 100,000 households will be organized of which at least 45 per cent will 
be  poor  (0-34)  and  over  50%  will  be  women  members.  At  least  30%  of  the 
management positions will be allocated to women.  
b.  Union  Council  Development  Plans:  45  Union  Council  Development  Plans,  duly 
costed/budgeted,  will  be  prepared  to  identify  the  priority  infrastructure,  social 
and economic needs of the communities and villages within the UC. Parallel to 
that  profiling  and  livelihoods  development  plans  for  the  poor  households 
(estimated to be 8,500) will be prepared to guide and deliver poverty graduation 
interventions.    
c.  Poverty Graduation. A total of 43,500 ultra-poor and poor households will benefit 
from poverty graduation interventions to move to next level of economic well-
being.  These  include  8,500  of  ultra-poor  eligible  for  a  productive  asset  and 
nutrition  support,  4,300  youth  in  agriculture  and  fisheries  communities  to  be 
skilled, 10000 women to be capacitated for improved incomes and nutrition and 
30,000 households to be trained in climate resilient agriculture and livestock. Of 
the total person benefited, about 50% will be from common households. At least 
60 per cent of productive assets will be given to women. 
d.  Community  Physical  Infrastructure.  This  sub-component  will  benefit  around 
76,000 hhs directly through investments in water (drinking and irrigation), solar 
protection, 
centers, 
energy,  women 
green/afforestation schemes, inter-village roads/street pavements etc. 
sanitation, 
enterprise 
flood 
e.  Rural farm to market roads. A total of 160 km of rural roads will benefit 16,000 
households per km with benefits accruing in terms of reduced transportation cost, 
reduced wastages and improved access to market and social services. 
f.  Fisheries value chain development. Three fish jetties and allied infrastructure, a 
value chain package covering ultimately all the land sites in Gwadar and Lasbela 
as  well  as improved  enabling  environment  will  positively impact  the  income  of 
50,000  small  fishermen  directly  and  all  the  fisheries  related  businesses  and 
services indirectly. A tailored value chain package will support the formation of 
cooperatives and will promote sustainable fishery resource management. 
The  increase  in  income  has  been  estimated  raging  between  33%  in  the  case  of 
12. 
fishermen  and  44%  in  the  case  of  youth  employment  generation.  Owing  to  improved 
3 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
physical  infrastructure  in  rural  areas  the  cost  associated  with  transportation,  O&M  and 
reduction in losses, health etc. is estimated to be 50% reduced from the current level.  
A.  Methodology and Approach 
III. 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
13. 
In  view  of  the  diversity  of  the  nature  of  different  interventions,  the  incremental 
financial benefits of each sub-component were worked out separately and aggregated at 
the project level. The phasing of the benefits and distribution of different categories of the 
beneficiaries  is  given  in  Table  1.  In  order  to  calculate  the  incremental  benefits,  the 
“Without  Project  (WOP)”  scenario  (which  is  income  stream  during  the  base  year)  is 
compared with the “With Project (WP)” scenario (the income streams during the project 
year-1 and afterwards).  
B.  The Financial Benefits 
14.  Within  each  component  there  are  a  number  of  sub-components  which  generate 
benefits, briefly summarized hereunder. 
1.  Community Development 
15. 
Asset  Transfer:  Diverse  packages  will  be  provided  under  the  project  including 
farm, non-farm and  off-farm  related assets as determined  in the household  investment 
plans. The actual packages may vary, however for the analysis, the financial models for 
few indicated types of assets have been worked out as with and without project scenarios. 
The accruing benefits is income generated from the productive use of the asset and at the 
same time will be enriching the asset base of the households. The cost and benefit have 
been worked out through partial activity budgets. It is estimated that the income of the 
recipient household will enhance by 124% as a result of receiving the productive asset. 
Youth Employment: The project intends to provide soft skills as an asset to youth 
16. 
to enter the job market or pursue self-employment. The total target for this intervention 
is to be mainly trained in the first three years of the project. The financial model for this 
is  worked  out  as  engaged  in  non-farm  business  activity  as  wage/salary  earner  or  self-
employment  undertaken.  It  is  estimated  that  with  new  skills  acquired,  the  income  will 
enhance by 58% from the current level by engaging in more remunerative jobs or earning 
higher level of wages – skilled as opposed to semi-skilled persons. 
Physical Infrastructure (CPI and Roads): The project has planned investment 
17. 
in  drinking  water  supply,  improved  sanitation,  and  road  access.  The  benefits  include 
reduced  costs,  expenditure,  time  and  produce  saving  have  been  taking  into  account 
resulting  from  improved  infrastructure  condition  in  the  project  area.  The  benefit  of  the 
infrastructure are however  embedded into the  economic activities and shall provide the 
necessary impetus to communities and individual to participate in project intervention and 
gain meaningful benefits. 
18.  Women Empowerment: This initiative will result into increased household income 
through economic activities where women skill and capacity will be improved. The increase 
in income expected from women activities is 37%. 
19. 
Agriculture  and  Livestock  Productivity  Enhancement:  The  other  sources  of 
income for households in the project area are limited to marginal agriculture and livestock 
rearing. Farming is limited to few crops which is possible with very limited availability of 
water. Livestock is also practiced on a small scale wherever possible. Farming practices 
are traditional and a low input, low output model.  With climate resilient practices, efficient 
water  use  and  water  conservation  practices  additional  cropping  would  be  realised  by 
beneficiaries.  The  same  would  apply  to  livestock  where  improved  practices  would  help 
improve  livestock  husbandry  and  management  resulting  in  improved  productivity.  
4 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Resulting from the intervention in increased climate resilience of the farming in the project 
areas, about 37% increase in income levels is expected. 
20. 
Fisheries  Value  Chain  Development:  From  the  perspective  of  fisheries 
component the primary focus is on the fishermen (operating through small boats of <25 
feet)  which  usually  go  for  a  day  trip  of  fishing.  The  incremental  benefits  accruing  as  a 
result  of  the  project  include  decreased  losses  due  to  improved  infrastructure  and  good 
handling practices, increased prices (premium) owing to better quality, access to sea for 
additional days due to functioning jetties and improved access to market. The resultant 
increase income is estimated to be up to 33% for the small fishermen. 
21. 
The fisheries value chain contribute 0.39% to the national Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) and 2.10% in agriculture value added.  The sector employs around 390,000 people 
directly and 900,000 and 1,800,000 people in total, including the indirect employment2. 
Marine  fishing  production  grew  by  1.95%  and  inland  fishing  production  grew  by  8.71% 
over  the  last  four  years  (marine  fishing  happen  at  Baluchistan  and  Sindh  coastal  areas 
only). There are a total of 150,000 registered boats3 in Balochistan: It is estimated that 
there are a total of 150,000 unregistered boats in addition along the more than 700 km 
coastline.  These  include  both  small  and  larger  boats.  Eight  authorized  landing  sites  in 
Balochistan account for 89% of its total catch: The total in Balochistan is 153,154 metric 
tonnes per year out which is 136,756 or 89% is at eight authorized landing sites out of a 
total  of  38  commercial  fish  groups  along  the  coast  line  of  Balochistan.  There  are  an 
estimated  64,226  fisherfolks  in  the  province  of  which  more  than  80%  operate  through 
small boats. The small boat catch on average is 5-10 kg of lobster and 10 kg of shrimp. 
After October (particularly in Kund Malir) the smaller boats catch 80-100 kg of crabs on a 
daily basis while the larger boats catch 200-250 kg of Indian Mackerel or other fish during 
each trip. The prices of the different types of catch are determined by the intermediary 
who purchase the catch from the fisherfolks. The average prices of the different types of 
catch are: lobster: PKR 1,500 per kg, shrimp: PKR 800 per kg, crab: PKR 80 per kg and 
Indian Mackerel: PKR 80-150 per kg. The catch is priced on weight and is not determined 
based on quality of the catch. The intermediary who is usually also the fisherfolks’ creditor 
retains 40 - 50% of the catch. The remaining 50-60% of the catch is equally distributed 
between the captain and fisherfolks on the boat. It is estimated that on average the small 
boat fisherfolks lose 50% of their catch due to poor handling and storage inside the boat 
and transport of the catch on donkey carts or other unsuitable means of transport to the 
factory gate. The catch which is not acceptable to the factories is sold as fishmeal. For the 
fisherfolks  (small)  it  is  important  that  the  current  level  of  losses  are  reduced,  a  better 
bargaining position is facilitated and a focus is shifted in favor of managing the quality of 
the fish catch to increase the income levels. Currently the fishfolks (small) Rs. 164,000 
per year as net income which can be increased to Rs. 219,000. 
C. 
The Financial Cost 
The  total  project  costs  is  USD72.801  million  for  GLLSP-II.  The  base  cost  is 
22. 
estimated at USD65.686 million. 
D. 
Key Assumptions for Financial Analysis 
23. 
Following are the key assumptions used in the financial analysis of the Project; 
24. 
Financial Income: The financial income are based on the average budget of the 
activities  performed  where  project  support  will  be  extended  which  has  been  prepared 
2 Revitalizing Pakistan’s Fisheries: Options for Sustainable Development. 2018. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / 
The World Bank 
3 Shared by fisheries department of Government of Balochistan 
5 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
taking into account the market prices and the current productivity levels. The income for 
the trained/skilled youth is worked out on the model of a self-employed skilled worker and 
an employed  skilled person.  In the  context  of the without project,  situation the current 
daily wage for an unskilled person is taken as the average rate prevailing in the project 
area. 
  Effective Rates: The average effective rate vary among different activities as given 
below: 
Components  Assets 
Youth 
Employment  
CPI 
Agriculture/ 
Livestock 
Women 
Empowerment 
Rural 
Roads 
Fisheries 
Success Rates  70% 
80% 
80% 
65% 
65% 
90% 
70% 
  Opportunity  Cost  of  Capital:  The  opportunity  cost  of  capital  used  in  the  financial 
analysis is 11.17%4. 
E. 
Financial Analysis 
25. 
The financial analysis of GLLSP-II shows viability of the proposed project as evident 
from its overall Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 20.96%. The Net Present Value 
(NPV)  of  the  proposed  project  over  20  years’  period  has  been  noted  to  be  USD40.60 
million.  The FIRR and the NPV based on financial prices of the project is given in Table 2.
4 Interest Rate in Pakistan averaged 11.55 percent from 1992 until 2019 (Source: www.tradingeconomies.com/ 
State Bank of Pakistan 
6 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Table 2: Financial Analysis of the GLLSP-II 
7 
AssetsYouth EmploymentWomen EmpowermentPY1(1.57)(0.5)(0.2)PY2(3.02)(1.1)(0.4)PY3(1.83)(1.0)(0.2)PY41.61(0.2)(0.1)PY51.610.50.2PY61.610.50.2PY71.610.50.2PY81.610.50.2PY91.610.50.2PY101.610.50.2PY111.610.50.2PY121.610.50.2PY131.610.50.2PY141.610.50.2PY151.610.50.2PY161.610.50.2PY171.610.50.2PY181.610.50.2PY191.610.50.2PY201.610.50.23.580.120.3519.95%11.90%16.64%0.60.60.61.1019.68%0.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.6Climate Resilient Agriculture/Livestock(0.5)(0.5)(0.4)(0.1)0.10.30.60.619.2419.2440.59916.320.96%Project YearsValue Chain Development(10.64)(20.69)Total Project Benefit (in million USD)(7.9)(15.6)16.316.319.2419.2419.2419.2416.316.319.2419.2419.24(16.18)(2.02)1.3016.4619.2419.24FINANCIAL ANALYSIS NPV (USD) 16.3 FIRR (@11.17%) 16.3(3.3)16.3Community DevelopmentFisheries Value Chain Development13.916.316.319.2416.319.2419.24(12.8)16.3(1.1)16.316.335.45026.38% 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
A.  Methodology and Approach 
IV. 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
26. 
The economic analysis of the proposed project was worked out taking into account 
the  economic  cost  of  the  proposed  project  and  the  resultant  economic  benefits  to  the 
target  beneficiary  households.  The  economic  cost  were  worked  out  by  converting  the 
financial value using the standard conversion factor whereas economic value of benefits 
have  been  worked  out  using  conversion  factors  of  outputs  and  inputs.  The  standard 
conversion  factor  used  in  the  economic  analysis  was  derived  to  be  0.847  while  the 
conversion factors for output and inputs were noted to be 1.20 and 0.95 respectively. 
27. 
The  economic  analyses  carried  out  for  the  GLLSP-II  takes  into  account  the  total 
economic investment and economic recurrent cost of the project during the project period 
i.e.  between  2020  and  2025.  Price  contingencies  and  taxes  are  excluded  from  the 
economic analysis. For the capital items, no residual values have been considered in the 
economic analysis. Since most of the investment are in infrastructure and assets coupled 
with capacity building, the economic recurring cost is assumed to be up to 7% of the total 
project cost.  
B.  The Economic Benefits 
The economic benefits are of similar nature as that of financial but adjusted in its 
28. 
economic values. The economic benefit are worked out over the period of 20 years. The 
aggregation  is  carried  out  for  all  the  project  components  taking  into  account  the 
incremental economic benefits. The recurring cost is assumed to be 7% of the total project 
cost spread over the project duration of 6 years (for both GLLSP-II) and thereafter. The 
recurring costs are assumed to be on account of repair and maintenance, replacement and 
recurring  costs  which  is  likely  to  continue  to  support  the  beneficiaries  as  well  as  the 
services  to  be  utilized.  These  are  essential  for  the  continuation  of  the  benefits  of  the 
programme. 
C.  The Economic Cost 
29. 
The total economic cost of the project is estimated at USD51.613 million. 
D.  Key Assumptions for Economic Analysis 
30. 
Following are the key assumption used in the economic analysis. 
31. 
The economic value have been worked out by converting the financial value using 
a  conversion  factor  of  1.1  for  the  assets,  livestock  and  agriculture,  drinking  water  and 
sanitation  schemes,  renewable  energy,  and  fisheries.  For  all  the  other  activities  the 
conversion factor of 0.95 has been used. The shadow discount rate used for the economic 
analysis is 11.17%. 
32. 
It is pertinent to include in the economic analysis the community contribution to 
the  different  activities  which  is  in  kind  at  times  but  also  the  opportunity  cost  which  is 
estimated  to  be  around  7%  of  the  project  cost.  Such  a  cost  will  accrue  in  terms  of 
communities continuing to participate in community meeting, undertaking operation and 
maintenance and in some cases undertaking savings with no interest accruing on it. 
E.  Economic Analysis 
33. 
The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated at 
29.05%.  The  economic  net  present  value  (NPV)  of  the  project  net  benefit  stream, 
discounted at 11.17%, was noted to be USD73.74 million. The summary EIRR and NPV is 
given in table 3 below. 
8 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Table 3: Economic Analysis of the GLLSP-II 
9 
PY10.75-               0.17-                        0.16-                  5.71-            7.02-              5.0975.097(12.1)PY20.36-               0.13-                        0.34-                  10.53-          11.28-            5.0975.097(16.4)PY31.67               0.56                        0.13-                  6.73-            4.16-              5.0975.097(9.3)PY44.15               1.38                        0.03                  2.75            9.19              5.0975.0974.1PY54.15               1.82                        0.27                  12.00          19.62            5.0975.09714.5PY64.15               1.82                        0.27                  15.30          23.07            5.0975.09718.0PY74.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY84.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY94.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY104.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY114.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY124.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY134.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY144.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY154.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY164.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY174.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY184.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY194.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5PY204.15               1.82                        0.27                  16.58          24.57            5.0975.09719.5NPV @11.17%73.74EIRR @11.17%29.05%1.76               1.76               ECONOMIC ANALYSIS1.76               1.76               1.76               1.76               1.76               1.76               1.76               0.23-               0.07               DetailProject YearsAssetYE1.76               1.76               0.47               0.89               1.38               1.52               1.76               1.76               1.76               Total Incremental CostsTOTAL INCREMENTAL BENEFITSCash Flow (million USD)FisheriesEconomic recurrent Costs  (million USD)Women EmpowermentNET INCREMENTAL BENEFITSAgri/ LivestockNET INCREMENTAL COSTS 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
V. 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
34. 
The project appraisal identifies three major risks (i) macro-economic and security; (ii) 
fiduciary,  and  (iii)  climate  change  risks.  These  risks  may  cause  underperformance  with 
regards  to  achievement  of  full  scale  benefits,  delay  in  realization  of  benefits  and  reduced 
effectiveness.  The  assumed  scenario  returns  acceptable  values  of  both  NPV  and  EIRR  and 
thus  the  proposed  investment  is  feasible  under  the  adverse  scenarios.  Summary  of  the 
Sensitivity Analysis is given in the following table. 
Table 4: Financial Analysis of the GLLSP-II 
Scenarios 
Normal Scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Time lag in benefits (Year) 
Time lag in benefits (Year) 
Success Rates 
Success Rates 
∆% 
Normal 
-10% 
-20% 
10% 
20% 
1 
2 
-10% 
-20% 
Link with the risk matrix 
No Adverse Risks 
Poor Security Situation affecting 
project benefits adversely 
Weak financial capacity result in cost 
overrun and delayed implementation 
Climate risk affecting success rate of 
the activities 
IRR 
29.05% 
27.42% 
25.48% 
27.58% 
26.17% 
25.26% 
21.87% 
22.75% 
23.08% 
NPV (USD M) 
                73.74  
                51.61  
                41.40  
                57.80  
                53.77  
                48.93  
                37.32  
                15.53  
                12.50  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
35.  Summary of the financial and economic analysis is reproduced in the following table; 
Table 5: Financial Analysis of the GLLSP-II   
Detail 
Financial 
Economic 
Internal Rate of Return 
(IRR) 
20.96% 
29.05% 
Net Present Value in Million 
USD 
40.60 
73.74 
36. 
The  project  investment  is  feasible  on  account  of  financial  and  economic  benefits 
envisaged and remains viable under different risks anticipated (as evident from the sensitivity 
analysis). Based on the financial and economic analysis, the proposed project is recommended 
for consideration. 
10 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix I: Standard Conversion Factor 
Estimates of the Standard Conversion Factor for Economic Analysis 
Year 
2014/15 
2015/16 
2016/17 
2017/18 
2018/19 
7 885 941 
3 229 420 
724 977 
906 883 
7 751 
0.873 
Total Imports (CIF) (I) 
4 644 152  4 658 749 
               5 539 720  
               2 138 186  
               6 694 897  
               2 555 043  
6 132 
0.872 
5 200 
5 132 
0.863 
0.892 
5 754 
496 772 
637 068 
608 324 
769 913 
306 220 
553 028 
2 397 513  2 166 846 
406 180 
683 518 
Total Exports (FOB) (E) 
Taxes on Imports (Itax) 
Sales tax on Imports(Ist) 
Subsidies on Imports (Isub) 
Taxes on Exports (Etax) 
Subsidies on Exports (Esub) 
SCF 
NOTES: 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 10.10 Imports excluded reimports 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 10.1 Exports excluded re-exports 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 8.1 Custom Revenue Receipts, Total import duty 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 2.4 Expenditure on gross national income 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 8.1: Iqra surcharges, Export duty and 0.25% Export Development Charges 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Table 6.1: Iqra surcharges, Refunds and Rebates 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, External Trade Statistics, Table 14.4 Exports by Economic category 
Federal Bureau of Statistics, External Trade Statistics, Table 14.5 Imports by Economic category 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 10: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2013-14, Table 10: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 8: Collection of Sales Tax 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 12: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 11: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2015-16, Table 3:  A Comparison of Collection 2015-16 Vis-a-Vis Target FY 2015-16 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2013-14, Table 10: Details of Collection of Customs Duties 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2011-12, Table 13: Month-wise Collection of FED 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2012-13, Table 10: FED Collection of Major Revenue Spinners 
Federal Board of Revenue, Year Book 2014-15, Table 11: FED Collection from Major Commodities FY: 14-15 and FY: 13-14 
FBR data on tax collection:  
FBS Table 14.01 Value of foreign trade 
0.871 
(Rupees million) 
Average 
5 884 692 
2 497 402 
508 495 
710 082 
5 994 
0.874 
11 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix II: Standard Conversion Factor for Outputs 
12 
Parity Price Basis  (1)WheatMilkVegetables(I)(E)(E)Projected Price in Current Dollars $/mt (2)247                      417                  429                  Factor1                          1                     1                     Quality Adjustment Factor1                          1                     1                     World Market Equivalent $/mt247                      417                  429                  Transport and Insurance20                        45                    10                    cif, Karachi267                      462                  439                  Exchange Rate Rs/US$105                      105                  105                  cif, Karachi (Rs/t)28 053                  48 502             46 050             Clearance & Port charges1 200                   1 200               1 500               Storage and handling3 000                   2 000               1 500               Value at Karachi market32 253                  45 302             43 050             Transport to/from Project Area9 000                   12 000             12 000             Processed Value41 253                  57 302             55 050             Processing Ratio %1                          0                     1                     Processing/Packaging Cost1 031                   1 000               3 000               Wholesale Value43 126                  56 302             51 500             Local agents' commission/margins4 000                   1 000               3 000               Value at farmgate (Ton)47 126                  55 302             48 500             Economic Value at farmgate (Rs/1000 Litres/Kg)47 126                  331 812            48 500             Local farmgate price (Rs/1000Liters/Kg)40 000                  60 000             40 000             Financial Price per Kg/Litere40                        60                    40                    Economic Price per Kg47                        55                    48                    Ratio of border to local farmgate price1.2                       0.9                   1.2                   (1) Parity : [I] Import, [E] Export(2) World Bank Commodoity Prices (for 2016)1.10                  
Islamic Republic of Pakistan – Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project – Phase II (GLLSP-II) 
Annex - 04: Financial and Economic Analysis 
Appendix III: Standard Conversion Factors 
Parity Price Basis  (1) 
Projected Price in Current Dollars $/mt 
(2) 
Urea 
(I) 
DAP 
(I) 
SSP 
(I) 
212  
368  
309  
Factor 
Quality Adjustment Factor 
World Market Equivalent $/mt 
Transport and Insurance 
cif, Karachi 
Exchange Rate Rs/US$ 
cif, Karachi (Rs/t) 
Port charges 
Storage and handling 
Value at Karachi market 
Transport to Project Area 
Value at Project area 
Wholesale Value 
Local agents' commission/margins 
Value at farm gate 
Economic Value at farm gate (Rs/50kg 
Bag) 
Local farm gate price (Rs/50kg Bag) 
1  
1  
212  
43  
214  
105  
           22 
477  
             1 
000  
             1 
500  
           24 
977  
             8 
000  
           32 
977  
           32 
977  
660  
           33 
637  
             1 
682  
             1 
700  
1  
1  
1  
1  
368  
309  
58  
55  
370  
311  
105  
                 38 
803  
                  1 
000  
                  1 
500  
                 41 
303  
                  8 
000  
                 49 
303  
                 49 
303  
986  
                 50 
289  
                  2 
514  
                  2 
000  
105  
      32 
675  
        000  
        1 
500  
      35 
175  
        8 
000  
      43 
175  
      43 
175  
864  
      44 
039  
        2 
202  
        3 
600  
Ratio of border to local farm gate price 
0.99  
1.26  
0.61  
Financial Price per Kg 
Economic Price per Kg 
(1) Parity : [I] Import   [E] Export 
(2) World Bank Commodity Prices for 
2016 
34  
34  
40  
50  
72  
44  
SCF - Fertilizer 
0.95  
13 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5:  Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)  
The Gawadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project Phase II (GLLSP-II) is a category “B” 
project (see screening checklist at Appendix-1), whereas environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) is provided at Appendix-2.  
1. Major landscape characteristics and issues (social, health, environmental and 
climate change) 
1.  The screening exercise of the project has been conducted based on the available literature 
review and field visits. The justification for the preliminary environmental/social category 
and climate risk classification is articulated and substantiated with appropriate analysis. 
The  present  Social,  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  Review 
has been prepared using the latest IFAD guidelines. The review aims to highlight, in view 
to  be  taken  into  consideration,  issues  on  Natural  Resources  Management  (NRM)  and 
gender, potential social and environmental impacts and risks so as to improve NRM and 
mitigate  environmental  concerns,  monitoring  aspects  and  justification  of  the  project 
environmental and social as well as climate risk categories assigned. 
1.1 Sociocultural context 
2.  The project area consists of two coastal districts of Balochistan i.e. Gawadar and Lasbela. 
The area is varied in terms of topography and means of production and livelihoods. There 
is  a  685  km  long  coastal  belt  along  Gwadar  and  Lasbela  districts  where  the  coastal 
communities’ main means of livelihoods is fisheries and agriculture/livestock husbandry.  
3.  Demographics: Balochistan is the least populated province  of the country with just 6 
percent people inhabiting it. According to the latest Census, the population of the province 
is  a  little  over  12  million  and  it  is  growing  at  the  rate  of  3.37%  per  annum1.  Mean 
household size for Gwadar and Lasbela is 7.1 and 9.7 people respectively, as per the 1998 
Census.2 
4.  Economic Opportunities: In addition to almost two third of the country’s coastline, the 
province is endowed with abundant natural resources. It is the largest supplier of grapes 
(98%), apricot (93%) and apples (81%) of the country’s produce. Balochistan accounts 
for  approx.  8%  of  country’s  GDP.  Services,  agriculture  and  industry  account  for  44%, 
29% and 26% of the provincial GDP respectively. Industrial base of the province is small 
and Lasbela is the only industrial city in the province. In Lasbela, there are 11 steel/metal 
factories,  9  wheel/engineering  units,  8  oil/chemical  units,  6  plastic  factories,  5  textile 
units, 5 pharmaceuticals and 4 agricultural auto/auto units.  
5.  The  proposed  project  will  build  on  GLLSP-I  and  reinforce,  consolidate  and  expand,  its 
successful interventions in districts of Gwadar and Lasbela. Evidence suggest that most 
of  the  GLLSP-I  interventions  have  had  positive  effect  on  quality  of  lives  of  involved 
communities. Both Gwadar and Lasbela have ‘Low HDI’ ranking and are categorized as 
‘high poverty zone’ and ‘extremely high poverty zone’ respectively.  
6.  Land tenure situation: The land, except the coastline, belongs to local land owners with 
heads  of  tribe  or  Sardars  owning  most  of  it.  However,  the  coastline  is  controlled  and 
owned by the Provincial Government and is managed by the Board of Revenue.  
1 Interim results of Census 2017 published by Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, Government of Pakistan 
(http://www.pbs.gov.pk/content/population-census) 
2 ‘Population of Pakistan, An Analysis of NSER 2010–11’, UNICEF,   
7.  Health  and  Nutrition:  A  recent  survey3  of  fourteen  drought  effected  districts  of 
Balochistan found out that 48% of the rural population was facing ‘crisis’ or ‘emergency’ 
situation  in  terms  of  food  insecurity.  The  situation  in  District  Gwadar  warrants  urgent 
attention as approximately 55% of the rural population is faced with ‘crisis’ situation while 
another 5% were facing ‘famine’. The report predicted worsening of the situation in near 
future due to the continued unmitigated drought.  
8.  Gender. The latest Census results show that women account for 47% of the population 
of Balochistan. The gender ratio in the province is 110.63. The traditional tribal culture 
and  value  system  of  Balochistan  puts  women  at  a  subservient  position.  Entrenched 
patriarchal systems combined with low education rates, especially among women, as well 
as  exclusion  from  mainstream  decision-making  institutions  has  greatly  disadvantaged 
women.  Women  are  generally  excluded  from  economic  sphere  and  decision  making. 
Women voter  registration,  as  well  as  voting in last  general  elections,  was  significantly 
lower than males. 
9.  Access  to  essential  services:  Access  to  essential  services  is  the  most  important 
determinant for quality of life and social well-being.  The level of provision of essential 
services  like  education,  health,  water  supply  and  sanitation,  etc.  is  severely  under-
developed throughout the province. According to ASER Survey, less than 30% children of 
3–5 years attend pre–school in Gwadar  and Lasbela.  69% of children  (6–16 years) in 
Lasbela  are  enrolled  in  school.  This  ratio  is  even  worse  for  Gwadar  where  only  51% 
children  are  enrolled  in  schools.  Access  to  health  facilities,  safe  drinking  water  and 
sanitation is far lower as compared to other provinces.  
1.2.  Natural resources and their management 
10.  Balochistan is  the  western  most  province  of the  country  and is  the  largest province  in 
terms  of  area,  with  46.3  percent  of  land  mass,  and  shares  border  with  Iran  and 
Afghanistan. It has almost two third of coastal area of the country. Balochistan hosts a 
large number of natural resources though poorly managed. 
11.  Minerals.  Over  US$1  trillion  worth  of  natural  resources  have  been  discovered  in 
Balochistan including, Gold, Copper, Black pearl, Oil, Valuable Stones, Coal, Chromite and 
Natural  Gas.  Balochistan  possesses  great  unexplored  potential  of  metallic  and  non-
metallic minerals. Lasbela is rich in minerals availability. Main minerals are coal, chromite, 
Marble and quartzite. Gwadar has no proven mineral resources but boasts world largest 
natural deep sea port and rich fishing grounds.   
12.  Biodiversity. Balchistan is also rich in bio-diversity, and possess a significant number of 
diversified species. Balochistan provides traditional route to migratory birds.Green Turtles 
are also found near the coastline of Jewani.   
13.  Forest. Balochistan covers 43 per cent land mass of Pakistan but it has only 0.2 per cent 
forest cover of total forestry of the country. The project area, Gwadar and Lasbella has 
arid  climate  conditions.  Gwadar  has  nearly  no  forest  cover,  while  Lasbella  has  limited 
plantation and forest. 
1.3  Climate Change 
14.  Climate change impact assessment for Gwadar and Lasbella show following trends and 
potential impacts: 
  Precipitation  increase  together  with  rise  in  temperature  is  projected  in  the  HKH  region 
during the 21st century. This may result in more floods and sediment transport to the sea, 
resulting in sea level rise. 
3 ‘IPC Acute Food Insecurity Analysis’ for Balochistan, June 2019 
  Gwadar and Lasbela may experience decline in precipitation during 2011-2040 and 2071-
2100  (ranging  between  5%  to  33%),  whereas  rise  in  precipitation  during  2041-2070 
under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5.  
  Both maximum  and minimum  temperature  rise  is expected in near,  mid  and  far  future 
(ranging between 0.1oC to about 6oC) under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5.  
  Rise in temperature and decline in precipitation are likely to worsen drought conditions in 
the project area.  
  Water scarcity, rise in soil degradation, sea-water level and temperature rise, increase in 
sediment  transport,  groundwater  depletion,  water  quality  deterioration  and  rise  in 
agriculture water demand are expected in the near to far future. 
1.4.  Key Issues 
15.  Key issues are Governance, Security situation, Economy, Non-availability of sustainable 
funding,  Social  Inclusion,  Development  Lag,  and  Infrastructure  Development  without 
considering Climate Change. 
2. 
Potential project’s impacts and risks 
2.1.  Key potential adverse social and environmental impacts of the project include: 
16.  The project may induce temporary adverse impacts during implementation stage (during 
construction  phase  of  infrastructure).  However,  detailed  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and its implementation will minimize the adverse impacts. Few 
of the potential impacts are: 
  The sub-projects implementation may result in adverse impacts on public health of 
surrounding communities and workers through air, water and soil pollution, noise or 
direct contact with hazardous material.  
  Soil erosion, changes in soil texture and soil displacement are expected soil related 
impacts, particularly in irrigation systems development, ponds and water storage 
tanks construction. 
  Ecosystem and biodiversity degradation through construction activities and ill-
managed fishing. 
  Establishment of temporary workforce during construction period, while permanent 
workforce after infrastructure development and capacity building through trainings.  
2.2.  Climate change and adaptation 
17.  Climate change impact assessment is detailed in Working Paper (and section 2.1 above). 
Summarize adverse effects are: 
  Anticipated  rise  in  temperature  and  decline  in  precipitation  are  likely  to  worsen  the 
drought conditions in the project area.  
  Water scarcity, rise in soil degradation, sea-water level and temperature rise, rise in 
heat-waves,  increase  in  storms  and  cyclones,  increase  in  sediment  transport, 
groundwater  depletion,  water  quality  deterioration  and  rise  in  agriculture  water 
demand are expected in the near to far future. 
18.  Main adaptation/mitigation measures are provided in Table 1. 
Table 1: Climate change impacts together with adaptation and mitigation 
measures. 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at 
the design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
Main themes 
Main challenges under 
Future Climate Change 
Scenarios 
Jetties and 
allied 
infrastructure 
  Sea Level Rise 
  Seawater 
temperature rise  
 
Inclusion of climate change 
assessment together with 
 Up  to  5%  of  the 
infrastructure 
cost 
Main themes 
Main challenges under 
Future Climate Change 
Scenarios 
  Rise in sediment 
transport 
  Expected rise in 
high-winds and 
cyclones 
  Rise in floods and 
tides 
  GHG emissions from 
boats’ engines 
  Variation in fish 
species and quantum 
  Construction of cold 
storages (insolation 
needs) 
  Adverse effect on 
eco-system 
  Seawater intrusion to 
rivers and aquifers  
Rural Roads 
  Embankment erosion 
 
Floods due to 
extreme precipitation 
events 
  Scouring at bridge 
Piers 
  Expansion Joints 
damages 
  Road deterioration 
due to use of 
inadequate asphalt 
grade 
Low visibility during 
dust-storms 
 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at 
the design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
hydrological modelling during 
infrastructure design. 
  Use of well-maintained boats 
(guidelines and monitoring 
framework to be developed by 
fishery department) 
  Climate resilient design of 
Jetties and allied infrastructure 
considering changes in sea-level 
rise, high-winds, potential 
cyclones, and changes in tides 
  Dredging estimates may 
consider changes in sediment 
transport  
  Demarcation of low, medium 
and high tide levels to protect 
fishermen from hazards 
  Awareness raising of the 
fishermen and line departments 
(through trainings and 
seminars) on climate change 
and its impacts on sea-level rise, 
storms etc 
  Adequate clear heights and 
insulation need to be considered 
in cold storages and cold chain 
  Construction and curing of 
concrete need adequate care 
and consideration due to 
expected rise in temperature 
  Sheds and first aid should be 
made available at sites for 
laborers (to protect them from 
heat-waves and hot weather)   
Inclusion of climate change 
assessment during infrastructure 
design. 
 
  Adequate compaction of road 
 
embankments 
Provision of adequate drainage 
arrangement 
  Estimation of future scour 
considering climate change 
scenarios 
  Design and provision 
appropriate expansion joints 
considering future rise in 
temperature 
  Selection of recommended 
grades of asphalt considering 
future rise in temperature 
  Applying adequate road marking 
and design of lights together 
with safety arrangements 
  Estimation of adequate budget 
for O&M due to potential 
increase in dust storms  
  Road side plantation together 
with design of small ponds to 
cater for water needs of the 
plants/trees 
 3  –  5%  of  the 
roads  allocated 
cost estimates 
store 
(Ponds  will 
rainwater  for  plants 
growth,  while  nano-
clay  technology  and 
such 
other 
technologies  will  be 
used  in  areas  where 
soils are sandy) 
Main themes 
Main challenges under 
Future Climate Change 
Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at 
the design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
Water Ponds 
  Availability of water 
resources and their 
precise estimates 
  Excessive 
evaporation from 
stored water 
  Embankments 
erosion 
Irrigation 
Channels 
  Rise in cropwater 
requirement 
  Rise in sediment 
 
transport 
Increase in scouring 
at aqueducts etc 
  Rise in evaporation 
losses 
Check dams 
  Water scarcity/floods 
Drinking water 
supply 
systems 
  Water 
availability/scarcity 
  Groundwater 
depletion 
  Awareness raising (through 
trainings and seminars) on 
climate change 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential 
locations for infrastructure 
development during their design 
  Covering surface of stored water 
by floating balls (this may 
reduce evaporation by about 
30%) 
  Adequate liquid limits 
 
 
assessment of the construction 
material and compaction design 
Plantation on the embankments 
and in the vicinity 
Design of irrigation channels to 
accommodate future enhanced 
irrigation requirements and 
sediment load (based on climate 
change scenarios) 
  Design consideration related to 
 Up  to  5%  of  the 
proposed 
infrastructure 
 Up  to  5%  of  the 
cost 
tentative 
estimates 
 
increase in floods and 
subsequent scouring 
Provision of concrete slab or 
pipe systems for irrigation 
systems to reduce losses 
Plantation along irrigation 
systems/watercourses 
  Adaptation of latest water 
 
 1-2% 
of 
tentative 
estimate 
the 
cost 
 3-5% 
of 
tentative 
estimate 
the 
cost 
efficient and climate change 
resilient practices, particularly in 
irrigation/agriculture field 
  Awareness raising 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential 
locations for infrastructure 
development 
Provision of adequate height and 
apron arrangement 
 
  Awareness raising 
  Tree plantation in the vicinity 
  Detailed assessment to map the 
existing facilities and gaps in 
water supply schemes and 
identification of new water 
resources schemes 
  Additional drilling (10-20 ft) will 
be needed and carried out in 
areas, where precipitation is 
likely to decline, whereas in 
areas where precipitation is 
predicted to increase may need 
flood protection (such as raising 
of well side levels by 1-2 ft 
above natural ground level) and 
water quality assurance through 
enhancing RO plants capacity.  
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential 
Main themes 
Main challenges under 
Future Climate Change 
Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at 
the design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
Flood 
Protection 
Schemes 
  Variation in floods  
  Variation in sediment 
size and load 
RO Plants 
  Access to clean 
drinking water 
  Significant ground 
water depletion 
In-adequate water 
supply lines and 
storage capacities 
 
  Availability of funds 
for more surface 
reservoirs 
construction  
 Up  to  5%  of  the 
cost 
tentative 
estimate 
 2-3% 
of 
tentative 
estimate 
the 
cost 
locations for infrastructure 
development 
Plantation near to the well and 
or water Tanks 
 
  Boreholes to be discouraged in 
groundwater stressed areas. 
  Rain water harvesting and its 
awareness among communities 
should be improved to harness 
the depleting water table 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential 
locations for infrastructure 
development 
  Climate resilient flood protection 
works, 
  Detailed assessment to map the 
existing facilities and gaps in 
water supply schemes and 
identification of new water 
resources schemes  
  Boreholes to be discouraged in 
groundwater stressed areas. 
  Drinking water quality should be 
monitored 
 
  Rusted and old water supply 
lines should be replaced 
Identification of ground water 
recharges potential sites and 
measures together with recharge 
wells. 
  Rain water harvesting 
implementation and knowledge 
among communities should be 
improved to harness the 
depleting water table 
Environmental and social category 
3.  
19.  The screening checklists (Annexure-1) for environmental and social and climate risks is 
attached  herewith  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP) review note. Based on the checklists the GLLSP-II Project is categorized as class 
B per social and environmental categories. A comprehensive ESMP has been developed 
and proposed for the current project. 
 4.  
Climate risk category 
20.  Climate of the project area is generally arid with low annual rainfall and water availability 
for household consumption, livestock and crops is generally at a premium. Large swaths 
of area along the coast received no rains during 2013-2018.  However, the area is also 
prone to flash-floods when it rains. The coastal areas are also susceptible to cyclones and 
strong  winds,  particularly  during  monsoon  season.  Project  approach  and  interventions 
are  aimed  at  improving  the  communities’  resilience  to  climate  change  through 
intervention related to adaptation and mitigation measures. Community level activities 
and  investments  cover  improved  understanding  of  climate  change  risks,  adopting 
appropriate  cropping  and  livestock  husbandry  practices,  improving  water  security  and 
efficient use for domestic and crop-use, construction of flood protection works etc. will all 
contribute to improved climate resilience. Based on the checklist for climate change risks 
show high risks (see Annex-1 for details), therefore detailed hydro-climate assessment 
and potential adaptation and mitigation measures are inevitable. 
 5. 
Recommended features of project design and implementation 
5.1.  Environment and social mitigation measures 
21.  Detailed ESMP and mitigations measures have been proposed, and provided in Annex-2.   
5.2   Climate change adaptation and mitigation 
22.  Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation measures are provided in section 2.2 above. 
5.3   Multi-benefit approaches 
23.  GLLSP-II will build upon successful development interventions under the first phase.  
5.4. 
 Incentives for good practices 
24.  Trainings may be provided as incentive for good practices. This will enable beneficiaries 
to get optimum benefits from the available natural resources. 
5.5. 
Participatory processes 
25.  The  project  follows  a  participatory  development  approach. It  offers  an  opportunity  for 
community  engagement  in  understanding  the  environment  and  climate  change 
challenges and participate in project supported mitigation and resilience interventions.  
6. 
Analysis of alternatives 
26.  Best available practices, available technologies, policies, strategies and action plans have 
been studied for  alternate analysis to optimize the benefits  and to reduce the adverse 
effects and same have been adopted for project interventions. 
7. 
Institutional analysis  
7.1. 
Institutional framework 
27.  Climate Change Ministry and EPA: Pakistan’s per capita emissions is one of the lowest 
in  the  world.  However,  Pakistan  remained  in  the  top  10  countries  that  have  been 
significantly vulnerable to extreme climate events during the last two and half decades.  
Pakistan received back to back climate change related disasters; such as floods in 2010, 
2011 and 2012, which led to establishment of the Climate Change Ministry in April 2012.  
The Ministry is Cabinet-level, headed by the federal minister.  
28.  The Ministry has three attached organizations: 
i)  Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) 
ii)  Zoological Survey Department, and  
iii)  Global Change Impact Studies Center (GCISC) 
29.  The  environment  wing  of the ministry is  responsible  for  the  Multilateral Environmental 
Agreements  (MEAs)  including  the  United  Nation  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change  (UNFCCC)  and  Kyoto  Protocol.  The  Ministry  of  Climate  Change  prepared 
Framework for implementation of Climate Change Policy (2013), which provides priority 
based adaptation and mitigation measures in Pakistan to cope with adverse impacts of 
climate change and to control and reduce Green House Gases (GHG) emissions during 
2014-2030. 
30.  At present, Balochistan has no Provincial Climate Change Policy, Strategy and Action Plan. 
EPA Balochistan is currently working on the same, however, there is no dedicated Climate 
Change Cell/Wing in the Department. The EPA is headed by Director General (DG). There 
are two Directors (Director Enforcement and Director Legal/Technical), who are assigned 
with  various  climate  change  related  tasks  in  addition  to  their  already  well-defined  job 
descriptions and responsibilities. There is an urgent need to develop a dedicated Climate 
Change Cell/Wing with well-defined roles and responsibilities. Asian Development Bank 
(ADB)  is  likely  to  provide  assistance  in  development  of  climate  change  policy  for 
Balochistan,  under  an  ongoing  project:  “Balochistan  Water  Resources  Development 
Sector Project”.  
31.  In the  absence of provincial climate change policy, strategies  and action plan, national 
and international climate change policies, strategies and action plans have been consulted 
(such  as  UNFCCC,  National  Climate  Change  Policy,  Kyoto  Protocols,  Pakistan’s  agreed 
INDCs,  National  Water  Policy,  Framework  for  Implementation  of  Climate  Change,  and 
Climate Change Financing Framework) for proposing the climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures under GLLSP-II.  
7.2.  Capacity building 
32.  Community  and  other  stakeholder  capacity-building  needs,  supported  by  effective 
information, education and communication activities have been identified. Details about 
various needs and compliance with national and international standards are considered 
and  will  be  ensured  in  the  financing  agreements  and  during  design  stage  of  the 
infrastructure. 
7.3.  Additional funding 
33.  The proposed project and its adaptation and mitigations measures will be enhanced by 
the results of the ongoing 10 Billion Tree Tsunami, Green Pakistan, Clean Green Pakistan, 
Mangroves  initiative  expansion  and  other  multilateral  or  bilateral  environmental  and 
climate  financing  sources  (i.e.  Global  Environment  Facility,  Least  Developed  Countries 
Fund  and  Special  Climate  Change  Fund  funding,  Green  Climate  Fund,  Adaptation  for 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Programme).  Government  will  be  encouraged  to  synergize 
existing  initiatives  and  leverage  additional  funds  through  annual  development 
programme. Project funded provincial dialogue platforms will be used for this purpose.   
8. Budgetary resources and schedule 
34.  Number  of  interventions  have  been  identified  as  part  of  project  components  and 
interventions  to  promote  climate  resilience  and  mitigation.  Extensive  training  and 
demonstrations for small holder farmers will be carried out for climate resilient farming 
and  adoption  of  climate  smart  agriculture.  The  activities  will  be  spear-headed  by  FAO 
through an IFAD Grant to develop TOT, extension staff and farmer training modules and 
curricula  and  demonstrations.  All  project  financed  infrastructure  will  be  subject  to 
environment and climate screening and all structures will be designed on specifications 
that take into account climate change effects. Technical Assistance will be provided to the 
provincial government for  development of a climate change action plan under National 
Climate Change Policy.   
9. 
Stakeholder consultations 
35.  Various  provincial  and  district  levels  organizations  have  been  consulted  together  with 
community  from  the  project  area  (Lasbella  District).  These  organizations  include, 
Fisheries department, Irrigation/Water Resources department, C&W, Ministry of Climate 
Change, Balochistan EPA, and Forest Department. 
S.No  Designation 
ACS 
1 
Department 
Planning and Development Department, 
Balochistan 
Meeting Date 
9 July 2019 and 
12 July 2019 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Secretary 
Fishery Department, Balochistan 
Deputy Secretary  C&W Department, Balochistan  
Director 
Balochistan Environmental Protection 
Agency 
Balochistan Forest Department  
Chief Conservator 
Forest 
Director General  Water Resources Department , Balochistan  11 July 2019 
12 July 2019 
Secretary  
19 July 2019 
Senior Research 
Scientist 
C&W Department , Balochistan 
Global Change Impact Studies Center 
(GCISC), Ministry of Climate Change 
11 July 2019 
9 July 2019, and 
12 July 2019 
9 July 2019 
11 July 2019  
Annex 5/Appendix 1. SECAP - Environment, Social and Climate Risk Screening 
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or C) 
and one of three climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Determination of the 
category and classification also depend on the national requirements and the existing national 
capacity to promote and implement environmental and social mitigation measures.  
A positive response to any question between 1 and 22 (see questions below) categorizes the 
project as A. Similarly, a positive response to question 23 to 38 categorizes the project as 
B. In case all answers are negative, the project will be categorized as C. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks is attached herewith the Social, 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) review note. 
Project title: 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project – II 
IFAD project no.: 
Country: 
Checklist prepared by 
(name, title and institution) 
Version of 
checklist:  
01 
Pakistan 
Date of this 
version: 
Dr. Asif Khan (Environment and Climate Change Expert) 
06 August 2019 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening  Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied 
adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any wetlands? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
2.  Would the project cause significant adverse impacts 
to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services 
(e.g. conversion of more than 50 hectares of 
natural forest, loss of habitat, erosion/other form of 
land degradation, fragmentation and hydrological 
changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 and 5) 
No 
No 
3.  Does the proposed project target area include 
No 
ecologically sensitive areas,4 areas of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation, and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
4.  Is the project location subjected to major 
No 
destruction as a result of geophysical hazards 
(tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
5.  Would the project lead to unsustainable natural 
resource management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock) and/or result in exceeding 
carrying capacity. For example, is the 
development happening in areas where little up-
No 
The project does not include any 
development of wetlands.  
The project neither include any 
conversion of more than 50 ha natural 
forest nor causes any adverse impacts 
on habitats and/or ecosystems and their 
services. 
The project does not produce any 
adverse impacts on the environment. To 
reduce and culminate minor adverse 
environmental impacts will be addressed 
adopting adequate mitigation measures.  
The project will encourage sustainable 
dishing and stop over-exploitation by 
providing trainings to fishermen and line 
department. 
4 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; 
areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate 
change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas that include 
physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance), and areas with high social 
vulnerability. 
to-date information exists on sustainable 
yield/carrying capacity? (Guidance statements 4, 5 
and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-scale5 
No 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where their 
development involves significant alteration of 
ecologically sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant use of 
No 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns? (Guidance statement 14) 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based 
No 
(groundwater and/or surface water) development 
where there is reason to believe that significant 
depletion and/or reduced flow has occurred from 
the effects of climate change or from 
overutilization? (Guidance statement 7) 
9.  Does the project pose a risk of introducing 
potentially invasive species or genetically 
modified organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity? (Guidance statement 
1) 
10.  Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
Infrastructure development 
No 
No 
11.  Does the project include the construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s) and/or 
reservoir(s) meeting at least one of the following 
criteria?  
-  more than 15 meter high wall;  
-  more than 500 meter long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity; or  
- 
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation 
No 
schemes rehabilitation and/or development 
(more than 100 hectares per scheme)?6  
(Guidance statement 7) 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that entail a total 
area being cleared above 10 km long, or any 
farmer with more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (Guidance statement 10). 
Will the works entail temporary and/or 
permanent resident workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or correction of 
No 
natural waterbodies  
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance statement 7) 
 The project may increase irrigation 
activities, which may increase use 
increased agro-chemicals. However, 
awareness will be spread in the farmers 
to handle and use adequate 
agrochemicals and environment friendly 
techniques, all to avoid adverse impacts 
of the project. 
The project does not include clearing of 
more than 10 km road stretches. The 
existing roads will be black-topped.  
5 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and 
fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 
hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as 
an aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
6 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and 
fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and 
these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
15.  Does the project involve significant 
No 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface 
water, leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental flow plus downstream user 
requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic 
No 
displacement7 or physical resettlement of more 
than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion and/or loss 
No 
of physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
18.  Would the project generate significant social 
No 
adverse risk/impacts to local communities 
(including disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups,indigenous people, persons vulnerable to 
GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse and people 
with disabilities) or other project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19.  Does the project include the manufacture and 
No 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials 
which may affect the environment? (Guidance 
statement 2) 
20.  Does the project include the construction of a 
No 
large or medium-scale industrial plant? 
21.  Does the project include the development of large-
No 
scale production forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22.  Does the project support any of the above 
No 
(Question 1 to Question 21) through the provision 
of a line of credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which 
can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural 
Yes 
intensification and/or expansion of cropping area 
in non-sensitive areas that may have adverse 
impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include rangeland and 
Yes 
livestock development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
The project may increase irrigation 
activities, agriculture areas, and 
intensification of agriculture. These will 
bring positive impacts on habitat, 
ecosystem and/or livelihood, such as 
production of more food for livestock. 
However, due to overstressing aquifer 
may result in stress on groundwater 
resources. This will be controlled by 
spreading awareness and through 
adaptation of efficient water-use 
methods. 
The project include livestock 
development. 
7 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods (guidance 
statement 13). 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
Yes 
information on stocks, fishing effort and 
sustainable yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, 
habitat damage and knowledge of fishing zones 
and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
26.  Would the project activities include aquaculture 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or 
intensively practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and clearing of 
coastal vegetation, change in hydrology or 
introduction of exotic species? (Guidance 
statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include natural resource-
based value chain development? (Guidance 
statements 1, 6 and 12) 
28.  Do the project activities include watershed 
management or rehabilitation? 
29.  Does the project include large-scale soil and 
water conservation measures? (Guidance 
statements 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium dam subprojects 
(capacity > 3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 
7 and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and 
microenterprise development subprojects? 
(Guidance statements 12 and 13) 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
32.  Does the project include the development of 
No 
agro-processing facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would the construction or operation of the project 
Yes 
cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
(Guidance statement 10) 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities have minor 
No 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
(Guidance statement 9) 
35.  Would the project result in physical resettlement 
No 
of 20 people or less, or impacting less than 10 
per cent of an individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term 
No 
public health and safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
37.  Would the project require a migrant workforce or 
seasonal workers (for construction, planting 
and/or harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the above 
(Question 23 to Question 37) through the 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
Yes 
No 
The project includes construction of 
Jetties and allied infrastructure, which 
may affect fish stocks, change fishing 
effort, and may result in changes in fish 
yield. Construction of Jetties generate 
opportunities for the current available 
fishermen as well as new/additional 
fishermen, which may cause overfishing. 
Project provides for assistance to 
Fisheries Departments for policy on 
sustainable management of fish and its 
enforcement 
Wetlands and coastal vegetative land 
conversion is not part of the current 
project. 
The project aims to develop/improve 
fisheries value chain. 
The project will include small-scale water 
storage ponds.  
The project does not include irrigation 
and drainage, and small and medium 
dams with potential reservoirs capacity 
> 3  million m3. 
The project include enterprises for 
fisheries. 
The project may raise traffic to rural 
areas. The project includes construction 
of about 160 km rural roads, which will 
provide ease in accessibility and 
livelihood development. 
The project design does not envisage 
any adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources in the project area. 
The project will require seasonal 
workers, particularly during construction 
of Jetties and allied structures. 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of 
“yes” response* 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme climatic 
events, such as flooding, drought, tropical storms or 
heat waves? 
Yes 
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather 
that will adversely affect the project impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
Yes 
3.  Would the project make investments in low-lying 
coastal areas/zones exposed to tropical storms? 
4.  Would the project make investments in glacial areas 
and mountains zones? 
5.  Would the project promote agricultural activity in 
marginal and/or highly degraded areas that have 
increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
6.  Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced significant 
weather-related losses and damages in the past? 
7.  Would the project develop/install infrastructure in 
areas with a track record of extreme weather 
events? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8.  Is the project target group entirely dependent on 
natural resources (such as seasonal crops, rainfed 
agricultural plots, migratory fish stocks) that have 
been affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events? 
9.  Would climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity (crops/livestock/fisheries), access to 
markets and/or the associated incidence of pests 
and diseases for the project target groups? 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
10.  Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes 
likely adversely impact upon key stages of 
identified value chains in the project (from 
production to markets)? 
Yes 
The available literature review 
show that the project area 
experienced extreme floods, 
droughts, and storms. Such events 
are likely to increase in future. 
Based on RCP 4.5 and 8.5 
temperature is likely to increase 
during 2020-2100. Precipitation is 
likely to decrease during near 
future and far future, whereas 
increase during mid-future (2041-
2070) based on both RCP 4.5 and 
8.5. 
The project includes construction 
of Jetties and allied structures. 
The project will cover the entire 
Gwadar and Lasbella districts, 
which had experienced both floods 
and droughts. 
The project will cover the entire 
Gwadar and Lasbella districts, 
which had experienced both floods 
and droughts. Coastal areas 
experienced high tides as well as 
sand storms. 
Future temperature rise and 
precipitation decline are likely to 
deplete water availability and raise 
crop-water requirement, and may 
result in reduction in agriculture 
productivity. Future rise in 
temperature may increase heat-
waves, and will adversely affect 
crops health. Various diseases and 
use of pesticides may also rise due 
to changing climate. 
Climate extreme events, such as 
floods, droughts, storms and heat-
waves will have adverse impacts 
11.  Is the project investing in climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are diversified? 
Yes 
12.  Is the project investing in infrastructure that is 
Yes 
exposed to infrequent extreme weather events? 
13.  Is the project investing in institutional 
development and capacity-building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer groups, cooperatives) 
in climatically heterogeneous areas? 
Yes 
14.  Does the project have the potential to become 
more resilient through the adoption of green 
technologies at a reasonable cost? 
15.  Does the project intervention have opportunities 
to strengthen indigenous climate risk management 
capabilities? 
16.  Does the project have opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue 
to improve agricultural sector strategies and 
policies? 
17.  Does the project have potential to integrate 
climate resilience measures without extensive 
additional costs (e.g. improved building codes, 
capacity-building, or including climate risk issues 
in policy processes)? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
18.  Based on the information available would the 
project benefit from a more thorough accounting 
of GHG  emission ? 
No 
on the entire value chains in the 
project. 
The project is investing in climate-
sensitive livelihoods, such as 
agricultural production and fishery. 
The project will cover the entire 
Gwadar and Lasbella districts, 
which had experienced both floods 
and droughts. Coastal areas 
experienced high tides as well as 
sand storms. 
Institutional and Farmers capacity 
building is considered in the 
project design.  
The project will provide trainings 
to farmers, fishermen and 
representatives from line-
departments, although the study 
area may not be climatically 
heterogeneous.     
The project considers adequate 
adaptation and mitigation 
measures, which will produce 
climate resilient infrastructure 
development. 
However, additional green 
technologies may further improve 
the resilience.   
Organized groups of farmers and 
fishermen, engagement of a 
capable social mobilization partner 
and sourcing of TA expertise offer 
opportunities to strengthen climate 
risk management 
Project offers opportunities to 
engage at policy level to improve 
agriculture sector strategies and 
policies. 
Adequate climate resilience 
measures are proposed, and will 
not require extensive additional 
costs. 
Annex 5/Appendix 2 
Environment and Social Management Plan  
1.1  Main Project Interventions 
1.  GLLSP-II  envisages  interventions  in  fisheries  and  agriculture  value  chains,  small-scale 
socio-economic  infrastructure  at  village level  (water  supply  schemes –  RO  plants,  water 
storage  tanks,  water  bores/pumping  schemes,  solar  power  for  households,  sanitation 
schemes/ street pavements etc.), rural roads and fisheries infrastructure development (3 
jetties, support infrastructure and fish landing platforms).  
1.2  Likely Adverse Impacts of GLLSP-II Interventions and mitigation measures:  
2.  The likely  adverse impacts  of  project interventions  on environment  and  climate change, 
along with mitigation measures, can be summarized as: 
a.  Hydrology  and  water  resources:  The  aquifer  may  be  put  under  stress  if  uncontrolled 
water pumping is resorted to. Improper designing of water storage tanks may result in 
subsidence and uncontrolled seepage. Improved availability for water for drinking and 
irrigation  may  lead  to  wasteful  practices.  Following  mitigation  measures  would  be 
adopted:  
-  Hydrological study of aquifer prior to any ground water pumping schemes with a view 
to sustainably manage aquafer levels 
-  Proper  siting  and  design  specifications  for  water  storage  tanks  and  protection 
measures against flash-floods 
-  Community education on efficient use of water and conservation and introduction of 
user fees 
-  Agrochemicals safe handling and use together with environment friendly techniques 
will be encouraged through trainings  
b.  Construction Waste Materials: Project sponsored construction interventions would result 
in  generation  of  considerable  waste  materials  and  residues.  Proper  waste  disposal 
arrangements will be agreed with communities for community executed infrastructure 
while safe waste disposal measures will be made part of construction contracts with the 
contractors and enforced.  
c.  Construction  of  Jetties  and  Allied  structures:  The  project implementation may  involve 
slight adverse impacts on waste disposal and ecosystem. Adequate waste disposal will 
be  ensured  by  the  contractor  under  close  supervision  of  the  consultants  and  line-
department.  Appropriate  sewerage  and  drainage  system  will  be  developed  by  the 
contractor during construction. Use of well-maintained vehicles and equipment will be 
ensured  by  the  contractor,  consultants  and  client.  Adequate  scheduling  and  planning 
will be carried out to avoid adverse impacts on fisheries, eco-system (particularly green 
turtles) and migratory birds. 
d.  Construction  of  roads:  The  project  implementation  will  include  disposal  of  excavated 
waste material, noise and air pollution. The contractor will ensure adequate disposal of 
excavated  materials,  use  of  well-maintained  vehicles  and  equipment  under  close 
supervision by the consultants, PMU staff and line-department.    
1.3  Land  Rights:  Under  GLLSP  2,  no  land  acquisition  is  planned.  Jetties  and  Allied 
Infrastructures as well as roads will be built on land to be made available by GoB. 
1.4  Labour Rights: Project infrastructure interventions and value chain activities will involve 
engagement of local and outside labour by contractors. Project will ensure that labour 
laws with regard to compensation, gender equality, wages, work place safety etc. are 
filly  respected  on  all  project  sponsored  schemes.  Gender  and  Vulnerability 
Considerations: Although gender and vulnerability are priority considerations in project 
approach and interventions, however there may be possibility of undue burden on them 
especially in terms of provision of some labour and materials for community executed 
schemes. The project will ensure that women and vulnerable groups are exempted from 
any such contributions and paid a fair wage for their work.  
2 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
2.1 Subproject Screening 
3.  Screening  for  environmental  and  social  impacts  using  the  Rapid  Assessment  Checklist 
(Attachment A) will be introduced for all subprojects before implementation. The screening 
process will include: assessing impacts; examining alternatives to minimize the negative 
impacts; enhancing positive impacts; and compensating for adverse impacts. If the Rapid 
Assessment Checklist indicates that the possible negative impacts from implementation of 
the subproject would be minimal and that the positive impacts would certainly outweigh 
them,  no  further  action  with  respect  to  environmental  and  social  safeguards  will  not  be 
required upon approval of the Checklist results by PMU. If the negative impacts are more 
than  minimal  or  irreversible  according  to  the  Checklist,  an  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment must be conducted and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
developed, whose suggested methodology and structure is shown in Annex G, to mitigate 
the negative impacts.   
Attachment A: Rapid Assessment Checklist 
4.  “Additional  Information”  field  must  be  completed  when  negative  impact  is  identified  or 
expected. For the purpose of allowing examination from various angles, some impacts are 
addressed more than once through different questions. 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Section A: Project Siting 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Of the project/subproject 
area covered by rapid 
assessment, what 
is/are: 
Is the project/subproject 
area in or close to: 
The approximate size? 
The GPS co-ordinates? 
The main physical delimitation (e.g., river, lake, 
altitude, slope, rainfall)? 
The estimated number of population (male, 
female, aged over 70, aged under 15)? 
The dominant environmental feature (e.g., 
rainforest, dry forest, savannah, barren land, 
agricultural land, pasture, other)? 
The likelihood of recurrent natural disasters (e.g., 
drought, flood, wild fire, strong wind)? 
The level of capacity to absorb waste? 
The level of economic resilience? 
Densely populated 
areas? 
Cultural heritage sites? 
Protected areas? 
Wetlands? 
Mangroves? 
Estuarine? 
Buffer zones of 
protected area? 
Special areas for 
protecting biodiversity? 
Other 
Will the project/subproject require support 
facilities? 
When is the rapid assessment conducted? 
Section B: Environmental Impacts
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Will the 
project/ 
subproject 
cause: 
Ecological disturbances or loss 
of ecological functions due to 
infrastructure construction? 
Environmental degradation from 
any of interventions? 
Environmental degradation from 
construction activities and 
equipment? 
Accidental release of hazardous 
chemicals? 
Increase in generation of solid 
waste? 
Occupational health hazards 
due to exposure to dust, 
hazardous material, noise, etc. 
Public health risks from solid, 
liquid, gaseous waste 
discharges? 
Changes in water flows? 
Eventual degradation of surface 
water bodies? 
Eventual degradation of 
groundwater bodies? 
Soil contamination? 
Soil erosion? 
Siltation? 
Decrease in soil fertility? 
Air pollution?  
Section C: Social Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Does the 
project/ 
subproject:  
Operate where property rights 
on resources (e.g., land tenure) 
are legally recognized? 
Cause changes to land tenure, 
land use, access to or use of 
resources? 
Require land acquisition? 
- 
 How will the cost be shared between the project 
and the landowner? 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Obtain private land with 
community funding and through 
willing-buyer-willing-seller 
arrangement? 
Involve dislocation or involuntary 
resettlement of inhabitants? 
Cause modification in 
technology and land uses, which 
affect current socioeconomic 
activities? 
Increase unemployment? 
Cause influx of laborers from 
other areas? 
Create a possibility of 
uncontrolled in-migration of 
people and overloading of 
infrastructure from improved 
transportation system? 
Have disproportionate impacts 
on the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
the poor, women, children, 
indigenous peoples, disabled)? 
Involve or be complicit in 
alteration, damage or removal of 
cultural heritage? 
Section D: Other Considerations 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project stage for 
addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the national regulation in country/countries 
affected by the project/subproject require EIA or 
ESIA for the activities under the project? 
Does local capacity exist for fulfilment of EIA and 
ESIA requirements in country/countries affected 
by the project? 
Does the project address issues that have also 
been addressed by other projects or approaches? 
Does the project/subproject generate cumulative 
or long-term impacts? 
Is it possible to isolate the impacts from the 
project/subproject for monitoring? 
5.  Attachment  B:  Suggested  Methodology  and  Structure  of  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plans 
An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared for each subproject will be 
where initial screening demands preparation of such a plan. 
Suggested Structure 
A suggested structure of ESMF is as follows: 
1.  Executive Summary 
A summary of the contents and key findings written in a way that is easily understood by the general 
public. It should be concise, about 3 to 5 pages. 
2.  Background 
Subproject specific background information will be included in this section. 
3.  Subproject Overview 
This section will provide an overview of the subproject and its relation to the project to which the 
subproject belongs. 
4.  Objectives 
The section will list the objectives of the Environmental and Social Management Plan specific to the 
subproject,  based  on 
the  appropriate  Project 
Managementpopulation Unit. The project and subproject details should include their precise nature 
and scope, site location, activities to be undertaken, and timing and scheduling. 
information  provided  by 
its  detailed 
5.  Scope of Work 
This  section  should  list  and  describe  all  national,  provincial  legislations  and  regulations  as  well  as 
World  Bank  policies  that  give  rise  to  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan.  The  scope 
should take into account the nature and the magnitude of the potential impacts in addition to the 
project location and size. 
6.  Screening of Environmental and Social Impacts  
This section will contain the assessment results of anticipated impacts of the project activities on the 
environment and the people, including the list of key concerns and potential impacts of the subproject 
on  the  environment  and  the  people.  The  assessment  will  be  the  base  for  deciding  whether  any 
auxiliary plan would be required:  
Baseline information 
This  section  will  describe  proposed  sites  and  their  immediate  surroundings  with  texts,  maps, 
photographs as well as key environmental and social aspects of the sites and surroundings, such as 
demography, ethnicity, socio economic activities, occupation and livelihoods, land form and land use, 
land ownership, water resources, settlements, critical habitat or protected areas, formal and informal 
groups,   methods  of  communication  and transport,  cultural  heritage  sites  or  graveyards,  sensitive 
receptor  such  as  schools,  hospitals  and  access  routes.  The  section  will  also  include  baseline  data 
necessary to monitor all key environmental and social impacts identified through screening. 
7.  Environmental and Social Impacts 
This  section  will  outline  both  positive  and  negative  impacts,  including  cumulative  ones,  of  the 
subproject  by  each  type  of  intervention,  assess  the  severity  of  these  impacts  and  the  range  of 
measures  required  to  avoid  (mitigate,  in  case  avoiding  is  not  possible)  the  negative  impacts  and 
enhance positive ones. 
8.  Stakeholder Consultations and Information Disclosure 
This section will describe the objective, process, and outcome of the stakeholder consultations---with 
community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and NGOs with experience in the area--
-that  are  carried  out  during  the  ESMP  preparation.  The  emphasis  will  be  on  the  concerns  and 
suggestions regarding the subproject and its potential impacts. 
This section will also list all project and subproject information shared with the stakeholders during 
the preparation of the plan and arrangements for disclosing subproject information.  
Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
The  section  will  describe  all  impacts  (including  cumulative  ones),  mitigation  measures  for  each 
impact, indicators for each impact, the parties responsible for implementing each mitigation measure, 
and  the  parties  responsible  for  monitoring  each  indicator.  A  single  indicator  may  be  monitored  in 
different ways by multiple stakeholders to allow maximum participation of various stakeholders, and 
subsequently enhanced ownership and implementation of the project. 
9.  Capacity Assessment and Training 
This section will detail capacity assessment among the relevant officials and other stakeholders on 
implementing environmental and social management plan. It will also include a plan to enhance the 
capacity of the stakeholders while implementing the subproject and the ESMP. 
10. Cost Estimates and Sources of Funds 
The section will indicate cost estimates and sources of funds for institution development activities, 
training programs for implementation teams and local institutions, technical assistance to authorities, 
costs for preparation of ESMP and other safeguard documents, and their implementation.  
2. 
Impact Assessment and Mitigation Measures 
2.1  Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
2.1.1  Soils 
Soil Erosion: Soil get eroded due to climate extreme events, floods and droughts, and intense precipitation. 
In addition, steep slopes are subject to soil erosion, which becomes more likely if an irrigation system allows 
water to escape from the watercourses. System designs which do not take the contours of the slope into 
account are conducive of such outcomes. Unlined watercourses could also cause soil erosion and siltation 
downstream if not compacted properly.  
Construction of ponds and water storage tanks is envisaged to support high efficiency irrigation systems; 
their improper construction or siting may cause soil erosion or subsidence. Soil erosion will be caused if the 
increased availability in water prompts the farmers to clear the forests and convert them into farmlands. 
Soil  compaction  and  other  damages  to  soil  structure  may  occur  from  use  of  heavy  machinery  for  pond 
embankments and laser land levelling. 
Soil Characteristics: The residual-colluvial soil found on the mountain slopes of Balochistan is unsuited 
for agriculture, because of its lack of depth and insufficient organic content. The effects of irrigation on soil 
organic matter are unclear. Irrigation may also raise soil pH and make the loess plains more alkaline than 
it is at present. 
Soil fertility may be lost, depending on the agricultural practices which the project recommends; excessive 
use of agrochemicals, tilling, and inadequate crop rotation would result in decrease in soil organic matter, 
reduction in aggregate stability, damage to soil structure, and reduction in mineralization. 
Increased application of irrigation water may result in exacerbated waterlogging and salinization, especially 
under  climate  change  which  makes  flooding  more  likely.  Agriculture  in  the  alluvial  plains  is  the  major 
economic power horse of the province, but such soil is prone to waterlogging.  
Soil Pollution: If various waste generated and hazardous material, including fuel, used by the watercourse 
rehabilitation crew is not treated properly, it will result in soil contamination. Vehicles and equipment that 
are not properly maintained will leak fuel and other toxic substances. Excess use of agrochemicals will also 
lead to soil pollution and destruction of soil fertility. 
Soil Displacement: If excavation of soil becomes necessary for watercourse rehabilitation, the excavated 
material---if inappropriately disposed--could block drainage and interfere with agricultural activities, traffic 
and wildlife. 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Irrigation systems must use design (location, dimension, material, layout, consideration of contours 
of the slopes, etc.) to adapt to climate change and enforce flood and drainage control functions. 
  Earthen  watercourses  must  be  well  compacted  in  a  timely  manner  to  avoid  soil  erosion  and 
resultant siltation. Vegetation from such watercourses should also be removed as little as possible. 
  Conversion of forests into farmlands must be avoided. If forest clearing is inevitable, compensatory 
plantation needs to be carried out in appropriate watershed areas; at least three times the number 
of trees cut must be planted. 
  Ponds and  water storage tanks should be designed and located so as to avoid soil erosion and 
subsidence. 
  Agricultural practices to be promoted should enhance soil fertility, which means climate resilience 
and  sustainability.  Examples  include:  terrace  faming  on  steep  terrains;  integrated  pest 
management; intercropping; and mulching. 
  Soil  testing  must  be  conducted  before  selection  of  subproject  sites  to  avoid  exacerbation  of 
waterlogging and salinity. 
  Waste  and  hazardous  material from  watercourse  rehabilitation, including fuel, must  be  handled, 
stored and treated so as not to cause environmental pollution. 
  Movements and use of vehicles and heavy equipment should be minimized. 
  Vehicles and equipment must be properly maintained. 
  Excavated material needs to be disposed of in pre-identified locations so as not to block waterways, 
drains,  watercourses,  and  local  traffic  routes  or  interfere  with  agricultural  activities,  including 
pastoralism, and wildlife. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.2  Hydrology and Water Resources 
Water Availability at Canals: The project activities partly rely on the performance of the existing dams or 
dams under construction. The project will rehabilitate the existing watercourses, and if the effectiveness of 
the  rehabilitation  depends  on  the  adequate  storage  and  operation  of  the  existing  dams,  the  safeguard 
policies would be triggered. At the time of writing, the relevant details to determine the applicability of the 
policy are unavailable. Climate change has already increased the number and intensity of extreme events, 
affecting how and when rains arrive. Irrigation systems must be equipped with flood control and drainage 
functions if they are to function properly in the near future.  
Water Availability On Farm: With the rehabilitation of the watercourses, less water will escape from the 
irrigation  system  and more  canal  water  will  be  available  to the farmer for irrigation  at  the  on-farm level. 
Farmers will have greater control over the amount of water that crops receive, but whether less canal water 
will be demanded overall is unclear, since seepage may have contributed to soil moisture to the benefit of 
some crops. Installation of ponds and water storage tanks may create seepage if construction, design and 
siting are inadequate. They will tap stream water and reduce downstream flows. 
Water  demanded  by the  rehabilitation  workers  for  drinking  and  civil  work  as  well  as  water  cut-off  during 
rehabilitation are likely to negatively affect the availability of irrigation water and general water availability 
in downstream ecosystems and communities. Improved water availability may prompt less efficient water 
use, increase in cultivation of crops, in particular, high water consumption crops, such as sugarcane and 
rice. This is also likely to lead to reduced water availability downstream. 
Agricultural  practices  promoted  by  the  project  reduce  evapotranspiration  on  farm  and  improves  soil 
moisture retention, the water passed on by upstream users to downstream users will increase. Increase in 
agricultural land by clearing forests will decrease water availability, and so would cultivation of fallow lands 
at a shorter than optimal interval. 
Groundwater: The sources of groundwater recharge are: seepage from the irrigation systems, including 
ponds and tanks; application of irrigation water; rainfall; and supply to and demand from other waterbodies 
connected to the aquifer. While it is clear that the seepage or water absorption pattern will be altered by 
climate  change,  watercourse  rehabilitation,  different  irrigation  and  agricultural  practices,  it  is  not  clear 
whether  there  will  be more  or less  recharge.  Climate change  implies less  recharge  overall,  watercourse 
rehabilitation points to less upstream and more downstream, and irrigation and agricultural practices can 
influence recharge in both ways. It also depends on the degree of waterlogging. 
Climate change is likely to decrease the surface water supply in the short run and long run, with very little 
possibility of recovery, if any. It is well possible that the farmers adopt less efficient ways of water use or 
crops  with  higher  water  requirements  upon  rehabilitation  of  watercourses.  If  so,  they  may  turn  to 
groundwater, whose aquifers have been recharged more slowly due to climate change, and quickly deplete 
it when the climate change reduces the amount of canal water available. Such scenario is more likely in the 
south, where water shortage is more chronic. 
Water  Pollution:  If  various  waste  generated  and  hazardous  material,  including  fuel,  used  by  the 
watercourse  rehabilitation  crew  is  not  treated  properly,  it  will  result  in  water  pollution.  Vehicles  and 
equipment  that  are  not  properly  maintained  will  leak  fuel  and  other  toxic  substances.  Excess  use  of 
agrochemicals will also lead to water pollution. 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Irrigation systems must use design (location, dimension, material, layout, consideration of contours 
of  the  slopes,  etc.)  to  adapt  to  climate  change  and  enforce  flood,  drought  and  drainage  control 
functions. 
  Hydrology, including both surface water and groundwater, should be studied before project design 
and monitored. Groundwater studies carried out by various organizations in the country should be 
consulted. 
  Groundwater  exploitation  should  be  discouraged  through  ensuring  surface  water  availability  in 
order to avoid groundwater depletion. 
  Awareness must be raised among the stakeholders on hydrological cycle, including roles of forests 
and effects of fallow period as well as climate change, especially in the south. 
  Forest clearing must be avoided; if not, the beneficiaries of the activity that caused the felling of 
trees must plant appropriate indigenous tree species to recover the ecosystem functions lost as 
much as possible. 
  Waste and hazardous material from watercourse rehabilitation must be treated so as not to cause 
environmental pollution. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All  hazardous  chemicals,  including  fuel,  must  be  properly  stowed  and  away  from  water  source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards, residential areas, schools and religious sites. 
  Use  of  hazardous  chemical  substances  should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible  by  adopting 
integrated pest management, nature-based solutions, renewable energy, etc. 
  Awareness of farmers and consumers needs to be raised on the existing contamination of water 
by fecal matter and highly poisonous pesticides. 
 
Irrigation  and  agricultural  practices  that  reduce  evapotranspiration  of  crops,  including  choice  of 
crops, will be promoted. 
  A water management plan that includes water for local residents, rehabilitation work, workers and 
local  ecosystem  will  be  established  by  the  community,  rehabilitation  work  contractors  and  the 
Project Management Unit with advice from the environmental specialist for the project. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.3  Air and Noise 
If machinery  and vehicles  for  watercourse  rehabilitation  and  water  saving  technologies  are  not  properly 
installed,  maintained  or  used,  they  could  leak  gasoline  and  other  hazardous  substances  in  addition  to 
creating more than minimal dust and vibration. 
Extensive or inappropriate transportation, storage and use of agrochemicals, gasoline and other hazardous 
chemicals will cause air pollution; many toxic substances are volatile and can become airborne.  
Mitigation Measures 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary 
for the operating personnel. 
  The  personnel  involved  in  civil  works  and  machinery  installation  and  use  need  to  be  trained  on 
occupational  hazards  and  equipped  with  appropriate  protection  gear---masks,  safety  googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.---and trained on proper use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with designated fuel. 
  Sustainably harvested renewable energy must be used as much as possible. 
  All  hazardous  chemicals,  including  fuel,  must  be  properly  stowed  and  away  from  water  source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards, residential areas, schools and religious sites. 
  Use  of  hazardous  chemical  substances  should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible  by  adopting 
integrated pest management, nature-based solutions, renewable energy, etc. 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small particles or pieces must be stored in a container with 
a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  Rehabilitation work and other activities that involve operation of machinery and equipment must be 
conducted away from residential areas, schools, religious sites and habitats of vulnerable wildlife, 
if  they  cause  noise,  vibration  or  dust  that  interfere  seriously  with  life  and  livelihoods  of  the 
community members. 
  Rehabilitation work and other activities that involve operation of vehicles, machinery and equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their noise, vibration or dust interfere seriously with 
life and livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of  Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.4 
Climate 
The  project  may  affect  local  climate  through  rise  in  evapotranspiration  losses,  in  particular,  rainfall  in 
downwind  areas.  If  improvement  in  water  availability  encourages  switch  to  rice  from  other  crops  could 
increase  emission  of  greenhouse  gases:  methane  and  nitrous  oxide.  Increase  in  agricultural  production 
may entail more burning of agricultural waste in the fields. Use of fossil fuels and synthetic nitrogen fertilizers 
as  well  as  clearing  of  forests  or  decrease  in  well-maintained  rangelands  will  result  in  emission  of 
greenhouse gases and exacerbation of climate change. Vehicles and machinery, ill maintained or operated 
with inappropriate fuel, will emit more greenhouse gases. 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Irrigation systems must use design (location, dimension, material, layout, consideration of contours 
of the slopes, etc.) to adapt to climate change and enforce flood and drainage control functions. 
  Machinery, equipment and vehicles must be well maintained and powered by designated fuel. 
  Sustainably harvested renewable energy and organic fertilizer must be used as much as possible. 
  Practices that benefit the material cycle of agroecosystems, instead of burning in open air, should 
be promoted for disposal of agricultural waste. 
  A water regime for rice cultivation that produces the least greenhouse gases should be considered. 
  Agroforestry should be adopted for controlling local water cycle and microclimate. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.5  Waste 
Civil works themselves and camps for the laborers hired for civil works will generate liquid and solid wastes, 
and  their  inadequate  disposal  would  contaminate  air,  water  and  soil.  Agricultural  practices  that  involve 
chemicals may result in chemical waste, which leads to pollution. People, flora, including crops, and fauna 
will be negatively affected by such pollution. 
Installation of on-farm irrigation system for water saving will also generate wastes: odd ends of equipment 
parts (plastic tubing, pieces of metal pipes, and pipe fittings); and leftover material from mounting (cement, 
sand and bricks). 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Integrated pest management plan should be adhered to. 
  Agricultural practice that do not involve hazardous chemicals must be promoted. 
  Waste management plan that covers waste generated by the community members and the workers 
at the camp as well as leftover from equipment installation will be established by the community, 
rehabilitation  work  contractors  and  the  Project  Management  Unit  with  advice  from  the 
environmental specialist for the project. 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.6  Vehicle Traffic  
Movement of vehicles and machinery at and around the rehabilitation sites could negatively affect traffic, 
pedestrians and wild animals by making their established routes hazardous. It could also adversely affect 
the air and noise quality as well as soil, hydrology and climate, especially if not maintained well or operated 
improperly. 
 Mitigation Measures 
  Mitigation measures for soils, hydrology and water, air, noise, climate must be adopted. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well maintained and in good working condition.  
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with designated fuel. 
  Designated routes for vehicles and equipment---which do not involve forest clearing, rangelands 
reduction,  or  disturbance  to  wild  animal  movements---will  be  established  by  the  community, 
rehabilitation  work  contractors  and  the  Project  Management  Unit  with  advice  from  the 
environmental specialist for the project. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the routes. 
  Rehabilitation work and other activities that involve operation of vehicles, machinery and equipment 
must  not  be  conducted  during  the  hours  when  their  movements  interfere  seriously  with  life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
2.1.7  Ecosystems and Biodiversity 
Changes in soils, hydrology and water resources described above---by rehabilitation of watercourses, and 
adoption of water saving technologies and agricultural practices---would affect ecosystems and biodiversity, 
including migratory birds. So would the negative effects on air quality, noise and vibration, and climate. 
More  direct  effects  on  ecosystems  and  biodiversity  are  likely  to  be  caused  by  expansion  of  agricultural 
lands through conversion of forests and rangelands and disposal of excavated material. 
Wetlands  are  found  in the mountains  as  well  as  in  the  plains  and  serve  as  important  habitats for  birds, 
including migratory birds, and fish. Drainage of wetlands will not only put in danger these animals, but also 
the water regulating function that wetlands provide, preventing floods and ensuring sufficient water in the 
wells  during  the  dry  season:  an  ecosystem  service  whose  importance  can  only  increase  under  climate 
change. 
Protected areas do not need to be no-go zones for human beings. Considering the population pressure, it 
should be used to support human needs and it can be through sustainable agroforestry, etc. 
Agrobiodiversity  is  a  subset  of  biodiversity;  the  richer  it  is,  the  better  off  humans  are.  However, 
agrobiodiversity has been in decline since the introduction and adoption of conventional modern agriculture. 
Promotion  of  horticulture  with  emphasis  on  mainstream  cash-crops  may  exacerbate  the  situation,  while 
adoption of indigenous crops will boost resilience of agroecosystems. 
Mitigation Measures 
  Rehabilitation work will be carried out so as not to disturb migratory birds. 
  Mitigation measures for soils, hydrology and water resources, air, noise, climate, waste and vehicle 
traffic must be adopted. 
  Conversion of forests, meadows and rangelands must be avoided; if a forest needs to be sacrificed, 
the beneficiaries of the activity that caused the felling of trees must plant appropriate indigenous 
tree species to recover the ecosystem functions lost as much as possible. 
  Wetlands  should  not  be  drained  or  converted  into  agricultural  lands,  and  its  water  regulation 
functions should be enhanced through agroforestry in watershed areas, etc. 
  Human  activities  should  be  allowed  in  protected  areas,  but  only  in  ways  that  enhance flora  and 
fauna diversity. 
  Excavated material needs to be disposed of in pre-identified locations so as not to block waterways, 
drains,  watercourses,  and  local  traffic  routes  or  interfere  with  agricultural  activities,  including 
pastoralism, and wildlife. 
  Crop diversification should not focus only on proven cash crops, but also include indigenous crops, 
which will enhance climate resilience of the agroecosystems. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA Regulations 2000; Balochistan Environment Protection Act 2012; National Climate Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.8  Land Tenancy 
Land is a fundamental input required for crop agriculture, livestock raising and other types of livelihoods. 
Not  only  livelihoods,  but  entire  lifestyle,  are  the  results  of  adaption  to  the  ecosystem  and  landscape  of 
particular land, and it is usually impossible to find a comparable environment elsewhere; land acquisition 
should be avoided as much as possible. 
Mitigation Measures 
  Project activities should be planned according to a participatory approach, involving tenants in 
addition to landowners. If land must be acquired by the project, it should be an outcome of 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent by the local population, including tenants, either indigenous 
or non-indigenous. 
  A Resettlement Policy Framework for the project should be strictly followed to ensure there is 
no involuntary land acquisition or loss of livelihood, especially for tenants. Tenants should not 
be evicted against their will as a result of a landowner’s donation or sale of land to the project. 
  Resettlement Plan Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework must be followed if the 
plans are deemed necessary, according to the criteria put forth in the frameworks. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency  Review  of  IEE 
and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate 
Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on 
Biological  Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations 
Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary 
Movements  of  Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior 
Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides;  Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the 
Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.9  Poverty and Labor Force  
No activity should widen the wealth gaps, and as the high poverty rates are recorded in almost all districts 
of the province and high unemployment rates have become the norm for the youth, greater attention must 
be paid to them. The project needs to make livelihoods in the rural areas, based on crop agriculture and 
livestock,  attractive  to  the  youth,  and  the  vulnerable  groups  besides  the  youth---women,  elderly, 
handicapped and the poorest of the poor---will need specific programs or activities tailored to each group. 
We also need to know: how natural resources are used by various stakeholders; how value chains function; 
and who are the actors in the chains 
Increased availability of irrigation water could encourage farmers to grow more of water-intensive crops, 
such as sugarcane. Considering the water scarcity that climate change would incur, such crop choices are 
unsustainable  and  must  be  discouraged.  Cash  crops  to  be  introduced  may  also  call  for  application  of 
synthetic agrochemicals, which is an unsustainable practice, as weeds and pests develop resistance. More 
generally,  use  of  synthetic  chemicals, including fertilizers,  are  ultimately  harmful  to the  ecosystems  and 
human beings. For sustainability, we need solutions that bring benefits to people as well as to ecosystems 
and their biodiversity, which will reinforce resilience of the ecosystems and agro-systems built on them. 
Thorough  market  analysis  should  be  conducted  so  as  not  to  “grow  and  sell”  (cultivating  crops  without 
understanding how the agriculture products are sold in the market), but to “grow to sell" (providing products 
based  on  the  market  demand).  Cultivation  of  high-value  cash  crops  does  not  necessarily  mean  higher 
income for farmers if they lack good understanding of markets and negotiation skills. 
Promotion of cash crops may also come at the expense of rangelands and forests, leading to conflicts and 
impoverishment  of the  region  as  a  whole.  Non-timber forest  products must  be  considered  together  with 
crops for commercialization of high-value commodities. 
Agrobiodiversity  is  only  increasing  in  importance  under  climate  change,  which  is  accompanied  by 
unpredictable  and  extreme  weather.  Local  varieties  are  more  resistant  to  extreme  weathers  and  local 
diseases  compared  to  non-local  varieties  even  under  climate  change;  they  must  be  protected  for  its 
suitability to and role in the local ecosystems as well as for diversity. 
Without  a  full  analysis  of  rural  financial  sector,  including  examination  of  all  possible  instruments  for 
investment,  and  strong  socioeconomic  justification,  matching  grants  may  exacerbate  external  aid 
dependency and hinder development of local finance sector. If the recipient selection is not planned  and 
implemented properly, it may increase the poverty gap. 
Effectiveness  of  activities  to  increase  value  addition  and  crop  diversification  will  depend  on  how  much 
access farmers and other value-chain actors have to market information and how well they can make use 
of it. The consultations with the officials and farmers did not reveal that there is sufficient entrepreneurial 
skills or clear roadmap to strengthen such skills. 
If  economic  prospects  in the  rural  areas  become  good  enough,  urbanization  of the  rural  areas  could  be 
mitigated by reducing loss of agricultural lands and rangelands to residential and commercial structures. 
Expansion of urban areas could also be attenuated by retaining young people who would otherwise go to 
the cities. Migrant workers could also be enticed to come back to the province from abroad bringing with 
them valuable skills obtained. Remittance may decrease, but human capital of the province will be elevated 
and could lead to further socioeconomic prosperity. 
Mitigation Measures 
  Livelihood opportunities should be created for the youth, especially those that make rural living a 
viable and attractive one. 
  Programmes  or  activities  that  specifically  target  the vulnerable  groups  should  be  planned  and 
implemented. 
  Activities  must  be  planned  according  to  the  principles  of  integrated  natural  resources 
management as well as climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
  Farmers  must  be  trained  on  climate  change  (including  its  mitigation  and  adaptation  to  it), 
Integrated  pest 
ecosystem-based  agriculture,  and  nature  based  solutions 
management). 
(including 
  A  comprehensive  livelihood  and  value-chain  analysis,  dealing  with  both  environmental  and 
socioeconomic aspects, must be conducted with the participation of the community prior to and 
during activity formulation. 
  Farmers must be trained on functionality of markets and negotiation skills, for example based on 
SHEP (Smallholder Horticulture Empowerment and Promotion) approach. If illiteracy is prevalent, 
reading and basic arithmetic must be taught. 
  All  people  whose  properties  and  livelihoods  would  be  negatively  affected  must  be  properly 
compensated; a grievance redress mechanism should be established with the participation of the 
locals. 
  Non-timber  forest  products  should  be  exploited  for  income  generation  and  as  incentives  to 
maintain forests. 
  A  full  analysis  of  rural  financial  sector,  including  examination  of  all  possible  instruments  for 
investment, should be conducted. The financing mechanism with the strongest socioeconomic 
justification should be adopted. 
  Recipient selection for financial aid should be planned and implemented so as to diminish the 
poverty gap. 
  Entrepreneurial  skills  of  farmers  and  other  actors  in  the  relevant  value  chains  must  be 
strengthened so that the increase in production is effectively sold in the market to generate income 
for the farmers. 
  The provincial government should support the re-integration of migrant workers upon return to 
make use of their knowledge and skills gained abroad. 
  Resettlement Plan Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework must be followed if the 
plans are deemed necessary, according to the criteria put forth in the frameworks. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency  Review  of  IEE 
and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate 
Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on 
Biological  Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations 
Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary 
Movements  of  Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior 
Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides;  Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the 
Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code.  
7.1.10  Social Protection 
While social protection measures exist in the province in the form of social insurance and social assistance, 
the great majority of the population, especially in the rural areas, have no access to the programs. 
Hiring  of  local  and  external  workers,  contractors  and  service  providers  for  the  project  activities---
construction/rehabilitation  of  irrigation  schemes,  operation  and  maintenance  of  facilities  for  reduction  of 
harvest  loss,  and  so  on---must  be  done  so  as  to  minimize  the  wealth  gaps.  Without  clear  criteria  and 
communication, local people might perceive it as unjust and detrimental to their immediate interest. If the 
locals feel socially and economically unprotected, it may lead to conflicts and disruptions, including violence. 
Contractors, sub-contractors, and other personnel engaged for the civil work will be relieved of their duties 
upon completion of the project activity. They must be prepared for loss of income from the project. 
Mitigation Measures 
  Formulation  of  any  project  activity  should  be  based  on  the  use  of  the  Gender  and  Social 
Protection Checklist (Annex Y) and Free, Prior and Informed Consent of all vulnerable groups. 
  Hiring  must  be  conducted  in  consultation  with  the  local  population  in  a  transparent  and 
accountable manner. 
  Hiring conditions must be in compliance with pertinent labor legislation and ratified international 
conventions. 
  Workers, contractors and service providers must be well informed of the duration of the work and 
the finite nature of their contracts under the project. 
  Whenever  local  people/organizations  can  carry  out  project  activities  they  should  be  given 
preference over external people/organization. 
  External organizations should be hired only after the local communities acknowledge that they 
have inadequate capabilities. 
  Work opportunities must benefit the people directly affected by the project; local authorities must 
be adequately involved to better manage the influx of external workforce.  
  Local training programs on project activities must be first provided to the affected locals. 
  A grievance redress mechanism should be established to resolve disputes or conflicts related to 
employment and service provision with the consultation of the local population. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency  Review  of  IEE 
and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate 
Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on 
Biological  Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations 
Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary 
Movements  of  Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior 
Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides;  Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the 
Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.11 Culture and Language 
The project details are still to be determined, and a priori the activities planned under the project would not 
have  direct  adverse impacts  on  the  sites  of  cultural,  religious  or  historic importance,  such  as family  and 
community cemeteries and other sacred places.  
If it is found during any stage of project development that the project could harm graves, cemeteries, cultural 
sites  of  any  kind,  including  ancient  heritage,  relics  or  anything  that  might  be  or  believed  to  be  of 
archeological  or  historical  importance,  such  findings  should  be  immediately  reported  to  the  Project 
Management Units and measures must be taken to protect the resources.  
Mitigation measures 
  To identify and protect sites of cultural and religious significance, stakeholder consultation should 
be conducted especially with the Directorate of Archeology and Museums and the Department of 
Auqaf, Hajj, and Religious and Minority Affairs. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  World  Bank  Operational  Policies  and  guidelines  (see 
Section 2.6) must be respected, in particular: Antiquity Act 1975; Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Antiquities 
Act  2016;  National  Culture  Policy  2018;  Culture  Policy  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  2018;  OP  4.10  on 
Indigenous Peoples; OP 4.11 on Cultural Property; World Bank Policy on Access to Information; 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, International Covenant on Civil 
and  Political  Rights;  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child;  International  Labour  Organization 
Convention No. 107; United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; Convention 
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women; and Convention for Safeguarding 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage. 
1.1.12  Religion and Belief System 
The  project  does  not  include  activities  that  deal  directly  with  religion  and  belief  systems.  The  influx  of 
laborers  and  outsiders  may  pose  real  and  perceived  threats,  such  as  violation  of  the  communities’ 
sociocultural rules  and  forced  conversion  to  another  religion. The  proposed  changes  in  crop  agriculture 
may well affect their livelihood which is intertwined with their culture, religions and belief system.  
Mitigation measures 
  Before the start of any intervention, the religions and belief systems of the locals must be studied 
in depth so that they can be accommodated in activity formulation. 
  Free, Prior, Informed Consent (FPIC) for project activities must be obtained. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.13  Women and Other Vulnerable Groups 
The vulnerable population is usually insufficiently considered in many interventions; the wealth and social 
gaps are widened as a result. Women and other vulnerable people lag behind men in literacy, education and 
access to other resources and opportunities. Since vulnerable people tend to be overburdened just to make 
a living, any additional work under the project should be balanced by reduction in their other responsibilities. 
Mitigation Measures  
  Formulation of any project activity should be based on the use of the Gender and Social Protection 
Checklist (Annex Z) and Free, Prior and Informed Consent of all vulnerable groups. 
  High  infant  and  maternal  mortality  rates  and  violence  against  women  need  to  be  taken  into 
account when formulating subprojects. 
  A sociologist or an anthropologist must be engaged to identify vulnerable groups in target districts 
and their role and contribution in local livelihoods. 
  Project activities must ensure that gaps in access to resources and opportunities, capacities and 
wealth between the vulnerable groups and the rest of the community are reduced through project 
implementation; the low literacy rate among women, in particular, needs to be addressed. 
  Relevant legislations, conventions and IFAD guidelines must be respected, in particular: Pakistan 
Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review of IEE and 
EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012;  National  Climate  Change 
Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.14   Health 
The project  may impact public health of surrounding communities and workers through air, water and soil 
pollution, noise or direct contact with hazardous material. The operation of supply facilities of fuel and other 
chemicals may release hazardous or flammable material due to accidental damages to storage containers 
and delivery structures. Work induced incidents–landslides and collapse of tall structures such as cranes–
could lead to damages. 
Safety issues may arise if community’s access to  work sites is not controlled; people may be injured by 
rehabilitation related machinery or may fall in open trenches (roads, water supply and other works).  
Placement of workers’ camps next to communities’ living areas may also result in noise, inconvenience and 
conflict. The workers from outside the community may bring diseases. Influx of people and machinery could 
create a large concentration of people in a confined area and can result in a high number of casualties if 
there is an emergency of any sort (fire, earthquake, etc.) 
Changes in the crops to cultivate should not lead to decrease in food or nutritional insecurity, which may 
happen if farmers decide to concentrate on high-value cash crops and use the cash earned to purchase 
food.  Farmers  may  opt  for  foodstuff  of  lower  nutritional  value,  but  associated  with  higher  social  status. 
Purchasing produce from far flung places is never equivalent to consuming locally produced goods in terms 
of nutritional values and sustainability. Increase in pesticides will also have negative effects on the farmers 
as producers and consumers. 
The  number  of medical facilities  remains  inadequate  in  the  rural  areas,  and  traditional  use  of medicinal 
plants can fill the unmet needs to a certain extent. The project activities should not increase the already 
high infant and maternal mortality rates and violence against women. 
Health  concerns  should  not  limit  itself  to  physical  aspects  and  include  mental  health,  which  hinges  on 
cultural aspects of crop agriculture and livestock management in addition to culture itself and religions and 
belief systems. Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is not only important in terms of self-determination 
and  ownership  of  the  project  activities,  but  also  for  minimizing  the  negative  mental  and  psychological 
impacts of the project. 
Mitigation Measures  
  The local people must be informed of the danger of the activity and safety measures available to 
them. 
  Worker’s camps must be located at an adequate distance from local residential areas. 
  Proper signage, adequate and safe pedestrian walkways and alternate routes for use by the 
public must be provided. 
  Appropriate speed limits for motored vehicles must be set. 
  Fire Safety Plan and Emergency Evacuation Plan (which include identification of fire/emergency 
exits, placement of fire extinguishers, first aid kits, evacuation plans) must be established. 
  Workers, including drivers, must be trained on work safety, machinery operation and public 
health before the commencement of work. 
  Workers must be provided with personal protection equipment, such as helmets, gloves, dust 
masks, boots and earmuffs.  
  Adequate water-supply and sanitation facilities must be provided to the workers.  
 
In case of traffic diversions, proper sign boards should be provided sufficiently ahead of the 
work site. 
  Workers and local people must be trained on transmissive diseases and reproduction. 
  Farmers need to be sensitized on food and nutritional security and importance of good health 
for income generation. 
  High  infant  and  maternal  mortality  rates  and  violence  against  women  need  to  be  taken  into 
account when formulating subprojects. 
  Traditional  use  of  medicinal  plant  should  be  encouraged  by  facilitating  their  collection  and 
cultivation. 
  Culture, religion and belief systems must be well researched and taken into account in project 
formulation. 
  Free, Prior, Informed Consent (FPIC) for project activities must be obtained. 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework and Integrated Pest Management Plan Framework must 
be  followed  if  the  plans  are  deemed  necessary,  according  to  the  criteria  put  forth  in  the 
frameworks. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Review  of  IEE  and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012; 
National  Climate  Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya 
Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Wetlands of International Importance; United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol  and  Paris  Agreement; 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Rotterdam Convention 
on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides; 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International 
Convention for  the  Prevention  of  Pollution from  Ships,  and  International  Maritime  Dangerous 
Goods Code. 
1.1.15  Water Supply and Sanitation 
Modifications in hydrology brought about by works on water resources systems may dry up the springs and 
wells  used  for  drinking  water.  If  disturbances  are  caused  to  watersheds,  it may  well lead to  decrease  in 
water supply. To avoid such outcomes, it is indispensable that a comprehensive study on the relevant river 
basin  and  impacts  of  climate  change  is  conducted  so  that  project  activities  are  formulated  based  on  its 
findings. 
Increase  in  resource  competition,  especially  drinking  water,  is  inevitable  when  workers  from  outside 
communities  are  engaged  in  the  project.  Improper  design  of  temporary  toilets,  sewage  treatment  and 
disposal systems could lead to surface, sub-surface and groundwater contamination. 
The rehabilitation work itself requires resources from the project area or located near water sources of the 
communities---preparation  of  sand,  cement  mortar,  curing  of  walls  before  and  after  plastering  require  a 
large amount of water that would reduce the availability of water in the intervention area. The work may 
also result in contamination from civil-work waste. 
Mitigation Measures  
  A comprehensive study on the relevant river basin, watersheds and impacts of climate change is 
conducted so that project activities are formulated based on its findings. 
  Plan on water use and disposal must be established and submitted to the Project Management 
Units as well as Irrigation, On-Farm Water Management, Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and 
Wildlife Departments/Directorate. 
  The Project Management Units and Departments should examine the effects of planned water 
use and disposal on the hydrology, ecosystems and community and suggest ways to minimize 
water withdrawal and pollution to the level that would not compromise water supply and 
sanitation of the local communities. 
  Free, Prior and Informed Consent must be obtained from the local communities. 
  Water meters should be installed at project sites to monitor water consumption and reported 
regularly to the Project Management Units. 
  Construction staff must be trained on water conservation practices to avoid excessive loss and 
pollution. 
  Water required for construction should be obtained in a way so that water availability and 
supply to the local communities remain unaffected; 
  Latrines for the workers must be constructed at least 50 meters away from hand pumps, tube 
wells and other water sources. 
  Latrine design should include sustainable waste disposal mechanism: composting toilets with 
sawdust or dry toilets with ash or lime mixed dry with soil. 
  Rel  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Act 1997; Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency Review 
of IEE and EIA Regulations 2000; Balochistan Environment Protection Act 2012; National Climate 
Change Policy 2012; Climate Change Act 2017; Forest Act 1927; Nagoya Convention on Biological 
Diversity;  Convention  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement; United Nations Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Transboundary  Movements  of 
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal;  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent 
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides; Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, and International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
1.1.16  Crop Agriculture as Livelihood 
If the farmers interpret the improved availability of irrigation water as a new permanent condition and plant 
crops with high water requirements, it would most likely lead to a direr situation in a few years than without 
the irrigation system improvements, because of climate change and population increase. Such outcomes 
are more likely in districts where rainfall is scarcer and groundwater is more important. If such outcomes 
culminate in construction of a new mega dam, the demand-driven cycle to augment supply will recommence 
with larger negative consequences for the livelihood and the environment. 
Promotion of crops and agricultural methods must take into account salinization (which affects about one-
third  of  cultivatable  lands)  and  climate  change,  which  brings  extreme  weather  events  and  exacerbates 
waterlogging.  We  also  need  to  realize  the  potential  capacity  of  irrigation  systems  to  act  as  flood  and 
drainage control systems; climate resilient agricultural methods are ineffective if the fields are washed away 
or flooded, and the flood water needs to be harnessed in view of reduced water availability under climate 
change. 
Climate change has already introduced new pests and increased the number of familiar pests, prompting 
the farmers to use more pesticides. Without integrated pest management, which should include appropriate 
agricultural  practices,  the  negative  impacts  of  agrichemicals  on  the  environment,  human  health  and 
livelihoods are likely to intensify. 
Mitigation Measures  
  Awareness of farmers must be raised on climate change, hydrology---connection between rain, 
snow, surface water and groundwater---and water availability in the long run. 
  Awareness  of  farmers  must  be  raised  on  synthetic  agrochemicals,  the  environment,  human 
health and livelihoods. 
 
Irrigation system must incorporate flood and drainage control functions. 
  Floodwater needs to be harnessed to compensate for overall water shortage. 
  Climate  resilient  water  resources  management  and  climate  resilient  agriculture  must  be 
promoted,  including  integrated  pest  management  and  taking  into  account  the  agricultural 
problems that already exist, such as salinization and waterlogging. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Review  of  IEE  and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012; 
National  Climate  Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya 
Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Wetlands of International Importance; United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol  and  Paris  Agreement; 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Rotterdam Convention 
on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides; 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International 
Convention for  the  Prevention  of  Pollution from  Ships,  and  International  Maritime  Dangerous 
Goods Code. 
1.1.17  Livestock Management as Livelihood 
Promotion of crop agriculture and increased use of synthetic agrochemicals will have negative effects on 
the livestock and rangelands, which are already under pressure from population increase, climate change 
and urbanization. 
Many,  if  not  all,  of the  negative impacts  of  agriculture  can  be  eliminated  by implementing  an  integrated 
management approach to agriculture, combining crop cultivation and livestock raising, so that circular flow 
of resources is realized and necessity to external inputs, especially of synthetic kind, is greatly reduced. 
Mitigation Measures  
  Good quality rangelands must be maintained and expanded. 
 
Integrated management of crops and livestock must be sought. 
  Awareness  of  farmers  must  be  raised  on  synthetic  agrochemicals,  the  environment,  human 
health, animal health and livelihoods. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Review  of  IEE  and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012; 
National  Climate  Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya 
Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Wetlands of International Importance; United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol  and  Paris  Agreement; 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Rotterdam Convention 
on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides; 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International 
Convention for  the  Prevention  of  Pollution from  Ships,  and  International  Maritime  Dangerous 
Goods Code. 
1.1.18  Forestry as Livelihood 
If the promotion of agricultural practices by the project condones opening up forests to increase agricultural 
lands and increased use of synthetic agrochemicals, the project will in the long run inflict negative ecological 
impacts on the communities. Increase in the number of outsiders for business in the target districts may 
allow illegal loggers to operate more easily. 
Mitigation Measures  
  An energy plan must be established and submitted to the Project Management Units as well as 
Forestry, Environment and Wildlife Department for approval from ecological points of view. 
 
Importance  of  forests  in  terms  of  ecology  and  climate  change  must  be  well  understood  by 
farmers. 
  Farmers’  capacity  to  organize  must  be  strengthened  so  that  illegal  loggers,  especially  from 
outside the communities, are discouraged to enter the forests. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Review  of  IEE  and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012; 
National  Climate  Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya 
Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Wetlands of International Importance; United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol  and  Paris  Agreement; 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Rotterdam Convention 
on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides; 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International 
Convention for  the  Prevention  of  Pollution from  Ships,  and  International  Maritime  Dangerous 
Goods Code. 
1.1.19  Other Livelihoods 
If the project attracts workers who migrated out of the rural areas back to agriculture, they may contribute 
to  increase  in  marketing  and  value  chain  information.  If  the  influx  is  such  that  population  growth  is 
considerably more than the natural increase, the government will need to provide public infrastructure to 
accommodate them. The increase in population should not come at the expense of forests and rangelands 
which are already suffering from decrease. 
Mitigation Measures  
  The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government should devise a policy so that existing farmers would 
socially and physically integrate the returning residents. 
  New agricultural lands or residences should not be allowed in the forests or rangelands. 
  Resettlement Plan Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework must be followed if the 
plans are deemed necessary, according to the criteria put forth in the frameworks. 
  Relevant  legislations,  conventions  and  IFAD  guidelines  must  be  respected,  in  particular: 
Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Act  1997;  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Review  of  IEE  and  EIA  Regulations  2000;  Balochistan  Environment  Protection  Act  2012; 
National  Climate  Change  Policy  2012;  Climate  Change  Act  2017;  Forest  Act  1927;  Nagoya 
Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Wetlands of International Importance; United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  Kyoto  Protocol  and  Paris  Agreement; 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification;  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Rotterdam Convention 
on  the  Prior  Informed  Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides; 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants; Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer; International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International 
Convention for  the  Prevention  of  Pollution from  Ships,  and  International  Maritime  Dangerous 
Goods Code. 
1.2  Cumulative Impacts 
Even  when  the  negative  environmental  or  social  impacts  of  individual  subprojects  may  be  insignificant, 
cumulative impacts of a cluster of small subprojects may be quite significant. Many impacts also depend 
not only on the details of activity implementation, including duration and frequency, but also on post-project 
measures, such as changes that the beneficiaries would apply to the interventions. Cumulative impacts will 
be examined together with the impacts of subprojects. 
3 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
2.2  Subproject Screening 
Screening  for  environmental  and  social  impacts  using  the  Rapid  Assessment  Checklist  (Annex  F)  is 
required for all subprojects before implementation. The screening process will include: assessing impacts; 
examining alternatives to minimize the negative impacts; enhancing positive impacts; and compensating 
for adverse impacts.  
If the Rapid Assessment Checklist indicates that the possible negative impacts from implementation of the 
subproject would be minimal and that the positive impacts would certainly outweigh them, no further action 
with  respect  to  environmental  and  social  safeguards  will  not  be  required  upon  approval  of  the  Checklist 
results by IFAD.  
If the negative impacts are more than minimal or irreversible according to the Checklist, an Environmental 
Impact  Assessment  must  be  conducted  and  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP), 
whose  suggested  methodology  and  structure is  shown  in  Annex G,  established  to mitigate the  negative 
impacts.   
Annex F: Rapid Assessment Checklist 
“Additional Information” field must be completed when negative impact is identified or expected. For the 
purpose of allowing examination from various angles, some impacts are addressed more than once 
through different questions. 
Section A: Project Siting 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Of the project/subproject 
area covered by rapid 
assessment, what 
is/are: 
Is the project/subproject 
area in or close to: 
In the project/subproject 
area, what kind of fuel is 
used for: 
The approximate size? 
The GPS co-ordinates? 
The main physical delimitation (e.g., river, lake, 
altitude, slope, rainfall)? 
The estimated number of population (male, 
female, aged over 70, aged under 15)? 
The dominant environmental feature (e.g., 
rainforest, dry forest, savannah, barren land, 
agricultural land, pasture, other)? 
The likelihood of recurrent natural disasters (e.g., 
drought, flood, wild fire, strong wind)? 
The governance structure for communities? 
The governance structure for access to natural 
resources? 
The prevalence of self-sufficiency in resources? 
The level of saleable skills among the 
participants? 
The level of cultural homogeneity? 
The level of social solidarity? 
The level of capacity to absorb waste? 
The level of economic resilience? 
Densely populated 
areas? 
Cultural heritage sites? 
Protected areas? 
Wetlands? 
Mangroves? 
Estuarine? 
Buffer zones of 
protected area? 
Special areas for 
protecting biodiversity? 
Cooking? 
Heating? 
Tea/coffee making? 
Income generation? 
Industry? 
In the project/subproject 
area, what kind of 
material is used for: 
Other 
Household structures? 
Other shelters? 
Roofing materials? 
Compound fences? 
Other 
Will the project/subproject require support 
facilities? 
When is the rapid assessment conducted? 
Natural Resources and 
Habitats 
Presence and Condition 
Location 
- 
-  Quality 
-  Quantity 
-  Condition 
Primary Users 
-  Groups 
-  Gender 
-  Number of 
members 
Information 
Source 
Current 
Threat 
Level 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 
Cultural 
Importance 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 
Economic 
Value 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 
Strength 
of 
Local 
Rules on 
Resource 
Use 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 
Dominant Tree Species 
Shrub Species 
Grass Species 
Mammal Species 
Birds Species 
Fish Species 
Reptile Species 
Amphibian Species 
Arthropod Species 
Surface Water Resources 
Groundwater Resources 
Other Water Resources 
Soil 
Legally/Gazetted Protected Areas 
Ecologically Sensitive Areas 
Culturally Important Sites 
Other 
Section B: Environmental Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Will the 
project/ 
subproject 
cause: 
Ecological disturbances or loss 
of ecological functions due to 
infrastructure construction? 
Impairment of ecological 
functions? 
Environmental degradation from 
intensification of agricultural land 
use? 
Environmental degradation from 
transformation to monoculture 
practices? 
Environmental degradation from 
application of agrochemicals? 
Environmental degradation from 
transport, storage, use or 
disposal of material for facilities 
construction? 
Environmental degradation from 
transport, storage, use or 
disposal of hazardous 
chemicals? 
Environmental degradation from 
construction activities and 
equipment? 
Accidental release of hazardous 
chemicals? 
Increase in generation of solid 
waste? 
Occupational health hazards 
due to exposure to dust, 
hazardous material, noise, 
vibration, and other substance 
and disturbances from 
engagement in process 
operations? 
Disruption in transit patterns 
(people and animals), 
aggravation of noise, or increase 
in pedestrian hazards?  
Disease transmission from 
inadequate waste disposal or 
treatment? 
Public health risks from solid, 
liquid, gaseous waste 
discharges? 
Public health risks from noise?  
Public health risks from 
agrochemicals? 
Changes in water flows? 
Eventual degradation of surface 
water bodies? 
Eventual degradation of 
groundwater bodies? 
Soil contamination? 
Soil erosion? 
Siltation? 
Decrease in soil fertility? 
Air pollution?  
Foul smell? 
Vibration? 
Decrease in biodiversity? 
Disruption to wildlife? 
Section C: Social Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the 
project/ 
subproject:  
Operate where property rights 
on resources (e.g., land tenure) 
are legally recognized? 
Cause changes to land tenure, 
land use, access to or use of 
resources? 
Require land acquisition? 
- 
 How will the cost be shared between the project 
and the landowner? 
-  Will complete 
- 
- 
- 
documentation for land 
procurement or donation 
be maintained? 
Obtain private land with 
community funding and through 
willing-buyer-willing-seller 
arrangement? 
-  Will complete 
documentation for land 
procurement be 
maintained? 
Obtain land through private 
voluntary donations? 
- 
- 
- 
-  Will the donation 
- 
- 
- 
decrease the means of 
livelihood of the donor 
- 
- 
- 
by more than 10 
percent? 
-  Will complete 
documentation for land 
donation be 
maintained? 
Involve dislocation or involuntary 
resettlement of inhabitants? 
Cause modification in 
technology and land uses, which 
affect current socioeconomic 
activities? 
Increase unemployment? 
Cause influx of laborers from 
other areas? 
Create a possibility of 
uncontrolled in-migration of 
people and overloading of 
infrastructure from improved 
transportation system? 
Contain measure to avoid forced 
or child labor? 
Contain measure to ensure safe 
and healthy working 
environment for workers 
unemployed for the project? 
Compromise recreational 
opportunities? 
Have disproportionate impacts 
on the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
the poor, women, children, 
indigenous peoples, disabled)? 
Have mechanisms to integrate 
action plans developed or to be 
developed for special groups 
and issues that require 
attention?  
Include measures to integrate 
stakeholders’ information, 
suggestions and needs? 
Include measures to prevent 
and avoid corruption? 
Impair indigenous peoples’ 
livelihoods or belief systems? 
Involve or be complicit in 
alteration, damage or removal of 
cultural heritage? 
Respect internationally 
proclaimed human rights, 
including dignity, cultural 
determination and property? 
Affect the state of project 
country’s institutional context? 
Section D: Other Considerations 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Additional Information 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
  Project stage for 
addressing the impact 
  Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
  Budget implications 
  Other 
Does the national regulation in country/countries 
affected by the project/subproject require EIA or 
ESIA for the activities under the project? 
Does local capacity exist for fulfilment of EIA and 
ESIA requirements in country/countries affected 
by the project? 
Does the project address issues that have also 
been addressed by other projects or approaches? 
Does the project/subproject generate cumulative 
or long-term impacts? 
Is it possible to isolate the impacts from the 
project/subproject for monitoring? 
Annex G: Suggested Methodology and Structure of Environmental and Social Management Plans 
An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) specific to each subproject will be prepared using 
the standard methodology, as briefly described below. 
Suggested Methodology 
1.  Scoping 
-  Study the subproject details and prepare a comprehensive list of potential issues and concerns. 
2.  Site survey and data collection 
-  Record the key environmental and social aspects of the intervention area. 
- 
-  Conduct consultations with the stakeholders: community members, relevant local and provincial 
Identify any environmental or social hotspots or key concerns 
officials, and NGOs with experience in the area. 
3.  Screening  
-  Create with the stakeholders--- community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and 
NGOs with experience in the area---a list of key concerns and potential impacts of the subproject 
on environment and the people. 
4. 
Impact Assessment 
-  Assess the significance of each potential impact, using checklists and other tools identified in 
Section 8 of this document. 
Identify appropriate mitigation measures. 
- 
-  Assess cumulative impacts of a cluster of subprojects. 
5.  Environmental and Social Management Plan Formulation 
-  Document the process and outcome of the above steps.  
-  Obtain the required approval of the Plan by the World Bank. 
Suggested Structure 
A suggested structure of ESMF is as follows: 
11.  Executive Summary 
A summary of the contents and key findings written in a way that is easily understood by the general public. 
It should be concise, about 3 to 5 pages. 
12.  Background 
Subproject specific background information will be included in this section. 
13.  Subproject Overview 
This section will provide an overview of the subproject and its relation to the project to which the subproject 
belongs. 
14.  Objectives 
The  section  will  list  the  objectives  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  specific  to  the 
subproject, based on its detailed information provided by the appropriate Project Managementpopulation 
Unit.  The  project  and  subproject  details  should  include  their  precise  nature  and  scope,  site  location, 
activities to be undertaken, and timing and scheduling. 
15.  Scope of Work 
This section should list and describe all national, provincial legislations and regulations as well as World 
Bank policies that give rise to the Environmental and Social Management Plan. The scope should take into 
account the nature and the magnitude of the potential impacts in addition to the project location and size. 
16.  Screening of Environmental and Social Impacts  
This  section  will  contain  the  assessment  results  of  anticipated  impacts  of  the  project  activities  on  the 
environment and the people, including the list of key concerns and potential impacts of the subproject on 
the environment and the people. The assessment will be the base for deciding whether any auxiliary plan 
would  be  required:  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement  Plan  (LARP);  Resettlement  Action  Plan  (RAP); 
Indigenous Peoples Plan; or Integrated Pest Management Plan.  
17.  Baseline information 
This section will describe proposed sites and their immediate surroundings with texts, maps, photographs 
as  well  as  key  environmental  and  social  aspects  of  the  sites  and  surroundings,  such  as  demography, 
ethnicity, socio economic activities, occupation and livelihoods, land form and land use, land ownership, 
water resources, settlements, critical habitat or protected areas, formal and informal groups,  methods of 
communication  and  transport,  cultural  heritage  sites  or  graveyards,  sensitive  receptor  such  as  schools, 
hospitals  and  access  routes.  The  section  will  also  include  baseline  data  necessary  to  monitor  all  key 
environmental and social impacts identified through screening. 
18.  Environmental and Social Impacts 
This section will outline both positive and negative impacts, including cumulative ones, of the subproject by 
each type of intervention, assess the severity of these impacts and the range of measures required to avoid 
(mitigate, in case avoiding is not possible) the negative impacts and enhance positive ones. 
19.  Stakeholder Consultations and Information Disclosure 
This  section  will  describe  the  objective,  process,  and  outcome  of  the  stakeholder  consultations---with 
community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and NGOs with experience in the area---that 
are  carried  out  during  the  ESMP  preparation.  The  emphasis  will  be  on  the  concerns  and  suggestions 
regarding the subproject and its potential impacts. 
This  section  will  also  list  all  project  and  subproject  information  shared  with  the  stakeholders  during  the 
preparation of the plan and arrangements for disclosing subproject information in order to comply with the 
World Bank’s Policy on information disclosure. 
20.  Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
The  section  will  describe  all  impacts  (including  cumulative  ones),  mitigation  measures  for  each  impact, 
indicators  for  each  impact,  the  parties  responsible  for  implementing  each  mitigation  measure,  and  the 
parties responsible for monitoring each indicator. A single indicator may be monitored in different ways by 
multiple stakeholders to allow maximum participation of various stakeholders, and subsequently enhanced 
ownership and implementation of the project. 
It should also indicate the methodology for monitoring, including reporting tools and requirements, as well 
as  a  feedback  mechanism,  such  as  impact  thresholds  that  trigger  stronger  measures  for  mitigation  or 
reformulation of the subproject, and addition of indicators. The monitoring and reporting procedures will be 
such that they ensure early detection of conditions that necessitate particular mitigation measures.  
An implementation schedule must be included, which specifies the timing, frequency, duration and location 
of mitigation, monitoring and reporting, and is linked to the overall subproject schedule. 
21.  Capacity Assessment and Training 
This  section  will  detail  capacity  assessment  among  the  relevant  officials  and  other  stakeholders  on 
implementing environmental and social management plan. It will also include a plan to enhance the capacity 
of the stakeholders while implementing the subproject and the ESMP. 
22.  Cost Estimates and Sources of Funds 
The section will indicate cost estimates and sources of funds for institution development activities, training 
programs  for  implementation  teams  and  local  institutions,  technical  assistance  to  authorities,  costs  for 
preparation of ESMP and other safeguard documents, and their implementation. 
Annex H: Scheme Siting Checklist 
No. 
1 
Issues 
Yes 
No 
Uncertain 
Mitigation Measures 
Remarks 
Does the subproject require land 
acquisition? 
2  Will the subproject negatively impact 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
livelihoods?  
Describe the negative impacts in the 
Remarks column. 
Is the subproject located on land with 
contested ownership? 
Is the subproject located in an area with 
security problems? 
Is the subproject located on land 
reclaimed from floods (the ownership  
may be contested)? 
Is the subproject located in an area with 
designated natural reserves? 
Is the subproject located in an area with 
unique natural features? 
Is the subproject located in an area with 
endangered or conservation-worthy 
ecosystems, fauna or flora? 
Is the subproject located in an area falling 
within 500 meters of national forests, 
protected areas, wilderness areas, 
wetlands, biodiversity, critical habitats, or 
sites of historical or cultural importance? 
Is the subproject located in an area which 
would create a barrier for the movement 
of conservation-worthy wildlife or 
livestock? 
Is the subproject located close to 
groundwater sources, surface 
waterbodies, watercourses or wetlands? 
Is the subproject located in an area with 
designated cultural properties such as 
archaeological, historical and/or religious 
sites? 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
Is the subproject in an area with religious 
monuments, structures or cemeteries? 
Is the project located in an area from 
where people have been displaced? 
Is the project located in an area where 
internally displaced persons are 
temporarily settled? 
Is the project in a politically sensitive 
area? 
Is the subproject in a polluted or 
contaminated area? 
Is the subproject located in an area of 
high visual and landscape quality? 
Is the subproject located in an area 
susceptible to landslides or erosion? 
Is the subproject located in an area of 
seismic faults? 
Is the subproject located in a densely 
populated area? 
Is the subproject located on prime 
agricultural land? 
Is the subproject located in an area of 
tourist importance? 
Is the subproject located near a waste 
dump? 
25  Does the subproject have access to 
26 
27 
28 
29 
potable water? 
Is the subproject located far (1 -2 km) 
from accessible roads? 
Is the subproject located in an area with a 
wastewater network? 
Is the subproject located in an area 
covered by urban planning of the city? 
Is the subproject located outside the land 
use plan? 
Completed by: 
Name:   
_______________________________ 
Title: 
_______________________________ 
Signature: 
_______________________________ 
Date: 
_______________________________ 
Reviewed by: 
Name:   
_______________________________ 
Title: 
_______________________________ 
Signature: 
_______________________________ 
Date: _______________________________ 
Annex I: Gender and Social Protection Checklist 
Section A: Project/Subproject Profile 
Project/Subproject 
Title: 
Implementing Agency: 
Processing Stage: 
Valley/Village __________________________UC____________    Tehsil_____________ 
 District__________________ Province______________________  Pakistan 
Categorization Status: 
New 
project/subproject 
Revision of 
project/subproject 
Other 
Section B: Identification of Impacts in Project/Subproject Area 
Key Concerns 
Not 
Known 
Gender 
Yes  No 
Remarks or identified 
problems, if any 
Does the project/subproject take gender 
issues explicitly into account? 
Does the background/context analysis of the 
project/subproject examine: 
  The difference in the situations of 
women and men; and, 
  The impacts of the project/subproject 
on different social groups. 
Are women/gender-focused groups, 
associations or organizations consulted for 
the project/subproject? 
Does the project/subproject ensure that both 
women and men can participate in project 
activities – from planning, implementation to 
monitoring and evaluation? 
Are outcomes, outputs and activities 
designed to meet the different needs and 
priorities of women and men? 
Does the results framework include gender 
responsive indicators, targets and baselines? 
Will the project/subproject collect and use 
age and sex disaggregated data and 
qualitative information to analyze and monitor 
gender issues? 
Does the project/subproject include gender 
sensitization activities for male and female 
stakeholders? 
If negative, exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, exclude from 
financing. 
Does the project/subproject management 
has an adaptive mechanism to address 
gender issues as they emerge? 
Have adequate financial resources been 
allocated to the proposed gender activities? 
Has a gender expert been recruited for the 
project/subproject? 
Will all project management members and 
technicians be sensitized on gender? 
Is the project/subproject personnel balanced 
in terms of gender? 
Will the monitoring and evaluation of the 
project/subproject cover gender issues and 
monitor behavioral changes towards gender 
equality? 
Will any project/subproject activity demand 
women’s time without reducing the time 
required for their household responsibilities? 
Will there be any impact on women that may 
hinder their mobility and safekeeping? 
Will there be impacts on women’s 
opportunities to earn cash income? 
Does the project/subproject lessen 
constraints on women’s access to various 
resources? 
Does the project/subproject provide 
opportunities for women to build their 
capacities to access information and to make 
decisions? 
Social Protection 
How many workers (male/female) will be 
employed under the project/subproject? 
Will the enterprise chosen by the 
project/subproject hire workers (male/female) 
from the local community? 
If workers from outside are indispensable, 
how many will move to live in the 
community? 
If workers from outside are indispensable, 
will the community members be involved in 
deciding:  
  where they would live; 
  where they would be allowed to set 
their feet;  
  where they would obtain the 
resources needed for their everyday 
life (water, fuel, food); 
  how they would dispose of their 
waste; and, 
  how they communicate with the 
community members. 
Will the enterprise chosen by the 
project/subproject ensure that its contractor 
If  negative,  exclude  from 
financing. 
If  negative,  exclude  from 
financing. 
If  negative,  exclude  from 
financing. 
If  negative,  exclude  from 
financing. 
agree, monitor, and comply with the national 
and provincial labor policy and laws? 
Will the enterprise chosen by the 
project/subproject and its contractor establish 
a reliable two-way communication channel 
with the community members? 
Does the enterprise chosen by the 
project/subproject and its contractor have a 
policy on women’s rights and gender 
equality? 
If  negative,  exclude  from 
financing. 
Section D: Anticipated Project Impacts on Women and Social Protection 
Project Activity and Output 
Anticipated 
Positive Impact 
Anticipated 
Negative Impact 
1 
2.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
If negative, 
exclude from 
financing. 
Section D: Decision on Categorization and Required Actions (Please Tick) 
After reviewing the answer above, the three Project Management Units agree that the project: 
Should be categorized as a project/subproject with high negative impacts; it should not be financed as is. 
Should be categorized as a project/subproject with moderate negative impacts; a gender analysis, a gender 
action plan and a community participation plan are required. 
Should  be  categorized  as  a  project/subproject  with  little  or  no  negative  impact;  specific  actions  that 
empower women and other vulnerable groups and a community participation plan, are required. 
Project Team Comments:  
Proposed by Project Management Unit of the 
relevant Component: 
Reviewed by Project Consultant 
Project Director for the Component 
Social Safeguard Specialist, IFAD 
Date: 
Date: 
Reviewed  by  Project  Management  Unit  of 
another Component: 
Project Director for the Component 
Date: 
Reviewed by Project Management Unit of the 
other Component: 
Project Director for the Component 
Date: 
Annex J: Safeguards Procedures for Inclusion in the Technical Specifications of Contracts 
A. General 
1. The Contractor and his staff/employees shall adhere to the mitigation measures set down and take all 
other measures required by the Engineer to prevent harm, and to minimize the impact of his operations 
on the environment. 
2. The Contractor shall not be permitted to unnecessarily strip clear the right of way. The Contractor shall 
only clear the minimum width for construction and diversion roads should not be constructed alongside the 
existing road. 
3. Remedial measures which cannot be effectively carried out during construction should be carried out on 
completion of each section of the road (earthworks, pavement and drainage) and before issuance of the 
Handling Over Certificate: 
(a) these sections should be landscaped and any necessary remedial works should be undertaken 
without delay, including grassing and reforestation; 
(b) canal sections, water courses and fields should be cleared of excavated material and debris, and 
drains and culverts checked for clear flow paths; and 
(c) borrow pits should be dressed as fish ponds, or drained and made safe, as agreed with the land 
owner. 
4. The Contractor shall limit construction works to between 6 am and 7 pm if it is to be carried out in or 
near residential areas. 
5. The Contractor shall avoid the use of heavy or noisy equipment in specified areas at night, or in 
sensitive areas such as near a hospital. 
6. To prevent dust pollution during dry periods, the Contractor shall carry out regular water sprinkling of 
earth and gravel haul roads and shall cover material haulage trucks with tarpaulins to prevent spillage. 
7. The Contractor may arrange adequate sources of water, particularly in reaches of canal rehabilitation 
during canal closure. 
8. The Contractor should not block any route, particularly farm-to-market routes when farmers use them for 
their livelihoods. 
9. The Contractor should prepare a work plan to avoid disturbance to migratory birds and other wildlife. 
B. Transport 
1. 
The  Contractor  shall  use  selected  routes  to  the  project  site,  as  agreed  with  the  Engineer,  and 
appropriately sized vehicles suitable to the class of road, and shall restrict loads to prevent damage to roads 
and bridges used for transportation purposes. The Contractor shall be held responsible for any damage 
caused to the roads and bridges due to the transportation of excessive loads, and shall be required to repair 
such damage to the approval of the Engineer. 
2. The Contractor shall not use any vehicles, either on or off road with grossly excessive, exhaust or noise 
emissions. In any built up areas, noise mufflers shall be installed and maintained in good condition on all 
motorized equipment under the control of the Contractor. 
3. Adequate traffic control measures shall be maintained by the Contractor throughout the duration of the 
Contract and such measures shall be subject to prior approval of the Engineer. 
4. The Contractor shall use adequate traffic and work in progress signs to avoid any accident and mishap. 
5.  The  Contractor  shall  ensure  use  of  adequate  and  recommended fuel,  as  per  National Environmental 
Quality Standards. 
C. Workforce 
1. The Contractor shall recruit optimal local workforce, particularly unskilled labors, and shall provide 
appropriate trainings. 
2. The Contractor shall install and maintain a temporary septic tank system for any residential labor camp 
and without causing pollution of nearby canal system, watercourses and agricultural land. 
3.  The  Contractor  shall  establish  a  method  and  system  for  storing  and  disposing  of  all  solid  and  liquid 
wastes generated by the labor camp or base camp. The Contractor shall also provide separate containers 
for segregated waste collection and subsequent disposal. 
4. The Contractor shall not allow the use of fuel wood for cooking or heating in any labor camp or base 
camp and provide alternate facilities which use other fuels. 
5. The Contractor shall ensure that site offices, depots, concrete batching plants and workshops are 
located in appropriate areas as approved by the Engineer and not within 500 meters of existing 
residential settlements and not within 1,000 meters for concrete batching plants. 
6. The Contractor shall ensure that site offices, depots and particularly storage areas for diesel fuel and 
concrete batching plants are not located within 500 meters of canal systems and watercourses, and are 
operated in a way that no pollutants enter canals or watercourses, either overland or through groundwater 
seepage,  especially  during  periods  of  rain.  This  will  require  lubricants  to  be  recycled  and  a  ditch  to  be 
constructed around the area with an approved settling pond or oil trap at the outlet. 
7. The contractor shall not use fuel wood as a means of heating during the processing or preparation of 
any materials forming part of the works. 
D. Quarries and Borrow Pits 
1.  Operations  in  a  new  borrow  area,  on  land,  in  a  river,  or  in  an  existing  area,  shall  be  subject  to  prior 
approval of the Engineer, and the operation shall cease if so instructed by the Engineer. Borrow pits shall 
be  prohibited  where  they  might interfere  with  the  natural  or  designed  drainage  patterns.  River locations 
shall  be  prohibited  if  they  might  undermine  or  damage  the  river  banks,  or  carry  too  much  fine  material 
downstream. 
2. The Contractor shall ensure that all borrow pits used are left in a trim and tidy condition with stable side 
slopes, and are drained ensuring that no stagnant water bodies are created which could breed mosquitoes. 
3. Rock or gravel taken from a river shall be far enough removed to limit the depth of material removed to 
one-tenth  of  the  width  of  the  river  at  any  one  location,  and  not  to  disrupt  the  river  flow,  or  damage  or 
undermine the river banks. 
4.  The  location  of crushing  plants  shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  of the  Engineer,  and  not  be  close  to 
environmentally sensitive areas or to existing residential settlements, and shall be operated with approved 
fitted dust and noise control devices. 
E. Earthworks 
1. Earthworks shall be properly controlled, especially during the rainy season. 
2.  The  Contractor  shall  maintain  stable  cut  and  fill  slopes  at  all  times  and  cause  the  least  possible 
disturbance to areas outside the prescribed limits of the work. 
3. The Contractor shall complete cut and fill operations to final cross-sections at any one location as soon 
as possible and preferably in one continuous operation to avoid partially completed earthworks, particularly 
during the rainy season. 
4. In order to protect any cut or fill slopes from erosion, cut-off drains and toe drains shall be provided at 
the  top  and  bottom  of  slopes  and  be  planted  with  grass  or  other  plant  cover.  Cut-off  drains  should  be 
provided above high cuts to minimize water runoff and slope erosion. 
5. Any excavated cut or unsuitable material shall be disposed of in designated disposal areas as agreed 
by the Engineer. If the material is deemed rich in nutrients, farmers may apply it on the fields with proper 
instructions.  
6.  Tips  should  not  be  located  where  they  can  cause future  slides,  interfere  with  agricultural land  or  any 
other properties, or cause soil from the dump to be washed into any canal and watercourse. Drains may 
need to be dug within and around the tips, as directed by the Engineer. 
F. Disposal of Construction and Vehicle Waste 
1. Debris generated due to the dismantling of the existing structures shall be suitably reused, to the extent 
feasible, in the proposed construction (e.g., as fill material for embankments). The disposal of remaining 
debris  shall  be  carried  out  only  at  sites  identified  and approved  by  the  Engineer. The  contractor  should 
ensure that these sites (a) are not located within designated forest areas; (b) do not impact natural drainage 
courses; and (c) do not impact endangered/rare flora or fauna. Under no circumstances shall the contractor 
dispose of any material in environmentally sensitive areas. 
2.  In  the  event  any  debris  or  silt  from  the  sites  is  deposited  on  adjacent  land,  the  Contractor  shall 
immediately remove such, debris or silt and restore the affected area to its original state to the satisfaction 
of the Engineer. 
3.  Bentonite  slurry  or  similar  debris  generated  from  pile  driving  or  other  construction  activities  shall  be 
properly disposed of to avoid overflow into the surface water bodies or form mud puddles in the area. 
4. All arrangements for transportation during construction, including provision, maintenance, dismantling 
and clearing debris, will be considered incidental to the work and should be planned and implemented by 
the contractor as approved and directed by the Engineer. 
5. Operations, maintenance and refueling of vehicle, machinery and equipment shall be carried out to avoid 
spillage of fuels and lubricants. An “oil interceptor" will be provided for wash down and refueling areas. Fuel 
storage shall be located in adequate and approved areas. 
6.  All  spills  and  collected  petroleum  products  shall  be  disposed  of  in  accordance  with  standard 
environmental procedures/guidelines. Fuel storage and refilling areas shall be located at least 300 m from 
all cross drainage structures and important water bodies or as directed by the Engineer. 
G.HIV/AIDS and Education 
1. The Contractor shall ensure that detection screening of sexually transmitted diseases, especially with 
regard to HIV/AIDS, amongst laborers is actually carried out and will submit a certificate of compliance. 
2. The Contractor shall arrange awareness campaigns against HIV/AID and other contagious diseases. 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Project Number: I-837-PK
                        Project Title: Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project
Annex-I Detailed Annual Work Plan
Community Development
Fiscal Year:2013-14
Spent
(Cumulat
ive)
%
Spent
(Annual)
%
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Project Indicators
RIMS
Indicators
Timetable for
implementation
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
l
i
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
f
f
a
t
S
/
t
i
n
U
Implementation targets
Budget (PKR 000)
t
i
n
U
Appraisal
(Total)
Revised
(Total)
Planned
(Annual)
 Unit Cost (PKR) Achieved
(Cumulativ
e)
% Achieved
(Annual)
%
Appraisal (Total)
Revised
(Total)
Planned (Annual)
Budget
Category
Financiers
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(G.a)
(H)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
(O)
IFAD
Gov.
(P)
Benef
Project Goal is to develop a sustainable model of
decentralized and integrated rural development that
is poverty, gender, youth, nutrition and climate
change sensitive.
 C1: Community Development
Outcome 1: Improved capacities of ultra-poor and
poor men and women to move out of poverty
Percentage of
persons/households reporting
adoption of new/improved
inputs, technologies or practices
Output 1.1: Capacity Building for Community Development
Prepreation of UC development plan
Number of UC Development
Plans Developed
Training of village resource
persons
Adult Literacy and Numeracy
training
Training of Public Sector Staff for
UCDP
Activist Workshops
Number of rural HHs provided
with productive assets
Training of Asset Recipients
Establishment of Women
Resource Centers
No. of rural producers accessing
production inputs and/or
technological packages
no of persons/HH provided with
targeted support to improve
their nutrition
Number of persons trained in
income-generating activities or
business management
No of persons (youth) in rural
areas accessing financial services
Traiining of VO/CO Managers
Training of village resource persons
Adult Literacy and Numeracy training
Training of Public Sector Staff for UCDP
Activist Workshops
Output 1.2: Poverty Graduation
Training of Asset Recipients
Provision of assets to ulra poor households
Women Empowerment: Women Resource
Centres
Organize  skills and enterprise training and
start-up packages provided to poor
households (12-34)
 Organize training for Women
empowerment on nutrition, climate
change, food security and
entrepreneurship development facilitated
through awareness
Capacity Building - Provision of Tookits
Aforestation Campaign with Women
Kitchen Gardening - Nutrition support
Feasibility study for women enterprise
facility/processing unit
Establishment of Women Enterprise
facility/processing units
Facilitate sessions for skilled youth,
fishermen and smallholder farmers
provided with access to finance
Skills training at accredited institutions
Start up package for skilled youth
Climate resilient farming systems
Climate resilient livestock systems
Food Security/Nutrtion Initiatives -
Household Level
Nuttional package for ultra-poor/recipients
of assets
Output 1.3: Community Producttive
infrastrucuture and rural farm to market roads
Community prioritized infrastructure
# of drinking
water/irrigation/sanitation and
innovative schemes
Plantation linked to CPIs
Priority farm to market roads identified
and constructed
# of Km of roads constructed,
rehabilitated or upgraded
Design survey for roads
Plantation on roadside
Social Mobiliation Partner Selecton
Total Component Cost
PMU
70%
SMSP
Plan
45
SMSP
Persons
2000
SMSP
Persons
SMSP
Persons
SMSP
Persons
SMSP
SMSP
Workshop
130
250
50
50
SMSP
Persons
2000
SMSP
SMSP
HH
No.
2000
5
SMSP
Persons
400
SMSP
Women
400
SMSP
PMU
Plants
Households
Enterprise
4000
1000
1
SMSP
Enterprise
1
SMSP
Persons
SMSP
Persons
300
Persons
Persons
Persons
FAO
FAO
WFP
SMSP
150
3000
3000
1
2000
PMU
Schemes
80
Plants
Km
No.
Plants
PMU
SMSP
SMSP
PMU
500
20
5000
500
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70%
45
            318 570
                      14 336
                 14 336
85%
15%
                  -
2000
           3 716.65
                        7 433
                  7 433
130
              15 929
                        2 071
                  2 071
250
           2 123.80
                           531
                     531
50
50
              26 548
              10 619
                        1 327
                  1 327
                           531
                     531
                        -
2000
                2 124
                        4 248
                  4 248
2000
            106 190
                    212 380
               212 380
5
         1 592 850
                        7 964
                  7 964
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
400
                2 655
                        1 062
                  1 062
100%
%
                  -
                        -
400
                2 655
                        1 062
                  1 062
100%
0%
                  -
4000
1000
1
              530.95
           2 123.80
       530 950.00
                        2 124
                        2 124
                           531
                  2 124
                  2 124
                     531
1
     5 309 500.00
                        5 310
                  5 310
                        -
300
       159 285.00
                      47 786
                 47 786
150
3000
3000
         53 095.00
                5 155
                5 155
1
       28 351 125
                        7 964
                      15 464
                      15 464
                      28 351
                  7 964
                 15 464
                 15 464
                 28 351
2000
                3 690
                        7 380
                  7 380
                  -
                  -
                  -
10%
                  -
100%
100%
100%
75%
100%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
0%
0%
0%
15%
0%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
                        -
                        -
80
         1 500 000
                    120 000
               120 000
90%
10%
10%
500
20
                   500
       13 000 000
5000
                1 500
500
                5 000
1
       53 577 103
Page 1 of 6
                           250
                    260 000
                        7 500
                        2 500
                      53 577
                     250
               260 000
                  7 500
                  2 500
                 53 577
100%
85%
85%
85%
85%
15%
15%
15%
15%
                829 269                -
           829 269          -
     704 348        124 390              531
               Project Number: I-837-PK
               Project Title: Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project
Annex 1 - Detailed AWPB Table
Fisheries Development
Fiscal Year: 2013-14
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Timetable for implementation
Project Indicators
RIMS
Indicators
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
l
i
/
t
i
n
U
e
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
Implementation targets
Budget (PKR 000)
f
f
a
t
S
t
i
n
U
Appraisal
(Total)
Revised
(Total)
Planned
(Annual)
Unit Cost   (PKR)
Achieved
(Cumulative
)
%
Achieved
(Annual)
%
Appraisal (Total)
Revised (Total)
Planned (Annual)
Budget
Category
Financiers
IFAD
Gov.
Benef
Spent
(Cumulative)
%
Spent
(Annua
l)
%
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(G.a)
(H)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
(O)
(P)
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
(i) No of HHs/ persons reporting an
increase in production;(ii) No. of rural
producer organizations engaged in
formal partnerships/agreements or
Number of sites jetties and allied
infrastructure constructed; and, Fish
landing platforms provided
No of Cooperatives developed and
fishermen organized; and, Fishermen
capacity developed in improved
production/technologies
Number of Km of roads constructed,
rehabilitated or upgraded
(i) Number of persons/households
reporting using financial services
(ii) Number of persons reporting access
to e-commerce platforms
(i) Restocking hatcheries established
(ii) Net-Culture for fish production
introduced
(iii) Fisheries Deptt. Capacities
improved
(iv) Number of policy-related products
supported and adopted by GoB
Project Goal: The overall goal of the project is to
sustainably reduce poverty in the poorest region of
Balochistan. GLLSP-II specific development objective is to
address the socio-economic development lag of poorest
Union Councils and poor households in Gwadar and
Lasbela districts
C2
Component 2: Fisheries Development
Outcome 2: Smallholder farmers and fishermen benefit from
upgraded and inclusive value chain
Output 2.1. Jetties and allied infrastructure constructed/
rehabilitated/ upgraded  (Design Consulting Services - Jetties
and Alied Infrasturcture)
Design Consulting Services - Jetties and Allied
Infrastructure
TA for Jetties Management-PPP Model
Output 2.2: Fishermen Organized in Cooperatives, 4-P based
value chains developed and youth facilitated to develop
fisheries income streams
Output 2.3: Fish Market Acess Roads
Road Design Consultancy
Upgrading of Rural Roads
Plantation on Roadsides
Output 2.4: Capacity Building of Value Chain Actors
Value Chain Package (3 Sites): 4Ps model for
market access
Value Chain Package (8 Sites): 4Ps model for
market access
Value Chain Package (19 Sites): 4Ps model for
market access
Strengthening Fisheries Cooperatives:TA Support
for strategic and business planning for cooperatives
Training of Landing Sites Managers/Trainers
TA Support for Strategic and Business Planning for
the Management Support to Cooperatives
Management Support to Cooperatives /g
Outcome 4: Policy reform/dialogue, Communication and
Knowledge Sharing
Output 2.4. Strengtheing Department of Fisheries
TA Policy Reform Support
TA Fisheries Cooperative Law
TA for Inspection Manual
TA for Stock Assessment and Management Plans
Equipment for Fisheries Inpectors
Fisheries Control Center
Training of Fish Inspectors
Training in Sustainable Management
Output 2.5.1. Support to Training Center Sub Bandar
TA for design of post harvent curricula
TA for SoPs for Laboratory
Output 2.5.2. Inovative Aquaculture
Hatcheries for Stocking
Commercial Net Culture
Output 2.5.3. Strengthening Fisheries Department
Total Cost Component 2:
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
Sites
FD/PMU
P/Month
1
36
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
Lumpsum
FD/PMU
Sites
FD/PMU
Sites
FD/PMU
P/Month
FD/PMU
p/days
FD/PMU Cooperative
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
FD/PMU
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Months
Months
Kit
No
Months
Months
Months
Months
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
20
20
5000
3
8
19
8
15
8
12
1
1
6
3
30
5
3
5
3
1
-
-
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
                      -
                       -
                       -
1
                     7 000
                 7 000
                 7 000
36
                        350
               12 600
               12 600
85%
75%
15%
15%
10%
20
20
5000
                        398
                   13 000
                            1
                 7 964
             260 000
                 2 655
                       -
                       -
                 7 964
              260 000
                 2 655
                       -
3
8
19
                   47 786
             143 357
              143 357
                   23 362
             186 894
              186 894
                      -
                       -
                       -
                       -
8
                        372
                 2 973
                 2 973
12
                        191
                 2 294
                 2 294
1
1
6
3
30
5
3
5
3
1
                   18 052
                   19 114
                     2 400
                     1 200
                        319
                     1 274
                     1 416
                        106
                        372
                        319
                      -
               18 052
               19 114
               14 400
                 3 600
                 9 557
                 6 371
                 4 248
                    531
                 1 115
                    319
                       -
                       -
               18 052
               19 114
               14 400
                 3 600
                 9 557
                 6 371
                 4 248
                    531
                       -
                 1 115
                    319
                       -
                       -
                       -
             123 181
              123 181
85%
85%
100%
75%
75%
75%
75%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
75%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
100%
30%
Page 2 of 6
             826 225
                    -
              826 225             -
         579 110         247 114.73       1 260
      1 424 914              377 833       1 791
Project Number:I-837-PK
             Project Title: Gwadar-Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project
Annex 1 - Detailed AWPB Table 2013-14
Project Management Unit
Fiscal Year: 2013-14
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
#
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Project
Indicators
RIMS
Indicators
Timetable for
implementation
Q1
Q2
Q3
l
i
b
s
n
o
p
s
e
Q4 R
/
t
i
n
U
e
f
f
a
t
S
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
t
i
n
U
(F)
Implementation targets
Appraisal
(Total)
Revised
(Total)
Planned
(Annual) Unit Cost (PKR)
Achieved
(Cumulativ
e)
Achiev
ed
(Annual)
%
%
Appraisal (Total)
Revised (Total)
Planned
(Annual)
(G)
(G.a)
(H)
(H.a)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(M.a)
(N)
Budget (PKR 000)
Budget
Categor
y
(O)
Financiers
IFAD
Gov.
Ben
ef
Spent
(Cumulati
ve)
Spent
(Annual)
%
%
Project Goal: The overall goal of the project is to sustainably
reduce poverty in the poorest region of Balochistan. GLLSP-II
specific development objective is to address the socio-
economic development lag of poorest Union Councils and
poor households in Gwadar and Lasbela districts
C3 Component 3: Project Management (a PMU and 2 PIUs)
A
1 Investment Cost.
Vehicles
Motorcycles
2 Computer /Laptop IT Equipment, Furniture for PMU
3. Knowledge Management and Communication
Staff Trainings
District Workshops
4 Evaluation/Studies
Case Studies
5 Software
MIS and M&E Portal
Accounting Software
6
TA for CDD Institutionalization
Consultative Workshops
B
C
Project Implementation Unit - Lasbella
Vehicles for PIU
Motorcycles
Computer /Laptop IT Equipment, Furniture and
Equipments for Lasbella District Office
Project Implementation Unit - Gwadar
Vehicles for PIU
Motorcycles
Computer /Laptop IT Equipment, Furniture and
Equipments for Gwadar District Office
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Project Management Unit
a. Professional Staff at PMU Level
b. Support Staff at PMU Level
2. Operating Cost - PMU
a. Professional Staff for Gwadar District Office
b. Support Staff for Gwadar District Office
2. Operating Cost - PIU Gwadar
a. Professional Staff for Lasbella District Office
b. Support Staff for Lasbella District Office
2. Operating Cost - PIU Lasbella
D. Planning and Development Department
F Strenghthening Fisheries Department
GRAND TOTAL
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
Lumsu
m
Lumsu
Lumsu
PMU P/Month
Lumpsu
m
PMU
PIU
PIU
No.
No.
PMU
No.
PIU
PIU
No.
No.
PMU
No.
Person-
Months
Person-
Months
PMU
PMU Month
Person-
Months
PIU
Person-
Month
PIU
Month
PIU
PIU Persons
Person-
Month
PIU
PIU
Month
PMU
LS
3
2
1
30
36
3
1
1
6
3
2
2
1
2
2
1
7
6
1
5
6
12
5
6
12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
2
1
30
36
3
1
1
6
3
2
2
1
2
2
1
7
6
1
5
6
12
5
6
12
12
6 500 000
90 000
4 282 000
13 333
33 333
133 333
3 000 000
5 000 000
500 000
250 000
6 500 000
90 000
3 350 000
6 500 000
90 000
3 350 000
18 504 000
3 900 000
12 476 127
8 640 000
2 100 000
6 086 000
8 640 000
2 100 000
6 086 000
2 151 420
6 327 705
(P)
(Q)
(R)
(S)
(T)
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
100%
147 783
   141 456       6 328
                           -
19 500
180
                       -
                       -
19 500
180
4 282
400
1 200
400
3 000
5 000
3 000
750
13 000
180
3 350
13 000
180
3 350
18 504
3 900
12 476
8 640
2 100
6 086
8 640
2 100
6 086
2 151
6 328
147 783
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4 282
0
400
1 200
0
400
0
3 000
5 000
3 000
750
0
13 000
180
3 350
0
13 000
180
3 350
0
0
18 504
3 900
12 476
8 640
2 100
6 086
8 640
2 100
6 086
2 151
6 328
Note:   The Vehicles and Equipments against which the Planned Column is given nil/zero, have already been purchased by the Govt: of Balochistan through Bridge Financing.
4
                 Project Number: I-837-PK
                 Project Title: Gwadar Lasbella Livelihoods Support Project
PART II - Summary AWPB Table
Fiscal Year:  2013-14
#
s
t
l
u
s
e
R
Objectives/Expected Results
Indicators
Implementation targets
Budget (Rs. 000)
Project Indicator
RIMS indicator Approved (total)
Revised
(total)
Planned
(annual)
Achieved
(cumulative)*
%
Achieved
(annual)*
%
Initial (total)
Revised
(total)
Planned
(annual)
Spent
(cumulative)*
%
Spent
(annual)*
%
Project Goal: To contribute to the reduction of poverty in Gwadar and Lasbela, by
enhancing the access of the poor rural men and women to productive assets, skills,
services and technologies for productivity enhancement
C1
SC
Component 1: Community Development
Sub-Component 1.1: Investment Cost
Output 1.1: Capacity Building for Community Development
Output 1.2: Poverty Graduation
Training conducted
Asset and trining conducted
Output 1.3: Community Producttive infrastrucuture and rural farm to market roads
CPIs and roads constructed
Sub-total
SC
Sub-Component 1.2: Recurring Costs
SC1.2 Social Mobiliation Partner Selecton
Sub-total
Total Component 1
C2
Component 2 - Fisheries Development
SC 2.1 Sub-Component 2.1: Investment Costs
SMP
Output 2.1. Jetties and allied infrastructure constructed/ rehabilitated/ upgraded
(Design Consulting Services - Jetties and Alied Infrasturcture)
Jetties and Allied
Infrastructure constructed
Output 2.3: Fish Market Acess Roads
Output 2.4: Capacity Building of Value Chain Actors
Output 2.4. Strengtheing Department of Fisheries
Roads built
4Ps developed
Capacity built
Sub-total
C3
Sub-Component 2.2: Recurring Costs
Sub-total
C3
SC 4.1 Investment Costs
Component 4: Project Management
Vehicles and Equipments
Trainings
Vehicles & equipment
purchased
Trainings imparted
Strenghthening Fisheries Department
Line departments supported
Sub-total
Recurring Costs
A. Project Management Unit
Project Implementation Unit (Gwadar and Lasbell)
Sub-total
Total Component 4
Grand Total
PMU made functional
SPMUs made functional
                   26 229           26 229            26 229
                 359 213         359 213          359 213
                 390 250         390 250          390 250
                  775 692          775 692           775 692
                    53 577            53 577             53 577
                    53 577            53 577             53 577
                  829 269          829 269           829 269
                    19 600            19 600             19 600
                  270 619          270 619           270 619
                  335 518          335 518           335 518
                  200 488          200 488           200 488
                  826 225          826 225           826 225
                  826 225          826 225           826 225
                    57 022            57 022             57 022
                    13 750            13 750             13 750
                      6 328              6 328               6 328
                    77 100            77 100             77 100
                    37 032            37 032             37 032
                    33 652            33 652             33 652
                    70 684            70 684             70 684
                  147 783          147 783           147 783
               1 803 277       1 803 277        1 803 277
Page 5 of 6
 I. Investment Costs
A. Civil Works/ Community Infrastructures
B. Vehicles
C. Computer and Equipment
D. Technical Assistance, Trainings and Studies
E. Grants and Subsidies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and Allowances
B. Operating Costs
Total Recurrent Costs
Amount - Rs. 000
665 005
59 845
136 286
236 056
575 497
1 672 688
43 884
86 704
130 588
1 803 277
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Country: 
Project Name:   GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT (GLLSP-II) 
PAKISTAN 
18 MONTHS PROCUREMENT PLAN FOR GOODS & NON-CONSULTING SERVICES (2020-21) 
Loan # 
BASIC DATA 
S/N 
Description 
Lot 
No(s) 
Issue # of 
Invitation for Bids 
Unit 
Quantity 
 Estimated Total 
Amount in PKR  
 Estimated Total 
Amount in US$* 
@  
Procurement 
Method 
Pre- or Post-
review 
Component 1 - Community Development 
1 
Provision of Assets 
-  Goods/CPP/2020/  Set/Unit 
3750 
421,218,500  
2,632,616  
Community 
Participation and 
Procurement ** 
Post-review 
2 
Capacity Building Toolkit 
-  Goods/NS/2020/ 
Set/Unit 
900 
2,553,500  
15,959  
NS 
Post-review 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Capacity Building - Provision 
of Toolkits 
Afforestation Campaigns with 
Women  
Kitchen Gardening-Nutrition 
Support 
Establishment of Women 
Enterprise Facility/Processing 
Unit 
-  Goods/NS/2020/ 
Set/Unit 
900 
2,553,500  
15,959  
NS 
Post-review 
-  Goods/NCB/2020/  Set/Unit 
9000 
5,107,000  
31,919  
NCB 
Pre-review 
-  Goods/NCB/2020/  Set/Unit 
2000 
4,510,500  
28,191  
NCB 
Pre-review 
-  Goods/NCB/2020/  Set/Unit 
1000 
5,310,000  
33,188  
NCB 
Pre-review 
7 
Plantation on Roadsides 
-  Goods/CPP/2020/  Set/Unit 
25000 
712,500  
4,453  
8 
Plantation  Linked to CPIs  
-  Goods/CPP/2020/  Set/Unit 
1425 
487,500  
3,047  
Community 
Procurement 
Procedures 
Community 
Procurement 
Procedures 
Post-review 
Post-review 
9 
Nutrition Support to Asset 
Recipient  
-  Goods/NCB/2020/  Set/Unit 
3750 
14,637,000  
91,481  
NCB 
Pre-review 
Sub-Total    
Component 2 - Fisheries Development  
457,090,000  
2,856,813  
10 
Procurement of Vehicles 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
11 
Procurement of Draggers  
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
2 
2 
13,805,000  
86,281  
NCB 
Pre-review 
106,190,000  
663,688  
NCB 
Pre-review 
12 
Office Equipment 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/  Set/Unit  Various 
3,186,000  
19,913  
NCB 
Pre-review 
13 
Plantation on Roadsides 
-  Goods/CPP/2020/ 
No 
10000 
5,638,500  
35,241  
Community 
Procurement 
Procedures 
Post-review 
14 
Equipment for Fisheries 
Inspectors 
-  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Kits 
30 
9,557,000  
59,731  
NCB 
Pre-review 
15 
Commercial Net Culture 
various Goods/NS/2020/ 
Kits 
Various 
2,386,500  
14,916  
NS 
Pre-review 
16 
Hatcheries for Stocking 
various Goods/NS/2020/ 
Kits 
Various 
1,193,400  
7,459  
NS 
Pre-review 
15 
Value Chain Package (11 
Sits) 4Ps Model for market 
Access  
Sub-Total    
Component 3 - Project Management 
16 
17 
Procurement of 4x4 
Vehicles 
Procurement of 
Motorcycles 
-  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
Various 
128,105,067  
800,657  
NCB 
Pre-review 
270,061,467  
1,687,884  
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
7 
45,500,000  
284,375  
NCB 
Pre-review 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
14 
1,260,000  
7,875  
NCB 
Pre-review 
18 
Procurement of Furniture & 
Fixture (PMU & 2PIUs) 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Unit 
various 
3,000,000  
18,750  
NCB 
Pre-review 
19 
20 
Procurement of 
Computer/Laptop & IT 
related equipment (PMU, 
2PIUs) 
Procurement of Office 
equipment (ACs & Gen. 
Refreg. etc.) (1PMU & 
2PIUs) 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Set 
various 
3,300,000  
20,625  
NCB 
Pre-review 
1  Goods/NCB/2020/ 
Set 
various 
4,682,000  
29,263  
NCB 
Pre-review 
21 
Procurement of Accounting 
Software (Tompro)  
1  Goods/SSS/2020/ 
Each 
1 
5,000,000  
31,250  
SSS 
Pre-review 
22 
Development of 
Project MIS & M&E 
Portal 
Sub-Total  
Grand Total  
Country: 
PAKISTAN 
1  Goods/NS/2020/ 
Unit 
1 
3,000,000  
18,750  
NS 
Post-review 
65,742,000  
410,888  
792,893,467  
4,955,584  
Project Name:   GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT (GLLSP-II) 
18 MONTHS PROCUREMENT PLAN FOR WORKS (2020-21) 
Loan # 
Basic Data 
S/N 
Description 
Lot 
Number 
Issue # of 
invitation for 
bids 
Lumpsum 
or bill of 
quantities 
Procurement 
Method 
Estimated 
Amount in PKR 
Pre or post 
qualifications 
Pre or post 
review 
Estimated 
Amount in 
USD * 
@160 
Component 1 - Community 
Development 
Design & Construction 
of 20KM Roads 
60 
Community Physical 
Infrastructures 80 
units** 
380 
1 
2 
Works/NCB/2020 
 BoQs  
 NCB  
520,000,000  
3,250,000  
 Pre  
Pre-review 
Works/CPP/2020 
 BoQs  
 Community 
Participation 
and 
Procurement  
345,000,000  
2,156,250  
 Post  
Post 
Sub-Total  
Component 2 - Fisheries Development 
   865,000,000     5,406,250  
3 
4 
5 
6 
Design & Construction 
of 20KM Roads 
Civil Works - 
Construction of Jetty 
Infrastructure 
(Onshore) 
Hatcheries for 
Stocking 
Value Chain Package 
(11 Sits) 4Ps Model 
for market Access  
20 
1 
Various 
Various 
Sub-Total  
Grand Total 
Works/NCB/2020 
 BoQs  
 NCB  
260,000,000  
1,625,000  
 Pre  
Pre-review 
Works/NCB/2020 
 BoQs  
 NCB  
240,000,000  
1,500,000  
 Pre  
Pre-review 
Works/NCB/2020 
 BoQs  
 NCB  
4,773,600  
29,835  
 Pre  
Pre-review 
Works/NCB/2020 
 BoQs  
 NCB  
320,262,669  
2,001,642  
 Pre  
Pre-review 
   825,036,269     5,156,477  
1,690,036,269   10,562,727  
Country: 
Project Name:   GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT (GLLSP-II) 
PAKISTAN 
18 MONTHS PROCUREMENT PLAN FOR SERVICES (2020-21) 
Loan # 
S/N 
Description 
Issue # of Invitation for 
Bids 
Selection 
Method 
Lump-
sum or 
Time-
based 
 Estimated Total 
Amount in PKR  
 Estimated 
Total Amount 
in US$* @ 
$160  
Pre- or 
Post-
review 
Component 1 - Community Development  
1 
Social Mobilization Service Provider** 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QBS 
2 
Road Design Consultancy Firms 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
3 
Union Council Development Planning  
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
3 
Feasibility Study for Women Enterprise 
Facility Processing Unit 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
ICS 
4 
Accredited Training for Youth Employment 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QBS 
5 
Start-up package for Youth Employment 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
118,790,120  
742,438  
15,000,000  
93,750  
14,336,000  
89,600  
531,000  
3,319  
47,786,000  
298,663  
7,964,000  
49,775  
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Sub-Total  
Component 2 - Fisheries Development  
  204,407,120      1,277,545               -    
6 
Design Consulting Services - Jetties & 
Allied Infrastructure 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
7 
TA for Jetties Management - PPP Model 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
8 
TA Support for Strategic and Business 
Planning for Cooperatives 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
CQS 
9 
Road Design Consultancy Firms 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
10 
TA Policy Reform Support 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
11 
TA for Fisheries Cooperative Law 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
12 
TA for Inspection Manual  
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
13 
TA for Stock Assessment and Management 
Plans 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
CQS 
14 
Fisheries Control Center 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
14,000,000  
87,500  
18,900,000  
118,125  
2,973,000  
18,581  
12,439,000  
77,744  
28,195,500  
176,222  
29,854,500  
186,591  
14,400,000  
90,000  
3,600,000  
22,500  
9,951,000  
62,194  
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
15 
Training of Fish Inspectors 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
CQS 
16 
Training in Sustainable Management  
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
ICS 
17 
TA for Design of Post Harvest Curricula 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
ICS 
18 
TA for SoPs for Laboratory 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
ICS 
Value Chain Package (3 Sits) 4Ps 
Model for market Access  
19 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
ICS 
Sub-Total  
Component 3 - Project Management  
20 
Baseline Survey 
GLLSP-II/2020/Service/ 
QCBS 
Sub-Total  
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
Lump-
sum 
6,634,500  
41,466  
531,000  
3,319  
1,741,500  
10,884  
319,000  
1,994  
192,157,601  
1,200,985  
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
Prior-
review 
  335,696,601      2,098,104               -    
3,000,000  
18,750  
Prior-
review 
3,000,000  
18,750  
            -    
543,103,721  
3,394,398  
USD Conversion Rate is 1 USD = PKR 160 
Community Participation and Procurement (CPP) 
* 
** 
***  SMSP - Social Mobilization Service Provider (NGO) 
Summary of Procurement Plan for First 18 months (2020-21) 
 Categories  
 Goods  
 Works  
 Services  
 Grand Total   
 PKR  
 USD  
          792,893,467  
       1,690,036,269  
          543,103,721  
    3,026,033,457  
            4,955,584  
           10,562,727  
            3,394,398  
        18,912,709  
 Categories  
 Goods  
 Works  
 Services  
 Total  
 Grand Total  
 Comp1  
 Comp2  
          457,090,000  
          865,000,000  
          204,407,120  
    1,526,497,120  
    3,026,033,457  
         270,061,467  
         825,036,269  
         335,696,601  
   1,430,794,337  
 Comp3  
        65,742,000  
          3,000,000  
     68,742,000  
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Project Implementation Manual 
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
A. 
INTRODUCTION 
B.  SECTION: I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECT 
1.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
C.  SECTION II: INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS: 
2.  PROJECT STEERING COMMITTEE (PSC) 
D.  SECTION: III PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 
E.  SECTION: IV  HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
F.  SECTION V: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
1.  COUNTRY AND PROJECT FIDUCIARY RISKS 
INTRODUCTION TO PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT 
G.  SECTION: VI PROCUREMENT 
1. 
2.  PROCUREMENT MONITORING SYSTEM 
3.  PROCUREMENT CYCLE 
4.  CONSULTING SERVICES 
5.  COMMUNITY PROCUREMENT: 
6.  GENERAL PROCUREMENT 
7.  TYPES OF CONTRACTS 
8.  FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS 
9.  CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION: 
5 
5 
5 
7 
7 
14 
20 
22 
22 
27 
27 
32 
32 
41 
42 
45 
51 
52 
53 
3 
A. 
INTRODUCTION 
Purpose of the PIM.  Purpose of the PIM is to provide a comprehensive guideline 
for  the  project  implementers  of  GLLSP-II  at  all  levels  for  effective  and  efficient 
management and implementation of the project. 
Instructions  for  Users.  The  users  of  this  PIM  must  recognize  that  participatory 
development  project  has  a  bottom  up  flexible  approach  whereby  they  have  to 
constantly  adjust  the  approach  and  interventions  to  the  evolving  implementation 
environment and knowledge gained. This PIM provides an initial guideline based on 
project design that would require updating and revision as the project progresses. 
However, such updating and revisions would stay within the parameters set by the 
financing agreement with IFAD and overall project objectives and target groups. 
Structures  of  the  Manual.  This  manual  has  six  (6)  sections  that  provide  handy 
guidance on applying the concepts covered in the manual. 
An Overview of the Project  
Institutional and Implementation Arrangement/Role of PMU 
Planning, M&E, SM, SO, VO 
 Section: 1 
 Section: 2 
 Section: 3  
 Section: 4   Human Resource Management  
 Section: 5  
 Section: 6  
Financial Management  
Procurement Management 
B.  SECTION: I:  AN OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECT 
1.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Project  Goal  is  to  develop  a  sustainable  model  of  decentralized  and  integrated 
rural  development  that  is  poverty,  gender,  youth,  nutrition  and  climate  change 
sensitive.    
Project  Development  Objective  is  to  sustainably  increase  the  incomes  and 
enhance the livelihoods of the rural poor fishermen’s and agricultural households in 
the project area.  
Project Coverage and Duration:  Project will cover the two districts i.e. Gwadar 
and Lasbela Districts in Balochistan directly benefitting around 100,000 households 
out of total 133,087 households and will be implemented over a period of six-year 
(2020-2025).  Project will cover all 400 villages in 45 Union Councils in Gwadar and 
Lasbela districts.  
Target Groups:  The primary target groups for the project are the ultra-poor and 
poor  (0-34)  rural  households  of  the  two  districts  (Gwadar  and  Lasbela)  of 
Balochistan province. Around 100,000 poor households (PSC 0-34) among farming, 
non-farming  and  fishing  communities  would  benefit  from  a  range  of interventions 
that helps them  graduate to enhanced levels  of economic  well-being. Women and 
male and female youth will be particularly targeted and around 12,000 women and 
4,300  youth  will  be  provided  remunerative  skills  and  enterprise  development 
besides 8,500 household directly receiving a productive asset. The recipient of the 
asset will also benefit from nutrition interventions. Each of 400 villages will benefit 
from  at  least  2  community  infrastructure  investments  improving  the  socio-
economic  conditions  of  the  inhabitants  –  benefiting  about  72,000  persons.  Small 
fishermen  at  eight  notified  landing  sites  and  32  other  landing  sites  will  be 
organized  into  cooperatives  to  be  an  active  partner  in  development  of  fisheries 
value  chain  and  operation  of  landing  sites  infrastructure  –  benefiting  50,000 
fishermen.  
Components/outcomes  and  activities:  The  project  consists  of  the  following 
components: 
5 
Component 1: Community Development (US$ 29.037 million): The objective 
of  the  component  is  to  enable  the  rural  poor  men,  women  and  youth  poor  to 
improve  their  livelihoods.  GLLSP-II,  through  comprehensive  Union  Council 
Development  Plans,  and  leveraging  existing  social  capital1  and  capacities  built 
under GLLSP-I, will deliver a comprehensive package of public and private goods in 
all 400 villages. Except for large infrastructure, all other community and household 
level interventions will be identified, prioritized and implemented through COs/VOs. 
The  component  will  be  implemented  by  the  social  mobilization  partner  in 
collaboration  with  PMU,  relevant  line  departments,  FAO  and  WFP.  A  detailed 
community  interaction  strategy,  developed  as  part  of  PIM,  shall  guide  the 
implementation of activities. The component consists of three sub-components:  
  Social  Mobilization  and  Community  Empowerment  sub  component:  Will 
prepare and facilitate the transition of the institutionalization of the CDD approach 
with the ongoing Balochistan decentralization context.  
  Union  Council  Development  Plans:  A  bottom-up  development  planning  and 
need identification process will be extended to the project area. CO level plans will 
be  feed  into  VO  Plans  that  would  be  further  consolidated  into  Union  Council 
Development  Plans  with  a  five-year  perspective.  Standard  formats  will  be 
developed  by  SMP  for  the  plan.  Plans  for  all  45  Union  councils  will  be  completed 
during the project year 1.  
  Capacity  Building  at  3-Tiers:  Existing  COs/VOs  will  be  restructured  and 
strengthened  to  ensure  full  membership  of  all  poor  households.  In  principle,  one 
larger  COs  will  be  promoted  in  each  village  for  a  more  holistic  understanding  of 
village development needs and priorities.  
  Social  Mobilization  Partner:  A  social  mobilization  partner  will  be  selected 
through  competitive  process.  SMP  will  be  paid  on  output  basis  an  agreed 
percentage of investment cost as per the norm under GLLSP-I.  
  1.2  Economic  Graduation  of  the  ultra-poor,  Women  &  Youth  sub 
component:  The  subcomponent  will  support  ultra-poor  and  poor  households, 
women  and youth increase  their  incomes. Selection  of target  beneficiaries  will  be 
through  BISP  Poverty  Score  Card.    Productive  Assets  for  Ultra-poor:  The 
interventions  will  cover  all  remaining  0-11  PSC  hhs  (around  8,500),  who  will  be 
provided  training  and  suitable  productive  assets  to  graduate  to  next  level  of 
economic  well-being. 70 per cent of productive assets will be provided to women. 
Women  Empowerment:  Women  empowerment  will  be  pursued  both  through 
community organizational processes and specific targeted interventions. At least 50 
percent  membership  for  women  in  COs/VOs  will  be  ensured.  Women  Resource 
Centers:  45  centers,  at  least  one  per  Union  Council,  will  be  established  in  very 
poor  villages that have no public building or suitable private dwelling for women’s 
joint activities. Youth Job Market Readiness: Two sets of trainings for youth will 
be  focused  –  one  for  youth  with  required  educational  qualifications  and  one  for 
those  without.  Collaboration  with  FAO  and  WFP  on  Nutrition  and  climate 
Change  Resilience:  Technical  Assistance  support  will  be  provided  by  FAO  and 
WFP,  through  IFAD  Grant  funding  and  own  sources,  for  improved  nutrition  at 
household level and on-farm climate change resilience respectively.  
  1.3  Social  and  Economic  Infrastructures  sub-component:  Community 
Physical Infrastructure. Community and UC Plans prepared under GLLSP-I show 
an  immediate  need  of  around  800  priority  community  infrastructure  schemes. 
Rural  Farm  to  Market  Roads.  Main  agriculture  production  areas  will  be 
connected with national trunk road network and new road network being developed 
through CPEC/BRI through 80 km black top roads.  
1 consisting of 3,545 COs (1,831 female and 270 mixed), 547 VOs and 37 LSOs with a membership of 53,363 
households (around 50% of total households) 
6 
  Component  2:  Fisheries  Value  Chain  Development  (US$  39.862  million): 
This  component  includes three  sub-components:  (2.1)  Establishing  4Ps;  (2.2) 
Economic Infrastructure for  Fishery Development; and (2.3) Capacity building and 
institutional  strengthening.  A  total  of  50,000  households  will  be  directly  reached 
through this component. 2,300 poor young women and men will be also supported 
to  become  entrepreneurs/staff  responding  to  demand  for  products  or  services 
generated  by  the  4Ps.  This  component  will  cover  the  overall  700  km  of  coast  in 
Gwadar and Lasbela districts and all 40 current fishing landing sites. 
  Sub-component  1.1  -  Establishing  4Ps: the  programme  will  support  the 
establishment  of  market-driven  4Ps  between  Organized  Fishermen  (1  cooperative 
per  landing  site/40  cooperatives  established  or  revamped  by  the  end  of  the 
project), existing fishery processing factories (200 factories are currently operating 
within these  40 sites), Middlemen (as  a market agent in a first phase), banks  (to 
initiate a first relation between fishermen and the formal banking system through 
only  deposit,  saving  account  and  mobile  transfer)  and  the  GoB  through  GLLSP-II 
project. 
  Sub-component  2.2, Economic  Infrastructure  for  Value  Chain  Fishery 
Development: the project will finance enabling infrastructure development for the 
Baluchistan Value chain Development through:  Construction  of Jetties  and Allied 
Infrastructure  on  the 3  priority  sites;  Fish  Market  Access  Roads:    development  of 
80  km  of  black  top  road  links  from  landing  site  to  nearest  factory  and/or  trunk 
roads  to  facilitate safe  and time-efficient  transport  of the catch;  and,  Cooperative 
Landing Site Platforms: These platforms will be supported at 8 landing sites with no 
jetty  to  ensure  efficient  cleaning,  grading,  weighing  and  transportation  to  the 
factory.  
  2.3.  Capacity  building  and  institutional  strengthening.  The  department  of 
fisheries  will  be  provided  support  to  formulate  a  comprehensive  sustainable 
fisheries  management  policy  for  the  province  and  develop  and  approve  a  new 
fisheries  cooperative  law  covering  all  the  landing  sites  in  Gwadar  and  Lasbela. 
Hatcheries  and  Innovative  Aquaculture.  The  project  will  support  the 
establishment  of  8 hatcheries  along the  coastline  to  run  on  a  commercially viable 
pattern. In addition, private sector  will be assessed to start net culture. A total of 
80 net culture practices will be supported during the project implementation. 
  Component  3:  Project  Management  and  Policy  Support  (US$  3.739 
million):  Project  Management  Unit:  The  project  Management  Unit  will  be 
established in Quetta and will be responsible to implement, manage and coordinate 
all  daily  project  activities.  Two  sub  offices  will  be  set  up,  one  in  Lasbela,  one  in 
Gwardar.  
  Policy Support and Advocacy:  Part of IFAD grant will be utilized to support the 
provincial  government  on  policy  aspects  related  to  project  key  components  and 
mainstreaming priorities. 
C. 
SECTION II:  INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS: 
2.  PROJECT STEERING COMMITTEE (PSC) 
  Given the multi  sectoral  nature  of the  project, it  will  be  placed in the  P&DD, GoB 
which  will  be  main  lead  implementing  agency  for  GLLSP-II.  The  policy  level 
guidance,  coordination  and  oversight  will  be  provided  by  a  Project  Steering 
Committee  (PSC).  The  PSC  will  grant  approval  of  AWPBs,  PPs,  conduct  regular 
progress  reviews  and  take  corrective  actions  where  warranted.  PSC  will  have 
following composition and will be formally notified prior to start of the project: 
i.  Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Development 
ii.  Secretary Planning and Development Department  
(Chairman) 
 (Member) 
7 
iii.  Secretary Implementation Department  
iv.  Secretary Finance Department 
v.  Secretary Fisheries Department 
vi.  Secretary C&W Department   
vii.  Secretary Agriculture and Livestock Department   
viii.  Chief of Section (AID) 
 (Member) 
ix.  Project Director (GLLSP-II)   
(Member) 
(Member) 
(Member) 
(Member) 
(Member) 
(Secretary) 
  ToRs:  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC): PSC  will  convene  every  year  (more 
often  if  necessary)  on  the  basis  of  agenda  prepared  by  PMU.  The  specific 
responsibilities of the PSC include: 
a.  Provide  overall  guidance  and  oversight  in  order  GLLSP-II  reach  its  development 
objective in line with the financing agreement.   
b.  Approval of Annual Work Plans and Budgets and Procurement Plan.  
c.  Make all pertinent policy decision relevant to the project and in line with financing 
agreement.  
d.  Approve the PIM as a guideline for project implementation. 
e.  Ensuring  timely  provision  of  counterpart  funds,  in  line  with  Project  needs  as 
defined in the annual work plans and budgets approved by the PSC.  
  Project  Management  Unit:  A  fully  autonomous  PMU  for  GLLSP-II  will  be 
established  and  will  be  responsible  for  all  aspects  including  operations,  finance, 
procurement,  human  resource,  M&E  related  to  the  implantation  of  the  project, 
based  in  Quetta.  The  PMU  will  be  administratively  linked  to  P&D  Department  but 
accountable  for  its  work  and  performance  to  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC). 
Following are the major responsibilities of PMU;   
i.  Project  planning, 
implementation,  monitoring  and  coordination  with 
the 
participation of all implementing partners and stakeholders 
ii.  Preparation  of  the  consolidated  AWPB  and  the  associated  procurement  plan  (PP); 
once  the  AWPB  and  PP  is  approved  by  PSC  and  cleared  by  IFAD,  the  PMU  will 
ensure its efficient implementation. 
iii.  Quarterly and monthly plans for project implementation 
iv.  Carry  out  financial,  accounting,  procurement  and  administrative  management, 
including for activities carried out by service providers and public agencies. 
v.  Procurements  and  contract  management  including  bulking  of  all  common 
equipment vehicles etc. for procurement in an efficient manner 
vi.  Development  of  comprehensive  M&E  Plan  and  conduct  of  monitoring  and 
evaluation activities including impact assessments. 
vii.  Preparation of detailed quarterly and annual physical and financial progress reports 
for submission to Government and IFAD as per prescribed timelines 
viii.  PMU  staff  and  partner  implementing  agencies  staff  capacity  building  training  in 
project approach, processes and outputs and outcomes 
ix.  Promotion  and  development  of  team  building  among  all  partners  and  ensuring 
discipline within PMU and among implementing partners 
x.  Establishing  systems  for  transparent  operations,  prevention  of  corruption  and 
achieving value for money through efficiencies and competitiveness  
xi.  Preparation  of  the  Project’s  communication  strategy  and  dissemination  of 
information  about  the  project  rationale,  concept  and  detailed  content  to  the 
stakeholders and all interested parties. 
xii.  Establishment  and  maintenance  of  linkages  with  government  departments  and 
agencies, donors, private sector partner organizations, social mobilization partners, 
and the community organizations. 
xiii.  Operation  of  the  management  information/reporting  systems  and  the  results 
monitoring framework, and regular reporting to the development partners. 
8 
  PMU Structure and Staffing Positions: PMU will be headed by a Project Director, 
selected  from  Provincial  Management  Service  or  Pakistan  Administrative  Service 
based  on  seniority,  qualifications  and  relevant  experience.  Two  Sub-PMUs  will  be 
established  in  Gwadar  and  Lasbela  to  provide  field  level  coordination  and 
monitoring.  
  The  PMU  will  be  established  in  Quetta  and  two  sub  offices  will  be  set  up,  one  in 
Lasbela, one in Gwadar, which will host the small complement of management and 
technical staff. GLLSP-I PMU will be transitioned into GLLSP-II PMU with retention 
of all those staff that meet the qualification requirements of new PMU. GLLSP-II will 
finance the necessary requirements  for vehicles, equipment, operational expenses 
and salaries of staff. PMU will have following staff:  
1.  Project Director 
2.  M&E Specialist 
3.  Manager Finance & Accounts 
4.  Procurement Specialist 
5.  Manager Internal Audit 
6.  Admin Finance Assistant   
7.  Project Allowance – Division Accounts Officer 
8.  MIS/Communication Officer 
Support Staff  
1.  Drivers 
2.  Security Guards 
3.  Naib Qasid/Office Boy/Cleaner 
b. Following are professional positions at PIU Gwadar: 
1.  District/Component Coordinator – Fisheries Specialist   
2.  Admin & Finance Assistant 
3.  Infrastructure Specialist    
4.  Business Support Facilitator  
Support Staff 
1.  Office Boy   
2.  Driver  
3.  Security Guard  
4.  Cleaner 
c. Following are the professional positions at PIU Lasbela. 
1.  District/Component Coordinator–Community Development 1 
2.  Admin & Finance Assistant 
3.  Infrastructure Specialist    
4.  Business Support Facilitator  
Support Staff 
5.  Office Boy   
6.  Driver  
7.  Security Guard  
8.  Cleaner 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
2 
2 
1 
  Terms  of  References  (ToRs)  of  Key  PMU  Staff  are  given  in  the  following 
paragraphs. 
  PROJECT  DIRECTOR  (PD):  The  PD  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  planning, 
coordination and management of the project activities. These include the provision 
of strategic guidance for project implementation and team building. PD will also be 
9 
principle accounting officer for the project and also act as Secretary to the Project 
Steering Committee (PSC). His responsibilities include: 
Timely  establishment  of  PMU  including  undertaking  recruitment,  account  opening 
and procurement of goods, works and services. 
Establishment  of  sound  management  system  within  the  project  for  planning, 
coordination,  reporting,  financial  management,  M&E  and  trouble-shooting  in  the 
line with IFAD financial agreement and programme documents. 
Lead  the  preparation  of  the  annual  work  plan  and  budget  (AWPB)  and  associated 
procurement  plan  and  ensure  its  timely  submission  to  relevant  forums  for 
approvals. 
Ensure  effective  targeting  of  the  poor  and  vulnerable  in  target  villages  and 
effective attainment of results under all mainstreaming priorities; 
Ensure  the  effective  and  efficient  utilization  of  project  funds  and  other  resources 
according to the AWPB and procurement plan through supervision and monitoring; 
Ensure  all  required  reports  are  produced  and  submitted  to  the  appropriate  levels 
on a timely basis; 
Develop  an  effective  media  management  and  communication  strategy  for  the 
project  and  efficient  dissemination  of  all  project  purpose  and  activates  within  and 
outside project area; 
Ensure  the  timely  dissemination  of  project  experience  and  results  to  relevant 
stakeholders within the learning community; 
Ensure  effective  linkages,  liaison  and  networking  with  other  implementation 
partners  and  service  providers  either  working  in  the  project  area  or  potentially 
concern with project activities and with other relevant interventions. 
Establish effective working relationship with all implementing partners and promote 
team building; and  
Perform any other duty relevant to the project as may be assigned by the PSC.  
  Minimum Qualifications.  
A  BS-19  officer  or  equivalent  from  Pakistan  Administrative  Service/Provincial 
Service,  or  private/corporate  sector  with  reasonable  experience  of  implementing 
foreign/loan funded programmes/projects - to be selected on competitive basis  
Preferably  a  Master’s  degree  in  Agriculture,  Economics,  public  administration, 
Business Studies, or other relevant field;  
At least 10 years’ experience at mid-senior management level;  
Demonstrated  experience  and  ability  to  liaise  with  a  wide  range  and  levels  of 
organizations  Government,  Donors,  private  sector,  NGOs,  and  community 
institutions.  
Strong communications skills (oral, written, presentation)  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
  TOR:  MONITORING  &  EVALUATION  SPECIALIST  AND  KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT  MANAGER  (MKM):  Directly  reports  to  the  PD  and  works  very 
closely  with  other  units  in  PMU,  implementation  partners  and  designs  and 
implements  a  robust  project  M&E  system  and  an  integrated  project  Learning  and 
Communication System. The system will link five functions: reports on output and 
outcome, taking into account IFAD's reporting requirements and regular update of 
the  log  frame  with  regards  to  achievements,  M&E,  learning  and  adaptation  for 
(PMU)  and  external 
continuous 
(stakeholders)  communication;  innovation  and  experimentation;  and  information 
management.  
improvement  of  performance; 
internal 
  Duties and Responsibilities (M&E): 
a) Developing  a  simple  progress  reporting  system  for  the  monitoring  of  project 
activities  and  preparing  regular  reports  on  implementation  progress,  performance 
and impact of operations, in line with IFAD reporting requirements. 
10 
b) Establishment of GIS mapping of each site and a Project Baseline Survey. 
c)  Set  up  terms  of  reference  for  periodic  impact  assessment  of  key  project 
interventions 
d) Organization  of  training  on  M&E  for  members  of  the  PMU,  implementing  partners 
and  providing  technical  backstopping  to  implementing  agencies  for  preparing  the 
AWPBs and progress reports. 
e) Develop  associated  Management  Information  System  for  managing  data  and 
information  for  overall  monitoring,  and  for  the  collection  and  analysis  of  data  on 
project  achievements  and  impact,  based  on  a  set  of  gender  disaggregated 
indicators  in  line  with  the  project  logical  framework  and  stakeholders’  information 
needs. 
f)  Coordinating  monitoring  of  the  AWPB  implementation  and  preparation  of 
consolidated quarterly and annual progress reports. 
g) Ensuring that all participating institutions keep records on their activities and feed 
this information into the project learning system. 
  Knowledge Management 
a) Develop  and  implement  processes  and  guidelines  for  systematic  capture  of 
knowledge, good practices and innovation, and the sharing and use of same;  
b) Provide assistance/guidance in implementing the Project Learning System;  
c)  Coordinate surveys and case studies to assess achievements and outcomes of KEP 
activities;  
d) Develop  a  multi-stakeholder  communication  strategy  along 
the  seasonal 
performance  of  the  programme  including  a  portal  for  web-based  feedback  of 
beneficiaries, private sector partners and county administrations  
e) Coordinate the dissemination of the findings from the impact assessment studies. 
  Qualifications. M&E Specialist position will be open to both Public and private sector 
candidates and will be filled on competitive basis.  
i.  Master’s 
degree 
in  Agricultural 
Economics,  Rural  Development, 
Communications or other relevant field. 
ii.  At  least  5  years  relevant  work  experience,  in  M&E,  knowledge  management 
and communication. 
iii.  Demonstrated  professional  experience  in  Developing  and  implementing 
comprehensive  M&E  and  communication  and  visibility  plans,  developing 
websites,  writing  reports,  articles  and  or  pamphlets  depicting  project 
interventions and results. 
iv.  Proficiency  in  the  use  of  databases,  modern  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) in development, and other computer applications. 
v.  Demonstrated  skills  in  quantitative  and  qualitative  analysis  and  data 
management;  
vi.  Demonstrated  experience 
in  designing  and 
implementing  successful 
communication and knowledge management strategies.  
vii.  Strong computer and communications skills (oral, written, presentation). 
  TOR:  PROCUREMENT  SPECIALIST:  The  Procurement  Specialist  will  report  to 
Project Director, GLLSP-II and will also support and oversee procurement across all 
components  and  sub-components.  He  will  be  responsible  for  the  procurement  of 
goods,  works  and  services  and  ensure  compliance  with  BPPRA/PPRA  Rules  and 
Regulations and ensure  due diligence to comply with IFAD Procurement Handbook 
and Guidelines.  
  Duties  and  Responsibilities: The  Procurement  Specialist  will  perform  the 
following tasks: 
a) Work  closely  with  Government  Line  Departments  (P&DD,  C&W  and  Fisheries 
Department)  to  develop  quarterly/annually  procurement  plans  (based  on 
11 
quarterly distribution plans and annual work plan) to ensure timely availability of 
the products for project activities  
b) Preparation of Project’s Annual Procurement Plans, as part of Project’s AWPB, for 
approval of Project Steering Committee and IFAD NOL.  
c)  Ensure  that  goods,  works  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in 
accordance with the loan agreement and the IFAD Procurement guidelines; 
d) Installation  of  appropriate  procurement  systems  and  procedures  for  effective 
planning and monitoring of procurements under the project; 
e) Conducts  entire  cycle  of  a  procurement  including  procurement  packaging, 
project’s  general  procurement  notices  (GPN),  maintenance  of  the  Register  of 
Expression of Interest, analysis of bids, preparation of purchase orders etc. 
f)  Ensuring the timely inventory coding and safe keeping of the goods purchased.  
g) When  the  prior  review  of  the  bidding  or  proposal  document  is  required,  submits 
the  document  through  the  Project  Director  to  IFAD  for  its  review  and  ‘No 
Objection’.  
h) Ensure  that  all  the  due  tendering  processes  are  adhered  to:  sufficient 
publications,  strict  adherence  to  deadlines,  transparency  in  communications, 
publication of bid results, etc.; 
i)  Train  staff  to  prepare  and  update  the  Annual  Procurement  Plan  (including 
procurement  method,  types/kinds,  quantity,  value,  delivery  requirements, 
sources, etc.); 
j)  Assist  SMP in  establishing  a robust  system  for community led  procurements  and 
supervise its effective implementation.  
k) Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement; 
l)  Prepare  bi-annually  progress  reports  with  implementation  of  the  procurement 
plan,  and  regularly inform the  PM  of  problems and  make  proposals to  overcome 
bottlenecks;  
  Required Qualifications 
a.  The  candidate  should  have  a  Master’s  degree  (in  Supply  Chain  Management, 
Accounting, Finance or Business Administration Law, Procurement, Economics,)  
b.  Minimum  10  years'  work  experience  related  to  the  above  duties  and 
responsibilities  and  at  least  10  years  in  a  comparable  donor-funded  project 
environment; 
c.  Seasoned  knowledge  of  all  major  facets  of  IFAD/WB/ADB  operations  and 
procurement policies. 
  TOR:  Infrastructure  Specialist:  The  Infrastructure  Specialist  (IS)  will  oversee 
the implementation of physical infrastructure (Jetties, Road, CPIs and Bridges and 
Allied Infrastructure etc.) on behalf of the PMU end ensure quality and efficiencies. 
He will assist the PD in review and approval of all infrastructure proposals, designs 
and cost estimates and will monitor on site progress and quality.  
  Duties and Responsibilities: 
i.  Be  responsible  for  review  of  infrastructure  design,  detailed  cost  estimates 
presented by consulting engineers or GLLSP-II engineers (in-house design) and to 
accord technical sanction. 
ii.  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB, Procurement Plan, and progress reports 
and consolidation with the help of M&E and Finance team. 
iii.  Establish specification, cost and quality bench marks for community infrastructure. 
for  major 
iv.  Draft  TORs 
for  design  and  supervision  consultancy  services 
infrastructure.  
v.  Evaluation and finalization of consultancy contracts/agreements. 
vi.  Ensure  environment  screening  and  environment  and  social  management  plans 
where applicable  
vii.  Guide Field Engineers in preparation and finalization of IPCs. 
12 
viii.  Prepare  on  a  timely  basis  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  progress  report 
highlighting  work  plan,  progress,  key  issues,  achievements  and  corrective  action 
taken. 
ix.  Prepare  and  ensure  visit  schedule  (weekly,  monthly  and  quarterly)  for  ongoing 
schemes  for  monitoring  and  technical  backstopping  of  field  engineers  as  well  as 
SMTs. 
Liaison  with  line  Departments  like  P&DD,  C&W,  Fisheries  Department,  PHED  and 
other  Govt.  Departments  with  respect  to  project  infrastructure  activities  and 
ensure timely actions for completed schemes handover to concerned agencies and 
communities for O&M.   
x. 
13 
D.  SECTION: III  PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 
  Planning:  Based  on  Project  PDR  and  PC-I,  and  indicative  phasing  contained 
therein,  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  will  be  the  main  instrument  for  project 
implementation. PMU will be responsible for leading the AWPB formulation process 
in  a  participatory,  bottom-up manner.  The AWPB  process  will  be  completed  by 31 
March each year and go approved from Project steering Committee and IFAD by 30 
April.  For  ease  of  planning  and  monitoring  during  the  year,  the  AWPB  will  be 
organized around four  quarters  of the year  with targets  and budgets  reflected for 
each quarter.  
  Planning Process/AWP/Budgets: Development of AWPBs will be a participatory 
and  consultative  exercise  involving  PMU,  implementing  agencies,  SMP,  technical 
advisors  and  community  forums.  It  will  have  two  streams  of  contributory 
processes.  One  stream  will  relate  to  community  organizations  and  Fishermen’s 
Cooperatives  which  will  be  guided  and  coordinated  by  SMP.  The  plans  generated 
from  the  CO/VO  level  will  be  consolidated  into  Union  Council  Development  Plan, 
endorsed  by  District  Development  Coordination  Committee  and  then  consolidated 
by SMP and submitted to PMU. Same will apply to Fishermen’s Cooperatives to the 
extent that Cooperative Business Plans will be submitted to PMU through Fisheries 
Department.  Second  stream  will  be  for  major  infrastructure  including  jetties  and 
rural  roads.  Jetties  will  follow  the  standard  process  of  feasibility,  detailed  design 
and  construction  and  will  be  led  by  the  concerned  experts  in  PMU.  Roads  will  be 
identified  in  consultation  with  the  communities  and  DDCC  on  the  basis  of  project 
selection  criteria.  Once  identified,  the  PMU  infrastructure  specialist  will  coordinate 
with  C&W  Department  for  design,  cost  estimation  and  tendering  through 
department’s established processes.  
  Quarterly Plans and Reviews:  PMU will organize quarterly progress  review and 
planning  meetings,  on  the  basis  of  quarterly  progress  reports  furnished  by  all 
implementing  partners.  The  meeting  will  be  held  before  the  end  of  a  quarter  to 
review progress, identify issues and shortfalls, agree on solutions and plan for the 
next quarter. All notified Activity Managers of the departments, key SMP staff and 
PMU  technical  staff  will  participate.  At  the  end  of  meeting,  a  quarterly  work  plan 
containing next quarter targets  and financial allocations  will be formally issued by 
PMU.  
  Annual  Progress  Review  and  Planning  Session:  PMU  will  organize  annual 
planning  and  review  meetings  in  March  every year  to  review  progress  during  on-
going year and formulate plan for the next financial year.  
  PSC Meetings: PSC will meet once a year. The meetings will be based on agenda 
prepared by PMU and containing issues and proposals  on which PSC decisions  are 
sought. Minutes will be prepared and issued following each meeting.  
  Monitoring and Evaluation:  The scope of Monitoring and Evaluation in GLLSP-II 
will be timely collection of reliable data and information for measuring performance 
and  progress  related  to  physical  progress  against  project  development  objective, 
outcomes  and  outputs.  It  would  also  help  to  provide  timely  information  for 
management  decision-making.  M&E  would  also  be  used  as  a  learning  tool  to 
provide  timely  and  quality  information  for  critical  reflection  on  project  strategies 
and operations to support decision-making.  
  The project log-frame and IFAD Corporate  Core  indicators will guide the design of 
the  GLLSP-II  M&E  System  along  with  the  performance  indicators  included  in  log-
frame.  Standardized  reporting  formats  will  be developed  and issued  by  PMU  M&E 
Wing along with any required training to concerned staff. The M&E system will be 
multi-layered that includes: 
Implementation monitoring by the Implementing Partner,  
• 
•  Output monitoring by the M&E staff at PMU 
14 
•  Process and outcome monitoring by M&E Specialist and P&DD 
  An  annual  M&E  plan,  as  part  of  project’s  overall  AWPB,  will  be  prepared  by  M&E 
wing  of  PMU,  with  inputs  from  all  implementing  partner  on  targets,  formats, 
processes  and reporting responsibilities  and then each agency, including PMU, will 
derive their individual plans to meet the requirements of annual M&E Plan.  
  The  implementation  monitoring  will  be  done  by  the  implementing  partner 
themselves and it should form the basis for their regular progress reporting to the 
PMU.  The  management  and  monitoring  teams  of  IP  will  be  responsible  for 
implementation  of  day  to  day  project  activities,  performance  of  their  staff,  and 
delivery  of  inputs  and  achievement  of  project  outputs/outcomes  as  per  agreed 
standards.  The  output  monitoring  will  be  carried  out  by  PMU  staff  and  joint 
activity/output  monitoring  missions  to  independently  asses  the  physical  and 
financial  progress.  The  activity  and  output  monitoring  by  PMU  will  focus  on  spot-
checking,  verification  of  output  data  reported  by  IP,  identification  of  risks  factors 
and  propose  mitigation  measures,  status  of  utilization  of  funds  by  IP  against  the 
disbursements,  ensure  compliance  to  the  financing  agreement, efficiency  of  funds 
flow mechanism, evaluation of internal control system etc. During joint activity and 
output  monitoring  visits,  the  monitoring  team  will  randomly  interview  the  target 
beneficiaries;  oversee  the  input  delivery  process  and  review  procurement, 
disbursement, training record, beneficiaries’ acknowledgements record and project 
database maintained by the IP.  
  The process and outcome monitoring shall be carried out by PMU M&E Specialist to 
ensure independence and objectivity of the outcome and process monitoring.  The 
key  activities  related  to  process  and  outcome  monitoring  include;  process  and 
outcome  monitoring  visits  to  the  IP,  management  of  annual  PSC  surveys  for 
poverty  graduation  tracking  by  IP,  annual  outcome  surveys  in  line  with  IFAD's 
requirements including third party validation of PSC survey conducted by IP, mid-
term and end-term project evaluations and value chain studies.  
  The  monitoring  of  project  interventions  at  IP  level  shall  be  carried  out  with  the 
support  of  latest  monitoring  technologies  such  as  use  of  mobile  data  collection 
through smart phones/tablets having customized mobile data collection application 
linked  with  GLLSP-II  MIS  database  which  would  provide  real-time  information 
access to PMU and IPs’ management. In addition, the IPs’ will have direct access to 
GLLSP-II central MIS customized to PMU monitoring and reporting needs to provide 
timely  monitoring  and  progress  data  that  would  help  PMU  to  efficiently  track  the 
physical  and  financial  progress  and  develop  follow-up,  progress  validation  and 
monitoring plans accordingly. 
  Participatory  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (PME):  Target  beneficiaries,  CRPs, 
CIGs  and  community  institutions  will  be  actively  involved  in  monitoring  and 
evaluation  of  project  activities  through  regular  project  monitoring  and  review 
meetings, field visits, surveys/FGDs, spot checking. A systematic plan to ensuring 
active  involvement  of community  institutions  and  beneficiaries  shall  be  developed 
in line  with the  overall  M&E  plan  of GLLSP-II. Furthermore,  annual  project review 
consultation and lessons learn workshops at provincial level will be held to engage 
community institutions, POs and other stakeholders in project progress review and 
monitoring process.  
  Poverty Graduation Tracking - Methodology and Process; As part of process 
and  outcome  monitoring,  GLLSP-II  would  systematically  track  poverty  graduation 
of the target beneficiaries through PSC baseline data compiled by BISP, annual PSC 
surveys by POs, sample validation of POs’ PSC by third party as well as revalidation 
PSC  done  by  POs  on biannual  basis  and through third-party  mid-term  and  end  of 
project  evaluations  managed  by  PMU.  The GLLSP-II  will  use  PSC  baseline  data  of 
BISP to identify the target beneficiaries eligible for different types of interventions 
as per PSC bands defined in GLLSP’s poverty graduation approach. BISP PSC data 
15 
will be used as baseline. The project will in turn share list of GLLSP-II beneficiaries 
(selected from BISP PSC registry) with BISP who have successfully graduated out 
of  poverty  so  that  BISP  can  graduate  those  from  its  registry.  The  PMU  would 
explore  avenues  of  collaboration  with  Impact Atlas  to  build  synergies  between  its 
own  tech-based  monitoring  and  reporting  systems  with  that  of  Impact  Atlas  to 
enhance effectiveness and efficiency in poverty graduation tracking for GLLSP-II. 
  Community  institutions  such  as  Village  Organizations  (VOs)  and  Local  Support 
Organizations  (LSOs)  would  also  be  actively  involved  in  annual  PSC  updating 
survey  by  the  IP.  The  findings  of  the  annual  surveys  would  be  shared  with 
VOs/LSOs  for  validation  as  well  as  for  incorporating  those  in  profiling  sections  of 
Village  Council  Development  Plans  (VDPs)  and  Union  Council  Development  Plans 
(UCDPs)  and  wherever  need  updating  the  VDP/UCDP  line  with  the  findings.  The 
avenues  of  sharing  of  findings  with  local  government  departments  would  also  be 
explored by the IP that would help the local governments for pro-poor development 
planning  and  targeted  interventions  for  the  ultra-poor  and  the  poor  in  their 
respective areas. 
  M&E Wing: PMU M&E Wing will consist of following staff (tentative):  
• M&E Specialist  
• MIS and KM Officer 
• Communication Officer 
• M&E/MIS & KM Assistant 
  The  team  will  be  supervised  by  the  M&E  Specialist  and  will  manage  the  surveys, 
studies  and  evaluations  conducted  through  external  consulting  such  as  baseline 
survey,  mid-term  and  end  of  project  evaluations,  thematic  studies.  The  team  will 
work  closely  with  all  sector  specialists  to  provide  timely  input  to  the  PMU  team 
regarding  project  progress  updates  and  outcomes.  The  team  will  coordinate  in 
customization of GLLSP-II MIS reporting requirements and will provide orientation 
and technical backstopping to the IP for smooth, timely and maximum optimization 
of MIS for  progress data entry and reporting. M&E Specialist along with the team 
will  also  oversee  development/customization  of  mobile  application  and  provide 
time-to-time  technical  backstopping  in  efficient  and  effective  management  of  the 
mobile  application  for  real-time  monitoring  by  IP  and  PMU  staff  through  smart 
phones and tablets. 
  Management  Information  System  (MIS):  GLLSP-II  will  develop  a  customized 
MIS  system  in  the  first  year  of  the  project  to  meet  data  collection  and  reporting 
needs  of the  project in line  with  its  log-frame.  The  dashboard  for  data  entry  and 
reporting  will  encompass  information  on  physical  and  financial  progress,  impact 
evaluation  analysis  and  reports,  IFAD's  first  and  second  level  core  indicator 
tracking, poverty graduation tracking of target beneficiaries in line with the poverty 
scorecard and other baseline data. This will be automated computer-based project 
to  generate,  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  on  financial  and 
physical progress including progress related to outcome indicators and outputs.  
  Reporting  and  Communication:  Timely  reporting  and  communication  is 
important  to  take  timely  corrective  actions  and  to  learn  from  implementation 
experience  to  further  improve  project  management  effectiveness  and  efficiency. 
Monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  reports  including  reports  from  studies  would  be 
produced by the project.  
  Mid-Term Review (MTR): GLLSP-II and IFAD would undertake a mid-term review 
in  the  last  quarter  of  third  year  of  the  project  lifecycle  to  review  the  project 
achievements  and  implementation  constraints.  In  particular,  it  would  review  the 
following:  (i)  achievement  and  improvements  in  the  production  systems, 
improvement  in  food  security,  and  increase  in  income;  (ii)  the  performance  of 
private sector partnerships; (iii) performance of CRPs, CIGs, and other community 
16 
institutions, (iv) financial and procurement management; (v) and human resources 
management.  A  mutually  agreed  action  plan  will  be  prepared  based  on  the  MTR 
findings.  IFAD  may  appoint,  in  consultation  with  GLLSP-II,  an  external  agency  to 
evaluate the impact of the project, if necessary. 
  Project Completion Review:  As  the project reaches  completion, the PMU would 
prepare  a  draft  Project  Completion  Report  (PCR).  IFAD  and  the  Government  will 
then  carry  out  a  joint  validation  of  PCR  based  on  the  information  in  the  Project 
Completion Report and other data. 
  Knowledge Management. A comprehensive knowledge management strategy for 
the project in line with the  newly released  IFAD Knowledge Management Strategy 
(2019) will be developed in the first year of the project. The strategy will focus on 
the  processes  that  will  be involved  in  building a  robust  KM  system  in  the  project. 
The KM system will enable the project to generate, capture, share and disseminate 
relevant  information  and  knowledge  to  various  stakeholders  in  a  timely  manner. 
The  project  updates  will  be  disseminated  at  broader  level  through  using  web-
sources including social media such as Facebook used as a knowledge sharing tool, 
and  also  linked  to  IFAD  Asia  website.  The  team  will  extensively  document  and 
share  knowledge  generated  in  the  project.  The  QRM  forums  will  be  used  as 
potential  KS  venues  for  capturing  lessons  learned  and  best  practices  leading  to 
development of related knowledge products.  
  Donor  and  Development  Coordination:  Other  pre-start  up  activities  will 
include  creating  a  coordination  platform  that  allows  GLLSP-II  to  develop  effective 
coordination  and  experience  sharing  mechanisms  with  other  IFAD,  donor  and 
government  funded  projects  that  are  working  on  similar  themes  in  the  identified 
areas.  This  will  help  to  reduce  any  duplication  of  project  activities  as  well  as 
support  reinforcement  of  mutual  goals  and  objectives.  Specifically,  IFAD  will 
support GLLSP-II to create a platform with BISP to develop a data clearing house 
that  allows  BISP  data  to  be  utilized  for  the  purpose  of  the  project  and  provides 
information  to  BISP  as  to  its  beneficiaries  that  are  accessing  the  GLLSP-II 
(specifically for the asset transfer component). PMU will also be enhancing its MIS 
to develop robust data tracking system for individual and household beneficiaries of 
the project. 
  Social  Mobilization  Partner  (SMP):  PMU  GLLSP-II  will  select  a  social 
mobilization  partner  (SMP)  through  a  competitive  process  for  the  implementation 
of Project’s Component 1.  
  SMP Terms of Reference: SMP’s main responsibilities will be:  
a.  Carry  out  a  baseline  survey  as  TOR  developed  for  the  purpose  to  establish 
benchmarks on status of poverty, incomes, food security, nutrition, gender etc. for 
future regular impact assessment  
b.  Organize,  strengthen,  restructure,  consolidate  existing  three  tier  structure  of 
COs/VOs/LSOs  in the 400 target  districts  of 45  Union  Councils  in line  with  project 
requirement of larger and more representative COs/VOs representing at least 80% 
of the village households and having all 0-34 PSC households as members. 
c.  Procure  latest  BISP  Poverty  Data  for  the  purpose  of  identification  and targeting  of 
project target ultra-poor and poor households. 
d.  Train and deploy staff for the preparation of CO/VO development plans and priority 
infrastructure  needs  and  consolidate  into  Union  Council  Development  plans  for 
submission to District Development Coordination Committee and PMU for approval.  
e.  Develop  standardised  formats  for  CO/VO  and  Union  Council  Plans  and  provide 
necessary training to field staff, line department staff and village activists.  
f.  Prepare  household  profiles  of  all  0-34  hhs,  household  income  generation  plan, 
identify  suitable  productive  assets  matching  household  potential,  select  suitable 
youth  from  0-34  households  for  technical  and  vocational  training  and  subsequent 
mentoring for job placement or self enterprise development. 
17 
g.  Establish  women  resource  centers,  mobilize  women  for  membership  and  delivery 
all women empwerment interventions including enterprise development. 
h.  Assist  WFP  and  FAO  in  delivery  of  their  nutrition  and  climate  change  resilience 
interventions. 
i.  Execute  800  CPIs  in  400  villages  in  an  efficient  manner  through  community  led 
implementation  and  develop  and  implement  effective  post  completion  O&M 
systems.  
j.  Provide support in establishment and promotion of Fishermen’s Cooperatives.  
k.  Build  synergies  and  linkages  with  on-going  national  and  provincial  pro-poor 
programmes like EHSAS and Kamyaab Naujawan and facilitate CO members access 
to such programmes.  
l.  Furnish  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  as  per  formats  agreeds 
with PMU. 
m. Render quarterly and annual accounts on project fund utilization as well as annual 
audit reports.  
  SMP  Qualifications:  To  be  eligible  for  selection,  the  SMP  must  meet  following 
qualifications: 
a.  Previous experience and presence in the project area and existing social capital 
b.  Registration under appropriate laws of the country. 
c.  Previous three-year corporate audit reports  
d.  Availability of appropriate number of management and technical staff at HQ and in 
the field. 
e.  Experience  in  implementing  gender  and  youth  sensitive  participatory  rural 
development programmes 
f.  Previous experience of working with the government and donor agencies.  
  The  Social  Mobilisation  Approach  and  Purpose:  At  the  heart  of  the  social 
mobilization  approach,  lies  the  belief  that  every  individual,  be  they  poor  or  rich, 
man or woman, has the capability and potential to carry out activities for their own 
benefit  and  for  that  of  their  own  families.  The  Social  Mobilization  approach  to 
development enables communities to identify, prioritize, plan and think about their 
developmental  needs  jointly.  Mobilized  communities  enter  into  a  partnership  with 
the  SMP  under  which  they  are  provided  social  guidance,  financial  and  technical 
assistance. In addition to this, the SMP help build their capacities and skills in order 
to  help  them  start  functioning  as  independent  organizations  and  fostering 
development linkages with government, donors and private sectors agencies. Once 
people  are  organized  into  properly  functioning  institutions  of  their  own,  they  find 
the  platform  to  harness  their  potentials,  address  their  problems  and  fulfil  their 
needs.  When  such  institutions  of  the  people  are  fostered  at  the  neighborhood, 
village and union council levels, they become a vehicle through which all kinds  of 
development initiatives can be effectively implemented.  
  The  GLLSP-II  project  will  continue  to  work  with  existing  three-tiered  social 
mobilization structures supported under GLLSP-I, which includes: 
i.    Community Organizations (COs) at neighborhood or muhalla level 
ii.   Federating COs into Village Organizations (VOs) at village level 
iii.  Federating VOs into Local Support Organisations (LSOs) at Union Council (UC) level 
  Process and Structure Adjustments in Social  Mobilization under GLLSP II: 
The prevailing approach and community organization structures in project area will 
be  adjusted  to meet certain  specific  approaches  and  requirements  of the  project. 
These adjustments and their rationale can be summarized as following:  
n. 
The  existing  norm  of  a  25-20  member  CO  in  a  Mohalla  or  settlement  of  a 
village,  representing  30/40%  of  the  total  households  will  be  reviewed  and 
larger COs, representing 80% of the households in a settlement or preferably 
18 
an entire natural village will be promoted. Towards this end, existing COs will 
be amalgamated and restructured.  
p. 
o.  Membership  of  all  0-34  households  in  the  village/settlement  would  be 
compulsory unless there are compelling extenuating circumstances for certain 
households to remain absent.  
CPIs  will  be  considered  from  a  whole  village  perspective  and  not  from 
individual CO perspective to ensure larger impact and foot-print.  
CPI  priorities  will  be  identified  in  separate  sessions  of  men  and  women  and 
women priorities will take precedence.  
Youth will be actively engaged in CO formation and membership.  
q. 
r. 
  Process   
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
for 
(PSC) 
obtained 
each  UC 
before  CO 
formation/restructuring  process  will  be 
All  project  staff  to  be  trained  on  social  mobilization  approach  and  GLLSP-II 
implementation processes; 
Poverty  Scorecard 
formation/restructuring process.  
CO 
initiated  through  project 
introduction  dialogues  at  the  village/cluster  level.  The  NRSP’s  Social 
Mobilization  Team  (SMT)  will  ensure  presence  of  stakeholders  in  the 
introductory  meetings  (stakeholders  include  poor  households  represented  by 
men  and  women,  disabled  persons,  minorities  (where  possible),  Govt. 
officials, elected councilors / representatives, etc.); 
These  COs  will  then  be  registered  in  the  GLLSP-II  Management  Information 
System (MIS); 
A  VO  will  be  formed  on  average  03-06  COs  (in  case  of  larger  settlements) 
with  some  variation  within  the  districts/UCs.  In  exceptional  cases  where  the 
population  is  very  low,  a  VO  can  be  formed  for  more  than  one  Revenue 
Village.  
After  the  formation  of  VOs,  NRSP  will  submit  the  list  of  VOs  to  District 
Development  Coordination  Committee  for  notification  by  the  government 
recognizing it as legitimate recipient of development funds; 
Community  Resource  Persons  (CRPs)  will  be  identified  and  engaged  by  the 
SMTs. The CRP will be responsible to facilitate/organize the households (HHs) 
in their respective villages and Union Councils (UCs).  
LSO will be formed after organization of minimum 60% HHs in the UC; and  
RSP  will  submit  the  list  of  LSOs  to  the  relevant  government  authorities  for 
notification. 
  Specific  Procedures  of  Social  Mobilization:  Project  Planning/Inception 
Workshop/Orientation  Training  Workshop  (OTW):  All  professional  staff  will 
be given orientation training on Social Mobilization through training workshops. The 
orientation training workshops duration will be three days and will be conducted at 
Quetta  for  all  GLLSP-II  district  staff.  The  orientation  training  will  be  important  to 
ensure  an  equal  level  of  understanding  amongst  all  PMU  staff  regarding  project 
objectives, implementation strategy, work plans, role/responsibilities of each cadre 
of staff and how project interventions are integrated with each other. 
  They  will  also  be  briefed  about  IFAD  Rules/Regulations,  visibility  and 
communication  guidelines,  etc.  This  will  help  ensure  smooth  implementation. 
Gender  sensitization  and  importance  of  women  and  men  in  the  development 
process  will  be mainstreamed in  all  training  sessions.  The  orientation  training  will 
be  a  combination  of  interactive  lectures,  group  work,  presentation  of  group  work 
by the trainees and practicing the development plans and budget. 
  Orientation Training of NRSP Key Project Staff and Project Relevant GoB Officials on 
Project Implementation  Manual  (PIM)/Community  Awareness  Tool  (CAT):  PMU  will 
organize an orientation training, in Quetta, on use of the PIM and CAT. The purpose 
of this training is to enhance participants' understanding on the importance of the 
19 
standardized social mobilization approach and effective use of PIM and CAT through 
various  mock  exercises  for  standardization  in  project  implementation  and 
reporting. The training will also focus on enhancing the technical knowledge of the 
participants  about  management  of  GLLSP-II  interventions  like  Technical  and 
Vocational  and  Education  Trainings  (TVET),  Women  Empowerment  Interventions, 
climate  change  and  nutrition  interventions,  Community  Physical  Infrastructure 
(CPI), and Fisheries related interventions. Gender sensitization will be an important 
part of the training to learn about the significance of working with women and men 
community  members.  Relevant  government  officials  from  provincial  departments 
i.e. Planning & Development Department, Balochistan Rural Development Academy, 
Local  Government  &  Rural  Development  Department,  Women  Development 
Department  and  Social Welfare  Department  will  also  be invited  to this  training to 
orient them about the approaches and methodologies that the NRSP’s will apply in 
the GLLSP-II.  
  Village Development Plan (VDP): Each VO should develop VDP for its village. A 
VDP is a plan which includes development initiatives at the village level, as decided 
by the VO and its member COs in their Micro Investment Plans (MIPs). It consists 
of  activities  (large  and  small,  cash  and  cash-less)  which  the  VO  aims  to  achieve. 
Social  mobilization  outreach,  youth  development  activities,  adult  literacy  & 
numeracy  skills, 
transgender, 
ethnic/religious  minorities,  gender  mainstreaming  and  women's  practical  and 
strategic needs should remain common themes in the VDP. 
the  poor,  women,  disabled, 
inclusion  of 
  Community  Physical  Infrastructure:  During  the  process  of  community 
mobilization and organization of COs/VOs, the communities will be informed by the 
social  mobilization  teams  about  the  menu  of  small-scale  community  managed 
physical infrastructure schemes to be supported under the project, and the possible 
options  to  address  some  of  their  priority  needs  for  social  and  economic 
infrastructure,  and  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  implementation  of  such 
schemes. The Social Organizers will ensure that the schemes are identified through 
a participatory approach, the schemes represent genuine needs of the community, 
benefiting maximum number of people including poor and marginalized. Men’s and 
women’s  priorities  will  be  identified  and  discussed  in  separate  sessions  and 
women’s  choices  will  be  given  precedence.  Community  contribution  and  O&M 
responsibilities will be explained and agreed up front. A CO/Vo resolution signed by 
all  members  will  be  required  for  initiation  of  feasibility  and  cost  estimates.  Once 
feasibility  is  completed,  a  written  agreement  between  CO/VO  and  SMP  on mutual 
responsibilities  will  be  required  for  initiation  of  work.  The  community  institutions 
will  also  remain  actively  involved  during  the  implementation  and  take  full 
responsibility for operation and maintenance of the completed projects. 
E. 
SECTION: IV   
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
  Scope: This section lays out the rules and procedures governing staff recruitment 
and management under GLLSP-II.  
  Types  of  Employment  Contracts:  The  GLLSP-II  will  develop  standard 
employment  contract  for  each  category  of  personnel  so  as  to  ensure  that  all 
personnel  are  recruited  on  identical  terms  and  that  employment  conditions  are 
adequate to meet the requirements  of the project. The project will hire the below 
categories of personnel: 
 
 
 
Project  personnel  who  are  core  members  of  the  PMU  team;  this  includes: 
professional, operations and support staff. 
Temporary  professionals  and  support staff  hired  locally to replace  an  absent staff, 
to cater for a temporary increase in workload, or to fill a vacant post temporarily. 
Individual  consultants  hired  nationally  or  internationally  to  carry  out  a  specific 
short-term assignment. 
20 
 
Internship  contract  offered  to  university  graduates  or  entry  level  job  seekers  for 
initially  3  months  extendable  for  3-6  months  with  stipend.  Unpaid  internship  also 
offered  to  students  coming  from  an  academic  setting  who  serve  as  intern  for  6-8 
weeks as part of their degree Programme.  
  The  recruitment  of  individual  consultants  is  subject  to  the  procedures  and  prior 
review  of  IFAD  as  spelled  out  in  the  financing  agreement  and  the  Letter  to  the 
Borrower. At the start of the project, P&DD GoB  will assess the suitability with the 
GLLSP-II  organogram  for  the  existing  staff  of  the  GLLSP  and  will  predesignated 
those  meeting  the  qualification  requirements  and  general  suitability.  Once  the 
senior  personnel  recruited,  the  PMU  will  take  charge  of  staff  recruitment  and 
contract  administration.  The  recruitment  of  senior  staff  within  the  project  will  be 
carried out with technical assistance (as needed) and oversight of IFAD. 
  Terms  of  Employment:  As  per  the  government  rules  in  terms  of  remuneration, 
leave  and  social  security  provisions  and  on  similar  patterns  as  being  handled  in 
GLLSP. 
21 
F. 
SECTION V: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT   (more details in Appendix) 
1.  COUNTRY AND PROJECT FIDUCIARY RISKS 
  Objective: This section defines an appropriate financial management system so as 
to adequately address the inherent country and project level fiduciary risks, based 
on the experience gained during implementation of GLLSP-I.  
  Country Risk: The country’s inherent fiduciary risk rating continues to be Medium. 
Pakistan is the 117 least corrupt nation out of 175 countries, according to the 2018 
Corruption  Perceptions  Index  reported  by  Transparency  International.  Corruption 
Rank in Pakistan averaged 109.04 from 1995 until 2018, reaching an all-time high 
of  144  in  2005  and  a  record  low  of  39  in  19952.  Pakistan’s  Open  Budget  Index 
(OBI)—which gauges transparency in public sector governance, has only marginally 
improved  from  43  in  2015  to  44  in  2018  on  a  scale  of  0-1003.  Pakistan’s  score 
against the World Bank’s Transparency, Accountability, and Corruption Index for the 
public sector has been 3 out of 6 since 2015.  This indicator measures the extent to 
which the executive can be held accountable for its use of funds and for the results 
of its actions by the electorate and by the legislature and judiciary, and the extent 
to  which  public  employees  within  the  executive  are  required  to  account  for 
administrative decisions, use of resources, and results obtained4.  
  The World  Bank’s  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial  Accountability  (PEFA)  report  of 
2017  for  Baluchistan  acknowledges  the  government’s  efforts  to  improve  financial 
management,  reporting,  external  audit,  and  procurement.  However,  several 
performance gaps persist in the PFM system such as (i) variations between budget 
and  actual  expenditure;  (ii)  absence  of  linkages  between  policy  and  the  budget; 
(iii)  development  projects  being  included  in  budget  without  proper  costing, 
appraisal,  and  approval  and  opacity  in  public  disclosure  of  fiscal  information;  (iv) 
concerns about financial data integrity, and non-coverage autonomous corporations 
in financial reporting; (v) absence of transparent and rules-based fiscal transfers to 
the  local  government  and  a  sound  debt  management  practice;  (vi)  use  of  both 
manual  and IT-based  accounting  systems  while  no  focus  on service  delivery;  (vi) 
increase 
instances  of  non-compliance  with  applicable  compliance 
requirements;  (vii)  lack  of  Internal  audit  function;  and  (viii)  inability  to  increase 
provincial  revenue  through  sales  tax  which  has  been  devolved  to  the  provinces5. 
The  World  Bank’s  PEFA  Assessment  for  Pakistan  (2017  &  2019)  have  flagged 
similar issues and emphasized the need for remedial actions.  
the 
in 
  The  federal  government  is  committed  to  improving  PFM  environment  in  Pakistan 
and  is  taking  necessary  steps  in  this  direction.  A  six-  pillar  PFM  Reform  Strategy 
(2018-2027)  has  been  approved  by  the  federal  government  in  consultation  with 
the provinces. The strategy built on the work completed under Project to Improve 
Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  (PIFRA)  which  included  improved  budgeting, 
accounting,  financial  reporting,  and  auditing  in  line  with  international  best 
practices. The strategy aims  at incremental improvements to ensure that systems 
deliver  to  their  full  potential  in  an  accountable  and  transparent  manner.  The  PFM 
Reform  Strategy  is  further  supported  by  the  National  Procurement  Strategy  and 
Training Plan (2017-2021). The World Bank is implementing a Program for Results 
(PfR) project (USD 400 million) to deepen the PRM reforms achieved under PIFRA. 
In  addition  to  addressing  the  gaps  in  PFM  system  highlighted  above,  the  PfR 
program  envisages  introducing  e-procurement  system  and  an  IT  based  audit 
2 For details, please see the report at https://www.transparency.org/country/PAK  
3 For details, please see the report at  https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/open-
budget-index-rankings/  
4 For details, please see the website https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IQ.CPA.TRAN.XQ?locations=PK  
5 For details, please see the report at  https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/PK-Balochistan-Nov18-PFMPR-SN- 
Public%20with%20PEFA%20Check.pdf  
22 
management information system.  Once implemented, the  changes  would improve 
the quality of PFM system in Pakistan.    
accounting 
  Project  Fiduciary  Risk:  The  project  fiduciary  risk  is  rated  as  Medium.  This  is 
explained by consistent delays in the approval of AWPB, lack of provisioning of the 
counterpart  funding  in  budget  and  the  timely  release  of  sufficient  funds,  sub-
optimal 
software,  non-compliance  with  previous  missions’ 
recommendations,  weak  follow-up  with  external  auditor  on  resolving  audit issues, 
weak internal controls—especially the ones applicable to the SMP (NRSP in case of 
the GLLSP-I), absence of internal audit function, and weak monitoring. These risks 
can be mitigated by retaining the existing PMU—along with the staff, hiring of the 
full  time  Finance  Manager,  ensuring  early  approval  of  the  AWPB  and  the 
Procurement Plan (by 31 March), using the existing designated project account for 
the  IFAD  Loan,  using  internal  auditing  firm  to  check  compliance  with  applicable 
compliance  requirements,  stronger  follow-up  with the  Auditor-General  of  Pakistan 
for  external  audit,  sufficient  allocation  and  timely  release  of  government 
counterpart funds etc.  
  Flow  of  Funds:  GLLSP-II  will  be  dealing  with  four  sources  of  funds  including  an 
IFAD  Loan,  an  IFAD  Grant,  Government  counterpart  Funds  and  Community 
Contribution  in  CPIs.  Project  will  maintain  separate  accounts  in  National  Bank  of 
Pakistan Quetta for each sources of funds. IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant and Counterpart 
Funds  will have segregated, but integrated, systems  of funds  flow, budgeting and 
accounting to  ensure  a  clear, verifiable  audit trail.  The  beneficiaries’  contributions 
would be recorded and reported by the SMP(s) though the PMU will keep updated 
information  on  this  source  of  funding  in  its  accounting  system.  The  flowchart 
depicts  how  these  funds—other  than  the  beneficiaries’  contribution,  would  flow 
through  the  project  and  accounted  for  separately  for  proper  traceability  and 
reporting. 
23 
IFAD will disburse funds to the project Designated Accounts using the imprest fund 
methodology which is an established practice of IFAD projects in Pakistan. For this 
purpose, the  PMU  will  open  Designated Accounts—one  for  the  IFAD  Loan  and the 
other  for  IFAD  Grant  in  USD  in  the  National  Bank  of  Pakistan,  Quetta—if  the 
existing  GLLSP-I’s  account  can  be  used  for  this  purpose.  Parallel  assignment 
account in PKR will be opened in the same branch of the bank which will be used as 
expenditure  account  for  the  funds  received  from  IFAD.  Project  funding  from  IFAD 
will  be  channeled  through  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  to  these  accounts  against 
Withdrawal  Applications  (WA)  submitted  by  the  PMU.  An  initial  advance  (Imprest 
Fund) to cover approximately six months of planned project expenditures would be 
released to the Designated Accounts through Withdrawal Applications. This Imprest 
Fund for these accounts will be periodically replenished by IFAD upon the requests 
of  PMU  duly  supported  by  required  documentation.  The  ceiling  of  authorized 
allocation  for  these  accounts  can  be  increased  subsequently  if  the  project 
determines that the ceiling is not enough to meet project expenditure and makes a 
case  to  this  effect  with  requisite  documentation  i.e.  approved  AWPB,  cash 
disbursement forecast etc. The nature of this imprest account will ensure allocation 
and retention of funds in USD, though all payments will be made in Pak rupees. 
  A separate Imprest Account will be opened for the management of the Government 
Counterpart  Funding  and  will  be  governed  by  government  instructions  on  the 
operation  of  such  accounts.  The  PMU  would  estimate  the  requirement  of 
Counterpart  Funding  during  AWPB  exercise  and  engage  with  the  provincial 
government to  get  sufficient  allocation for  the Counterpart  Funding  in the  budget 
and  timely  releases  of  such  funding  for  the  project.  The  provincial  Finance 
Department  will  establish  necessary  procedures  to  ensure  that  funds  received  in 
the  State  Bank  are  channeled  to  the  project  account  in  the  province  without  any 
delay.  
  For Community Mobilization Component, the PMU will engage a Social Mobilization 
Partner (SMP) which will open a dedicated account to manage the GLLSP-II funds. 
PMU  would  provide  advances  to  SMP  equal  to  cover  six  month  estimated 
expenditure on investment and operational aspects, based on the approved AWP/B. 
To  access  the  next  advance,  the  SMP  will  furnish  detailed  expenditure  statement 
and  supporting  documents  to  PMU.  After  adjusting  any  savings/surpluses  against 
the  previous  advance,  the  PMU  would  issue  advance  for  the  next  six  months. 
Effective  and  transparent  use  of  these  funds  on  priority  target  groups  will  be  of 
utmost importance. An output-based contract will govern the payments to the SMP 
which  will  be  a  mutually  agreeable  percentage  of  the  investment  costs  of  the 
component.  The  PMU  Finance  Wing  would  conduct  periodic/random  check  of  the 
SMP account and the reports thereof would be a requisite for payment to the SMP. 
The PMU would also check the SMP’s bank account to ensure that funds from other 
sources  than  IFAD’s  are  not  mixed  up  in  the  SMP’s  dedicated  account  for  the 
GLLSP-II. 
  First disbursement conditions. The following will be designated as precedent to 
withdrawal/initial  disbursement  of  funds  to  the  GLLSP-II  (i)  the  first  AWP&B  and 
procurement  plan  shall  have  been  approved;  (ii)  The  Designated  Accounts  shall 
have  been  duly  opened;  (iii)  A  full  time  PD,  and  Finance  Manager  have  received 
IFAD’s  No  Objection;  (iv)  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual,  including  the 
Finance and Administration Manual, shall have been duly approved; the process for 
engaging Social Mobilization Partner (SMP) is at an advanced stage. 
  Disbursement  period  and  withdrawal  applications.  IFAD  financing  will  be 
disbursed  over  a  period  that  will  be  specified  in  the  Financing  Agreement.  All 
withdrawals from the IFAD loan proceeds  will be made on  the basis  of withdrawal 
24 
applications  submitted  by  the  PMU,  in  accordance  with  the  AWPB,  following  the 
procedures detailed in the LTB. 
  Work  Plans  and  Budgets.  Based  on  the  Project  Design  Report  and  the 
Government’s  Project  PC-I,  the  PMU  will  prepare  AWPB  which  will  be  the  main 
instrument  for  financial  management,  expenditure  control,  reporting  and  fund 
releases. AWPB will be participatory involving the SMP, Fisheries Department, C&W 
Department,  P&D,  target  communities  etc.  and  it  will  be  shared  with  IFAD  for  No 
Objection  by the  end  of  March  for  the  financial  year  starting in  June  of  the same 
year.  IFAD’s  fund  will  not  be  used  for  the  activities  not  included  in  the  approved 
AWPB. 
  The AWPB will clearly identify IFAD and Government's share of eligible expenditure. 
In case of the Counterpart Funds, annual budget will be approved through Annual 
Development  Programme  (ADP),  and  funds  will  be  released  against  the  approved 
ADP in compliance with pertinent government rules and regulations. The PMU shall 
actively  engage  with  P&DD  to  ensure  that  the  project’s  counterpart  funding 
requirement against AWPB has been properly worked out and included in the ADP 
and that the allocated funds are released to the project account in the first quarter 
of a financial year. The PMU, SPMU, the SMP and concerned line departments  will 
be provided equipment and vehicles as per the approved Financing Agreement.  
  Financial  management  responsibilities.  The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  the 
financial  management  of  the  project  and  for  coordinating  with  all  implementing 
partners for this purpose. The PMU will maintain separate accounts and records in 
accordance with consistently maintained appropriate accounting practices adequate 
to  reflect  operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  Project  until  the 
financing  closing  date  and  retain  such  accounts  and  records  for  at  least  ten  (10) 
years thereafter. A full time Finance Manager—along with support staff in PMU and 
SPMUs  as  per  the  agreed  organizational  arrangements  would  be  responsible  for 
financial management of the project. 
  Financial  accounting.  A  full  set  of  accounts  will  be  maintained  by  PMU  as  per 
IFAD  requirements  and  internationally  recognized  accounting  standards  and 
qualified  staff  for  this  purpose  will  be  positioned  in  PMU.  The  accounts  will  be 
maintained  in  line  General  Financial  Rules,  suitably  adjusted  to  reflect  the  multi-
sector participatory nature of the project. The accounts will be reconciled with the 
National Bank on closure of each month. PMU will provide initial support to the SMP 
to ensure that accounting for the funds transferred to the SMP are maintained in a 
manner and format that assists in quick rendering at the end of each quarter and 
meets the needs for accuracy and transparency. 
  The accounting software will be set  up in a manner that enables  separate activity 
accounts to monitor the progress of implementation, identify the works, goods and 
services  financed  from  the  loan  and  disclose  their  use  under  the  GLLSP-II.  The 
accounting  system  will  (i)  ensure  the  proper  disbursements  from  the  IFAD 
proceeds  for  efficient  and  economical  implementation  of  the  project;  (ii)  allow 
performance  evaluation  of  the  project  and  comparison  of  actual  implemented 
budget versus  estimated,  and  reasons  for  the discrepancy,  and  (iii)  allow internal 
controls for ensuring protection of project funded assets. 
  Under the GLLSP-I, the project used Quick books Accounting Software to record all 
receipts  and  payments.  The  software  helps  PMU  in  meeting  its  basic  financial 
management  and  reporting  needs.  However,  the  software  does  not  fully  comply 
with  IFAD  financial  reporting  requirements.  For  example,  it  does  not  generate 
commitments  report  or  a  report  on  receivables  in  the  form  of  replenishment 
applications  in  transit/refunds  due  etc.  which  facilitate  informed  decision  making. 
The  accounting  system  is  also  not  recording  beneficiaries’  contribution  in  the 
accounting system. It is proposed that the project engage with the service provider 
of  Quick  Books  to  assess  if  the  existing  software  can  be  improved  to  respond  to 
25 
fully comply with IFAD’s financial reporting requirements. If this is not practicable, 
the  GLLSP-II  should  consider  switching  over  to  a  new  accounting  software 
(TOMPRO)—which  has  been 
the  Economic 
Transformation Initiative of Gilgit Baltistan (ETI-GB) 
improved  under 
tested  and 
  The  finance  team  at  PMU/SPMU  levels  will  be  trained  in  double  entry  accounting 
and  the  use  of  the  selected  accounting  software.  The  team  should  be  able  to 
generate mandatory and other analytic reports to support project implementation. 
In addition, the finance team need to be proficient in the use of MS Outlook. It may 
be  useful  for  the  finance  team  to  complete  IFAD’s  FM  e-learning  course.  The 
contract  to  be  established  with  the  selected  software  provider  will  ensure 
continuous support and maintenance. 
  Reporting. The project will submit detailed financial statements for each financial 
year  within  four  (4)  months  of  the  end  of  each  financial  year  (by  the  end  of 
October).  In  addition,  the  project  will  submit  Interim  Financial  Report  indicating 
progress  against  components/categories  and  issues  that  may  require  IFAD’s 
intervention  to  keep  project  on  track.  The  interim  reports  will  also  include  bank 
reconciliation  duly  signed  by  the  project  and  supported  with  authenticated    bank 
statements  or  countersigned  by  the  concerned  bank(s).  A  reporting  template  will 
be advised by IFAD. 
  The SMP will also be required to submit Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) along with 
bank  statement  duly  signed  by  the  SMP’s  bank  and  the  SMP’s  authorized  official. 
The  QPR  will  compare  technical  and  financial  progress  against  the  approved  WP 
and highlight specific actions that need to be taken to keep project on track. PMU 
shall use the QPR as the basis for its random/periodic inspections. 
  Internal  Controls. 
  The  provincial  Finance  Department,  Planning  and 
Development  Department,  and 
the  Accountant  General  Baluchistan  have 
established internal  controls  and  annual  external  audits  by the Auditor-General  of 
Pakistan  ensure  that  the  quality  of  these  controls  is  assessed  and  reported  on 
periodically. However, the GLLSP-II will require stronger internal controls to ensure 
proper  financial  management  as  explained  in  the  Working  Paper  (Fiduciary  Risk 
Assessment). Details of these controls will be outlined in the FM Section of the PIM. 
The  manual  will  be  approved  by  the  P&D,  Finance  Department  and  IFAD,  prior  to 
project start-up.  
  Internal  Audit.  For  internal  audit,  the  PMU  shall  engage  the  services  of  an 
auditing firm which would supplement the work of the external audit. The internal 
audit  will  have  larger  focus  on  the  activities  of  the  SMP.  The  PMU  shall  seek  No 
Objection  from  IFAD  for  the  TORs,  subsequent  to  which  the  auditing  firm  will  be 
appointed within two months. The auditing firm will be required to submit quarterly 
reports on the activities of the SMP which would be shared with IFAD as part of the 
project’s QFRs. A position of Manager Internal Audit is being proposed for the PMU 
to coordinate for the engagement and working of the internal audit firm.  
  Audit. Audit of Project Accounts will be carried out within three months of close of 
financial year by Auditor General of Pakistan through its provincial Director General 
Audit (Quetta) Report of each Audit will be conveyed to P&D Department and IFAD 
within six months of the close of financial year. The PMU will prepare the TORs for 
the  external  audit  by  the  Auditor-General’s  Office  to  ensure  that  IFAD’s 
requirements  are  clearly  documented  and  understood.  Further,  the  project  will 
submit its  annual  financial  statements  to the AGP no later than two months  after 
the end of the financial year to ensure timeliness. The external audit will examine 
(i)  consolidated  financial  statements  (ii)  Designated  Account  operations,  (iii) 
Statement  of  expenditures.  The  Audit  Report  would  respond  to  the  TORs  shared 
with the provincial Director General Audit (Quetta) for the external audit before the 
start of this activity. If the circumstances so warrant, IFAD may require the project 
26 
to arrange for an external independent audit in addition to annual audit by Auditor 
General of Pakistan. 
  Audit of the SMP’s Accounts—related to the activities funded by the GLLSP, will be 
carried out by a Chartered Accountant Firm selected with the concurrence of PMU. 
Accounts  of  the  SMP  will  be  audited  within  three  months  of  the  close  of  financial 
year  and  audit  report  furnished  to  PMU  within  six  months  of  closure  of  annual 
accounts. 
G.  SECTION: VI PROCUREMENT 
1.  INTRODUCTION TO PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT  
  This  module describes  the  rules  and  procedures  applicable  to  the  procurement  of 
goods,  works  and  services  for Gwadar Lasbela Livelihood Support Project (GLLSP-
II).  Procurement  financed  from  IFAD  funds  shall  only  be  carried  out  during  the 
Project implementation period, i.e. from project effectiveness to project completion. 
The applicable procurement modalities are defined in the Letter to the Borrower and 
the procedures manual. The procurement process, from planning to final payment, 
is conducted by the  PMU  as per the guidelines of the Balochistan Public Procurement 
Regulatory Authority (BPPRA)6/PPRA and IFAD7. 
  PROCUREMENT  PRINCIPLES:  The  PMU  must  comply  with  the  following 
principles:  
  ETHICS:  The  guiding  principles  of  ethical  behavior  are  impartiality, independence 
and integrity. No person or entity shall use his/her/ its authority, position or office 
for  personal  gain,  which  will  be  defined  as  soliciting,  accepting  or  otherwise 
benefiting  from  anything  of  material  value,  in  any  form,  either  in  person  or 
indirectly through close relatives or associates, as a result of procurement financed 
by IFAD. 
  The Project Management Unit (PMU) staff have a duty to: 
a.  Maintain the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all relationships; 
b.  Develop the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
c.  Maximize the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are responsible 
for the purposes for which these funds and resources were provided to the Project;  
d.  Comply  with  both  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Financing  Agreement,  the  laws 
and  regulations  of  Government  of  Pakistan/Balochistan,  accepted  professional 
ethics and contractual obligations; 
e.  Declare  any  personal interest that may  affect, or  might  reasonably  be  deemed  by 
others  to  affect,  impartiality  in  any  matter  relevant  to  their  duties  (conflict  of 
interest). In a situation of this nature, the official concerned will not participate in 
any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; and  
f.  Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not uses 
such  information  for  personal gain  or for the  unfair  benefit  of  any  bidder, supplier 
or contractor. Information given in the course of their duties shall be true, fair and 
not designed to mislead. 
  ACCOUNTABILITY:  PMU  is  accountable  to  IFAD  for  all  actions  and  decisions  in 
relation  to  Project-funded  procurement.  This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to, 
ensuring that: 
a.  The funds are used solely for the purpose for which they were provided; and 
b.  Procurement is undertaken in accordance with this Module. 
6 http://www.bppra.gob.pk/uploads/publication/afa23b33e1d60816869ffa74a9dba8b0.pdf  
7 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421018/proc_handbook_e.pdf/2febc53a-4244-4447-a788-
d06a632fd3b5  
27 
  COMPETITION:  Full, fair  and legitimate competition among eligible suppliers  and 
contractors is the foundation on which project-funded procurement activities will be 
based. The most common method of seeking competition is through a competitive 
bidding  process,  and,  in this  regard, GLLSP-II specifies  that  all  goods,  works  and 
services will be obtained through an agreed procurement process involving at least 
three  separate  suppliers  or  contractors  whose  business  is  directly  related  to  the 
procurement being undertaken. 
a.  The  project  will  therefore  promote  genuine  competition  at  every  opportunity  and 
will provide evidence of: 
b.  fair  and  genuine  competition  in  the  compilation  of shortlists  and in the  solicitation 
of bids; and 
c.  the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process 
d.  Single  sourcing  and  direct contracting  do not  provide the  elements  of competition 
required  by  IFAD.  Only  in  exceptional  circumstances  will  these  approaches  be 
considered and approved in procurement plans agreed with IFAD. 
e.  Notwithstanding the above, PMU recognizes that it is neither practical nor efficient 
to  advertise  internationally  for  low-value  contracts  for  goods,  works  or  services, 
and  the  degree  to  which  the  principle  of  competition  is  required  for  each 
procurement activity will be outlined in the procurement method approved by IFAD 
within the approved procurement plan for each year. 
  FAIRNESS: PMU expectation is that Project-funded procurement will be open to as 
many  eligible  bidders  as  is  practicable  in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
competition. GLLSP-II will ensure that all prospective bidders are: 
a.  Managed  with  a  consistent  approach  and  application  of  laws,  regulations  and 
requirements in respect of the procurement process; 
b.  Offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete offered a level playing 
field on which to genuinely compete; and 
c.  Treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality and 
equal opportunity can be demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
d.  In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, the Project will: 
e.  Not  tolerate  exclusion  of,  discrimination,  bias  or  prejudice  against,  or  favoritism 
or  inequality  towards  any  potential  supplier  or  contractor,  either  directly  or 
indirectly through manipulation of any part of the procurement process, including, 
but  not  limited  to,  the  preparation  of  technical  specifications,  evaluation  criteria 
or  bidding  requirements;  where  any  such  activity  is  suspected  or  proven,  PMU 
reserves  the  right  to  take  any  preventative,  corrective  or  punitive  action  it 
considers appropriate;  
f.  Seek to address, any impositions that may deter or impinge on the attainment of 
fairness within the procurement process. 
  TRANSPARENCY: Because a lack of transparency can be perceived as an attempt 
to withhold information, which in turn may make the fairness and  integrity of the 
procurement  process  suspect,  the  Project  will  ensure  the  highest  degree  of 
transparency  and  openness  within  the  procurement  processes  it  undertakes. 
Transparency  within  procurement  relates  to  disclosing,  in  the  public  domain, 
information for parties involved, interested in or affected by the process, including 
but not limited to information on: 
a.  the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
b.  where to access relevant data; 
c.  the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
d.  the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
e.  contract award data; and 
f.  appeal procedures 
g.  Modes of communication/publication of such information will vary depending on 
the  nature  of  the  data  but  will  generally  be  through  existing  means  of  public 
28 
information (e.g. government websites, public notice boards or media) or in the 
procurement documentation relevant to an individual procurement activity (e.g. 
bid notices and bidding documents). The Project will act openly, predictably and 
in accordance with the information provided. 
  EFFICIENCY,  EFFECTIVENESS  AND  ECONOMY:  GLLSP-II  will  demonstrate 
efficiency and economy in undertaking Project-related procurement, to avoid undue 
implementation  delays  and  to  achieve  value  for  money.  Procurement  will  be  well 
organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, quality and timeliness, and 
at the optimum price, in accordance with the appropriate guidelines, principles and 
regulations. Processes will be proportionate to the procurement activity, so that the 
overall cost of conducting the procurement process is minimized and tailored to the 
size  of  the  budget  for  the  activity  being  undertaken,  while  upholding  the  guiding 
principles.  Efficiencies  may  be  obtained  through  a  combination  of  methods.  For 
example, a strategic approach can be taken to planning, combining and conducting 
procurement activities so as to minimize loss of time and resources. 
  VALUE FOR MONEY: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for 
money  for  all  Project  procurement  activities  through the  optimum  combination  of 
several factors, including: 
a.  applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
b.  ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for the 
task and are not over specified; 
c.  ensuring  that  the  goods,  works  or  services  are  contracted  on  the  best  possible 
terms, taking into account their expected life cycle; and 
d.  ensuring  that  the  provider/supplier  of  the  goods,  works  or  services  is  qualified, 
legally entitled and competent to execute the contract.  
e.  Best  value  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  lowest  initial  price  option,  but  rather 
represents  the  best  return  on  investment,  taking  into  consideration:  the  unique 
and specific circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost 
and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting 
its original objectives. 
  GOOD  GOVERNANCE  AND  ACCOUNTABILITY  POLICIES:  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines  and  Anti-Corruption  Policy,  will  be  adapted  to  this  Project  through  the 
Financing  Agreement,  require  zero  tolerance  to  corrupt  and  fraudulent  practices. 
Therefore,  the  procurement  process  also  requires  a  strict  adherence  to 
BPPRA/PPRA and IFAD Guidelines and Policy. 
  IFAD  MONITORING  AND  REVIEW:  To  ensure  that  the  procurement  processes 
are  carried  out  in  conformity  with  BPPRA/PPRA  and  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines 
and  with  the  agreed  procurement  plan,  IFAD  will  review  arrangements  for 
procurement of goods, works and services proposed by the PMU including: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Contract packaging; 
Applicable procedures and procurement methods; 
Bidding documentation; 
Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
Draft contracts and contract amendments 
  The  extent  to  which  these  review  procedures  will  be  applied  to  the  Project  is 
contained in the letter to the Borrower/Recipient. 
  LEGAL FRAMEWORK: The  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  by  GLLSP-
II  follows  BPPRA  Rules  and  Regulations  as  well  as  the  modalities  set  out  in  the 
Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  this  PIM  and  specified  each  year  in  the  procurement 
plans  for  each  individual  procurement.  The  below  table  summarizes  the 
procurement modalities and prior review thresholds applicable to the project. 
29 
  The procurement methods allowed for GLLSP-II are the following: 
GOODS & WORKS 
SERVICES (FIRMS AND 
INDIVIDUALS)  
International  Competitive  Bidding (ICB)  
Quality 
(QCBS) 
and  Cost  Based  Selection 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
International Shopping (IS) 
Selection 
based 
Qualification (CQQ) 
Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) 
on 
Consultants’ 
National Shopping (NS) 
Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
Direct Contracting or Direct Procurement 
Procurement with community participation 
Service 
Community 
selection (SMT) 
Single-source selection (SSS) 
Organization 
Procurement from UN/ GoP Agencies 
Selection of individual consultants (ICS) 
  Types of goods, works and services: It is anticipated that the following goods, 
works and services will be procured for GLLSP-II: 
Goods  –  Vehicles,  motorcycles,  office  and  IT  equipment,  software,  furniture, 
generators, supplies, etc. 
Works – Irrigation infrastructure, Land Development and Farm to Market roads. 
Services - Audits, Studies and Surveys, Consultancies (from specialized consulting 
firms  or  individuals),  Seminars  and  Workshops,  Technical  Assistance, 
Training and other services. 
  Distribution  of  roles:  Except  for  certain  small  value,  the  PMU  is  responsible 
for  carrying  out  the  Project’s  procurement  process.  As  a  procuring  entity  for 
GLLSP-II,  the  PMU  has  established  a  procurement  unit  in  charge  of,  inter  alia, 
procurement  planning,  handling  of  the  bidding  process,  conducting  bid  openings 
and evaluations of bids, and procurement/contract monitoring.  
  The  different  steps  in  the  procurement  process  at  PMU  level  are  allocated  as 
follows: 
  Table  1:  Responsibility  of  task  with  different  steps  in  the  procurement  process  at 
PMU level 
Tasks 
Procurement planning 
Preparation of advertisements 
Review of advertisements 
Approval of advertisements 
Preparation of bidding documents 
Review of bidding documents 
Approval of bidding documents 
Bid opening 
Bid opening minutes and attendance sheet 
Rejection, cancellation, extension of bids 
30 
Responsible staff/unit 
Procurement Specialist 
Procurement Specialist 
Manager Finance & Administration 
Project Director 
Procurement Specialist 
Manager  Finance  &  Administration  / 
relevant sector specialist  
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
PMU bid opening committee 
Procurement Specialist 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
Bid evaluation 
Preparation of evaluation report 
Approval of evaluation report 
award  (based on approved 
Contracts 
evaluation report) 
Signature of contracts 
Contract monitoring 
Procurement monitoring 
Task 
Procurement planning 
Preparation of advertisements 
Review of advertisements 
Approval of advertisements 
Preparation of bidding documents 
Review of bidding documents 
Approval of bidding documents 
Bid opening 
Bid opening minutes and attendance sheet 
Rejection, cancellation, extension of bids 
Bid evaluation 
Preparation of evaluation report 
Approval of evaluation report 
(based  on  approved 
Contracts  award 
evaluation report) 
Signature of contracts 
Contract monitoring 
Procurement monitoring 
PMU bid evaluation committee 
Procurement  Specialist  (as  secretary  of 
the evaluation committee) 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
Project Director 
/  Relevant 
Project Director 
Procurement  Specialist 
Specialist 
Procurement Specialist 
Responsible staff/unit 
Procurement Specialist 
Procurement Specialist 
Manager Finance & Administration 
Project Director 
Procurement Specialist 
Director Finance & Administration 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
PMU bid opening committee 
Procurement Specialist 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
PMU bid evaluation committee 
Procurement  Specialist  (as  secretary  of 
the evaluation committee) 
Project Director 
IFAD (No Objection) 
Project Director 
Project Director 
Procurement Specialist 
Procurement Specialist 
  The  PMU is  allowed  to  conduct  procurement for  goods,  works  and  non-consulting 
services  when  the  value  is  below  USD  1,000.  The  Procurement/Administrative 
Assistant  will  prepare  the  requests  for  quotations,  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Procurement  Specialist.  A  small  evaluation  committee  is  set  up  to  evaluate 
quotations  received  from  bidders.  The  PS  prepares  the  evaluation  reports  (as 
secretary  of  the  evaluation  committee),  which  are  approved  by  the  PD,  who 
delegates his/her powers to the purchase committee for the award and signature of 
the  purchase  orders  (purchase  order  attached  in  Annex  4  (Procurement)).  With 
regard  to  implementing  partners,  PMU  representation  will  be  at  all  stages  of 
procurement, from planning, advertisement, short-listing to Purchase Order/Award 
of the Contract. In addition to ensuring adherence to applicable procurement rules, 
the  Procurement  Specialist  and  Project  Director  are  responsible  for  reporting 
procurement  activities  and  submitting  related  data  to  IFAD  and  the  P&DD 
Government of Balochistan. 
  IFAD  plays  an  important  role  in  the  support,  monitoring  and  control  of  the 
Project’s  procurement.    IFAD’s  No  Objection  must  consequently  be  obtained  at 
certain stages of the  procurement  process, on the basis  of  prior review thresholds 
31 
specified in the LTB. In the case of a query or rejection of a No Objection/approval 
request by IFAD or by the Project  Director, the procurement  unit  is  required  to  (i) 
suspend the procurement process, (ii)  address the  issue  raised  (by  answering the 
query  or  correcting  the  faulty  documents),  (iii)  re-submit  the  request  and  obtain 
the  No  Objection/approval  and  (iv)  resume  the  procurement  process.  The  above 
Table1  is  summarizes  the  responsibilities  of  each  of  the  parties  involved  in  the 
procurement of goods, works and services for GLLSP-II. 
2.  PROCUREMENT MONITORING SYSTEM 
  The  PMU  uses  a  database  system  developed  on  Excel  to  monitor  GLLSP’s-II 
procurement  actions  and  status  on  a  continuous  basis  for  each  individual 
procurement  case.  This  Procurement  Tracking  System  (PTS),  which  includes  the 
procurement  plan,  also  records  the  following  data  (in  addition  to  planned 
amounts): 
a.  Requisition  date  and  number  (sequential  number  generated  automatically  to 
identify each procurement case)8and name of requesting staff 
b.  Component,  sub-component  AWPB  activity,  expense  category,  district  and 
financier 
c.  Full description of goods, works or services and estimated cost 
d.  Shortlists (names and country of suppliers) 
e.  Date  of  issuance  and  number  of  bidding  documents  (ITB,  RFP,  RFQ,  etc.)  or 
date  of IFAD’s No Objection in the case of a waiver of competitive bidding 
f.  Date of evaluation and name of selected supplier 
g.  Date of IFAD’s No Objection for contract award 
h.  PO  or  contract  amount,  date  and  number  (and  subsequent  amendments,  if 
any) 
i.  Amount of advance paid, if any 
j.  Date of delivery and Receiving and Inspection Report date and number 
k. 
l.  Payment date(s). 
m.  Any relevant comments may also be included in a special column. 
Invoice amount, number and receipt date 
  This system also allows procurement data to be sorted by project component/sub-
component, by expense category, by contract number or date, by country of origin 
of  the  selected  suppliers,  by  financier,  by  district,  etc.  Reports  and  statistics  can 
then be issued according to any of those criteria and for any period requested. The 
Procurement Specialist  is  required  to  input  each  procurement  action  into  the  PTS 
on  a  real  time  basis.  The  information  inserted  into  the  database  enables  to 
generate monitoring reports for the PMU, P&DD GoB, and IFAD as needed. 
3.  PROCUREMENT CYCLE 
  Procurement  includes  the  planning,  purchasing,  delivery  and  final  hand-over  of 
goods, works and services. The procurement cycle includes the following ten steps: 
a.  Procurement planning;  
b.  Requisitioning 
c.  Identification of suppliers by advertising and short-listing (where applicable) 
d.  Competition  process  (via  ITB,  RFP,  RFQ,  Quotation  etc.,  or  waiver  of  competition 
in exceptional circumstances) 
e.  Selection of supplier (following an evaluation process) 
f.  Award of contract (including the issuance of the purchase order or contract) 
g.  Contract administration 
h.  Delivery of goods, works or services 
i.  Reporting. 
8 The format of the requisition number is YY/XXX where YY represents the current year and XXX is a sequential 
number. 
32 
is  described 
  The  procurement  cycle 
in  the  following  sections. 
Throughout  this  cycle,  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  Project  Director  are 
responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  rules  and  procedures  of  the  GoB  and  IFAD 
(where  applicable)  are  fully  complied  with,  in  conformity  with  the  Project  basic 
documents and the BPPRA Rules. 
in  detail 
  Procurement  planning:  Procurement  planning  is  the  first  stage  of  the 
procurement  process.  Each  year  during  the  second  half  of  April, the  Procurement 
Specialist  prepares  a  detailed  procurement  plan  using  the  AWPB  as  the  source 
document. The procurement plan9  (shown in Annex 5 (Procurement)) is a detailed 
list of anticipated purchases of  goods, works and services. It is prepared for a 12- 
month  period  (aligned  to  the  AWPB)  and  updated  on  a  ‘real-time’  basis;  it  is 
revised  with  each  AWPB  revision.  The  procurement  plan  is  presented  by 
procurement  category  (goods,  works  and  services)  and  by  component,  and 
indicates  thresholds  for  procurement  methods  and  IFAD  Prior  Review.  For  each 
individual  procurement  item,  the  PP  shows  separate  planned  vs.  actual  dates 
lines and contains the following information: 
Project component and AWPB activity code 
Expense category 
Procurement case number (from the PTS) 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d)  Nature of procurement, description and quantity of goods/works/services 
e) 
f) 
Procurement method and IFAD review requirement 
Pre-qualification  or  post-qualification  requirement  (for  goods,  works  or  non-
consulting services) 
Estimated cost, including transport and insurance, if applicable 
Planned  dates  for  the  entire  procurement  process,  i.e.  expression  of 
interest  or  pre-qualification  (if  applicable),  bidding  document  preparation, 
publication,  bid  opening,  bid  evaluation,  post-qualification  (if  applicable), 
contract  signature,  including  IFAD  No  Objection  (for  each  step  where 
applicable) 
Planned completion or delivery date. 
g) 
h) 
i) 
  Once  it  is  completed,  the  procurement  plan  is  submitted  to  the  Finance  and  the 
PD by the end of April each year for review. While reviewing the procurement plan, 
the  Finance  and  PD  must  ensure  that  (i)  the  information  contained  in  the  plan 
adequately reflect the AWPB, (ii) the cost estimates are reasonable, (iii) funds are 
available to  conduct the procurement actions and (iv) the anticipated procurement 
methods are in conformity with the provisions of the national rules and the Letter to 
the  Borrower.  The  Procurement  Specialist  makes  corrections  to  the  procurement 
plan  as  requested  by  the  Finance  Unit  and  PD.  Once  the  plan  is  validated,  the 
Procurement  Specialist  makes  a  proposal  for  grouping  goods,  works  and  services 
to  be  procured  into  sizeable  bid  packages  so  as  to  permit  the  optimal  use  of 
competitive  bidding.  The  finalized  procurement  plan  is  an  integral  part  of  the 
AWPB.  It  is  therefore  submitted  to  the  PSC  for  approval  with  the  AWPB,  by  Mid-
May.  After  approval  by  the  PSC,  the  procurement  plan  and  the  proposal  for 
grouping are forwarded to IFAD for review and possible No Objection by last week 
of  May.  Observations  from  IFAD  are  discussed  among  the  Project  Director,  team 
and the  Procurement Specialist  will integrate in the plan. In the absence of a reply 
from  within  30  days  of  sending  it,  the  procurement  plan  is  deemed  approved  by 
IFAD. It is then shared with the relevant PMU/Components Specialist staff. 
  Every  time  a  step  is  completed  in  the  procurement  process,  the  Procurement 
Specialist updates the procurement plan by inserting in the corresponding column, 
the  actual  date  on  which  the  step  was  completed.  The  PP  is  updated  every  time 
there  is  a  revision  of  the  AWPB  (usually  at  half-year);  the  PP is then reviewed by 
9 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421018/proc_handbook_e.pdf/2febc53a-4244-4447-a788-
d06a632fd3b5  
33 
the team and PD and re-submitted together with the AWPB – to the approval of the 
PSC, as well as to IFAD for No Objection. 
  Purchase requisition: The purchase requisition is the document that initiates the 
procurement  action.  It  is  prepared  by  the  requesting  staff  using  the  model 
shown  in  ( Annex  3 (Procurement)),  and  contains  the following information: 
a.  AWPB activity code 
b.  Description of goods, works or services requested 
c.  Cost estimate (including transport10, insurance and incidental costs) 
d.  Date of required delivery 
e.  Justification for waiver of competitive bidding, if applicable. 
f.  Technical specifications/TOR must be attached to the requisition. 
  The  requisition  is  signed  by  the  requesting  staff  and  forwarded  to  the  Manager 
Finance and Administration (MFA) who indicates the expense category and account 
numbers and verifies that: 
a.  The procurement request is included in the procurement plan; if not, s/he asks 
the requesting staff for justification and notes it on the requisition. 
b.  Funds are available under the component/AWPB activity and expense category; 
s/he prints out a budget statement and attaches it to the requisition. 
c.  The MFA consults with the Procurement Specialist as needed to ensure that the 
requisition is complete and the information adequate. 
  After  verification  by  the  MFA,  the  requisition  goes  to  the  Project  Director  who 
ensures that: 
a.  Proposed items are in accordance with the approved procurement plan; if not, 
s/he  ensures  that  the  justification  provided  by  the  requesting  staff  is 
acceptable11. 
b.  Estimated cost is reasonable and within the budget for the current year. 
c.  Proposed goods, works or services are technically appropriate. 
d.  Potential bidders have been identified. 
e.  Information  on  the  form  complies  with  procurement  rules,  policies  and 
procedures adopted for the Project. 
f.  If funds are not available, the Project Director decides whether to postpone the 
procurement  or to  reallocate  the  budget  and informs the requesting  staff  and 
MFA accordingly. Once approved the requisition the requester shall submit it to 
procurement  unit.  The  Procurement  Specialist  determines  the  appropriate 
method  for  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  or  services  on  the  basis  of 
threshold and input in PTS.  
  Upon receiving an approved purchase requisition, the Procurement Specialist must: 
a.  Input the information on the requisition into the PTS 
b.  Note the system-generated sequential number on the requisition, and 
c.  Create a procurement file. 
  The Procurement  Specialist then updates the procurement plan by entering the file 
number.  All  documents  related  to  a  particular  procurement  case  are  kept  in  the 
same file. In order to facilitate filing and search, the same number, preceded by the 
appropriate  prefix  (e.g.  ITB,  RFP,  RFQ,  PO,  etc.)  will  be  used  to  identify  the 
competition document and corresponding contract. 
  Technical  Specifications  and  Terms  of  Reference  (ToR):  The  technical 
specifications (for goods and works) or terms of reference (for services) attached to 
10 For purposes of estimating the cost on the requisition, airfreight is assumed to represent 30% and ocean 
freight 15% of the cost of goods. 
11 If the purchase is authorized, the Procurement Specialist will amend the procurement plan as part of the 
next update 
34 
the purchase requisition (Sample attached in Annex 3 (Procurement)) are normally 
prepared  by  the  requesting  staff  (under  supervision  by  the  component  head) 
and  checked  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  for  quality  and  suitability.  However, 
assistance  from  specialized  technical  experts  may  be  needed  to  develop  complex 
specifications  (including  specific  packaging/shipping  requirements)  or  terms  of 
reference. 
  Technical  Specifications:  Specifications  are  based  on  relevant  technical 
characteristics  and/or  performance  requirements.  The  specifications  must  clearly 
and  fully  describe  the  goods  or  works  required,  as  accurately  as  possible  and  in 
generic terms. The use of brand names, catalogue numbers or similar classifications 
that  could  favor  a  particular  supplier  must  be  avoided.  Where  there  is  no  choice 
but  to use  a  brand  name  or  catalog number  of a  particular manufacturer in  order 
to clarify an otherwise incomplete specification, then it shall be complemented with 
the  words  “or  equivalent”.  The  specifications  must  be  drafted  to  allow  the 
evaluation  of  offers  for  goods  or  works  which  have  similar  characteristics  and 
which provide performance at least substantially equivalent to those specified. 
  There are three types of specifications, which may be combined: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Functional specifications  define  the  function or  duty  to  be  performed  and 
focus  on  what  the  product  is  to  do.  Less  emphasis  is  given  to  materials  or 
dimensions. 
Performance specifications define the performance and results required of 
the product. 
In  order  to  assure  quality  of  the  goods/works,  relevant  product  standards 
(international  or national) and environmental standards (energy star ratings, 
recyclable  materials,  etc.)  should  be  included.  Where  certain  standard 
specifications  are  referred  to,  a  statement  should  follow  that  other 
international  or  national  standards  that  promise  to  confer  equal  or  better 
quality will also be acceptable. 
d.  Design  requirements  specifications:  the  exact  dimensions,  materials  or 
characteristics  must  be  provided.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  type  of 
approach  might  exclude  certain  suppliers  (and  hence,  lessen  competition) 
because of differences in engineering 
practices. Dimensions should always be quoted using the metric system. 
e. 
  Standards and technical specifications quoted in bidding documents should promote 
the broadest possible competition, while assuring the critical performance or other 
requirements for the goods or works under procurement. As much as possible, the 
requesting  staff  should  try  to  specify  internationally  accepted  standards  such  as 
those  issued  by  the  International  Standards  Organization  (ISO)  with  which  the 
equipment  or  materials  or  workmanship  shall  comply.  Where  such  international 
standards  are  unavailable  or  are  inappropriate,  national  standards  specified  by 
Pakistan Standards Quality and Control Authority may be specified. In all cases, the 
bidding  or  proposal  documents  shall  state  that  equipment,  material  or 
workmanship  meeting  other  standards,  which  promise  at  least  substantial 
equivalence, will also be accepted. 
  Terms of References (ToRs): ToRs are normally used for the services contracts. 
They detail the objective, scope and nature of the assignment, and form an integral 
part of the contract. The following information must be included in the ToRs: 
a. 
b. 
The     background     of      the      Project, including      objectives      and     
main components/activities; 
A  description  of  the  required  services.  The  activities  to  be  performed  or 
services to be rendered must be described in detail: for example, modalities 
of  a  survey  (defining  area,  data  needed,  means  to  be  employed); 
organization  of  a  training course  (defining target  group,  curriculum  outline, 
training materials, course duration); 
35 
c. 
d. 
A comprehensive list of the tasks and standards to comply with; 
Coordination  arrangements  (including  the  list  of  documents  and/or 
services  to  be  provided  by  the  PMU  or  the  end-user  in  order  to  facilitate 
the execution of the assignment); 
e.  Modalities for monitoring and control of progress by the PMU; 
f. 
A  detailed  work  schedule,  i.e.  duration  of  activities/services  from  inception 
to  completion,  indicating  any  factors  influencing  that  timeframe,  such  as 
seasonal 
considerations, schedule for initial submission, review/approval time, etc.; 
A  clear  definition  of  expected  outputs/results  and  the  final  products  to  be 
submitted (e.g. survey  completed,  maps  drawn,  research  undertaken,  data 
collected/elaborated, workshop conducted), and 
Reporting requirements (for example, specification of format and content for 
interim  and  final  reports,  periodicity  and  deadlines,  number  of  copies, 
recipients, etc.). 
g. 
h. 
i. 
  Identification  and shortlisting  of  suppliers:  The  identification  and  shortlisting 
of  suppliers  for  the  GLLSP-II  procurement  is  normally  carried  out  by  means  of  a 
competitive  process,  in  compliance  with  the  national  procurement  rules.  This 
competitive process may be more or less open depending on the provisions of the 
BPPRA  Rules  and  the  IFAD  LTB.  The  table  below  summarizes  the  procurement 
modalities  and  the  IFAD  review  requirements  for  the  various  categories  of 
procurement and related thresholds: 
36 
Threshold for Procurement of Goods, Works and Services 
Thresholds for 
Procurement and 
Review Methods 
Expenditure 
Category 
Contract Value 
Threshold (US$) 
Procurement / 
Selection Method 
Contracts Subject  
to Prior Review/  
Post Review 
≥ 3,500,000 
≥ 20,000 < 
5,000,000 
ICB 
NCB 
Prior Review  
Prior Review 
< 20,000 
National Shopping 
(Post review) 
All values 
Direct Contracting 
≥ 500,000 
≥ 20,000 < 
200,000 
ICB 
NCB 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
≥ 1,000 < 20,000  National Shopping 
(Post review) 
All values 
Direct Contracting 
≥ 200,000 
≥ 20,000 < 
100,000 
< 20,000 
All values 
QCBS/QBS 
(International) 
 (QCBS/QBS/ 
FBS/LCS) 
CQS 
SSS 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Post Review  
≥ 100,000 
IC- International  
< 100,000 
IC –National 
All values 
ICS – SSS 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Works 
Goods 
Consulting Services 
– Firms 
Consulting Services 
- Individuals (ICS) 
   Where: 
ICB.  
International Competitive Bidding  NCB.   National Competitive Bidding 
QCBS.   Quality and Cost Based Selection 
CQS.   Selection 
Based 
on 
Consultants’ 
Qualification  
FBS. 
Fixed Budget Selection 
LCS. 
Least Cost Selection 
SSS. 
Single Source Selection 
QBS 
Quality Based Selection 
ICS. 
Individual Consultant Selection 
DC. 
Direct Contracting 
  Open Competitive Bidding – ICB or NCB (Goods & Works): As indicated in the 
table above, open competitive bidding may be done at the national or  international 
level,  depending  on  the  value  of  the  procurement.  International  bidding  is 
appropriate  for  high value  or  complex  procurements  and  where  the  goods,  works 
or  services  by  their  nature  or  scope,  are  more  likely  to  be  of  interest  to 
international suppliers. National competitive bidding is the procedure normally used 
for  public  procurement  in  Pakistan;  it  is  most  appropriate  for  goods  or  works  of 
smaller value, which are not likely to attract adequate foreign competition. In both 
cases,  the  selection  of  the  supplier  is  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  an  invitation  to 
bid, using national standard bidding documents. Procurement of goods  and  works 
on open competitive bidding is subject to validation from the Project Director. IFAD 
37 
prior review is required for goods and works valued at USD 20,000 or more. Both 
ICB and NCB procurement is conducted exclusively by the PMU. 
  Pre-qualification: For high value and/or complex procurement of goods, works or 
non-consulting services, the PMU may decide at planning stage to go through a pre-
qualification process in 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
order to identify potential bidders that have the required capacity, resources 
and  experience  for  the  contract.  This  procedure,  which  limits  the  actual 
bidding  process  to  a  limited  number  of  qualified  suppliers/contractors,  is 
particularly useful when: 
Bidders may be discouraged by the high cost of preparing bids and would be 
more  willing  to  invest  resources  in  bid  preparation  knowing  that  they  are 
competing against a limited number of bidders,  
Evaluating  a  high  number  of  bids  would  be  very  costly  and  time-consuming 
for the PMU and/or 
Contractor’s  qualifications  are  key  for  the  satisfactory  performance  of  the 
contract. 
  The  Procurement  Specialist  prepares  the  pre-qualification  documents  using  the 
national template issued by the BPPRA, including a short description of the Project, 
a description  of  the  goods,  works  or  non-consulting  services,  the  pre-qualification 
criteria  and  the  details  for  submission  of  applications  (name/address,  deadline, 
submission  modality,  and  information/documentation  required  to  verify  the 
applicant’s eligibility or qualifications). The Procurement Specialist  then  drafts  the 
pre-qualification  invitation,  which  is  published  in  the  BPPRA  and  GLLSP-II 
websites,  and  in  at  least  2  daily  newspapers  (Urdu  and  in English)  based  on  the 
required  BPPRA  thresholds.  Sufficient  copies  of  the  pre-qualification  documents 
must be ready for sale at the PMU (by the Procurement Specialist) on the first day 
of  publication of the notice.  The price charged must only  reflect the actual cost of 
production  of the  pre-qualification documents. The  Procurement  Specialist records 
in a dedicated register, the name and address of all applicants who purchase a pre-
qualification document. 
  On the submission deadline, the Evaluation Committee augmented with the relevant 
technical expert or consultant, meets to evaluate the applications received  against 
the  criteria  defined  in  the  pre-qualification  document  and  to  attribute  a  score  to 
each application. The evaluation report prepared by the Procurement Specialist (as 
secretary  of  the  committee)  identifies  the  applicants  that  are  qualified,  and  those 
that are not qualified, and states the reasons. The pre-qualification report is signed 
by all committee members, approved by the PD and sent to IFAD for No Objection 
along with the bidding documents. 
  Invitation to Bid: The Procurement Specialist prepares the ITB using the national 
standard  bidding  documents.  The  ITB  package  must  contain  the  following 
elements: 
a. 
b. 
ITB letter and  Instructions to  bidders  (clearly  outlining the required  validity  of 
bids  as  well  as  the  criteria  for  bid  evaluation  and  selection  of  the  lowest 
evaluated bid); 
Information  on  the  deadline  and  location  for  bid  submission,  and  public  bid 
opening; 
c.  Bid submission sheet, including sample formats for bid security, if applicable; 
d.  Model contract or PO, including general and special terms and conditions; 
e.  Detailed  list  of  goods  or  description  of  works  (including  norms,  standards 
and/or methods to comply with); 
f.  Technical  specifications,  list  of  goods,  bill  of  quantities  and/or  drawings 
(provided by the requesting staff); 
g.  Place and time of delivery or completion schedule; insurance requirements; 
h.  Description of penalties or bonuses; 
38 
i.  Anticorruption  compliance  statement  and/or  permission  for  IFAD  to  inspect 
bidders’  accounts/records  relating  to  the  bid  submission  and  contract 
performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors; 
j.  Guidance on complaint filing procedures; 
k.  Financial provisions (payment modalities, advances, bank guarantees, etc.). 
  The  Procurement  Specialist  drafts  the  bid  advertisement,  which  contains  the 
following: 
a.  The bid number; 
b.  A  brief  presentation  of  the  Project  and  the  funding  source  (refer  to  IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines for the appropriate text to use); 
c.  A  description  of  goods/works  to  be  procured,  and  name  of  the  contracting 
authority; 
d.  The  preference  given  to  goods/works  manufactured 
in  Pakistan  or 
in 
developing countries, as well as the eligibility criteria for this preference; 
e.  The method and criteria to be used for the evaluation and comparison of bids; 
f.  The place, contact name and modalities for retrieving the ITB package; 
g.  The name of the person to contact for queries; 
h.  The place and deadline for submission (date and time); 
i.  The place, date and time for the bid opening. 
  The  ITB  and  advertisement  are  reviewed  by  the  project  technical  team  for 
validation, and approved/signed by the PD. When required, IFAD’s No Objection on 
the bidding documents must also be obtained prior to publishing the advertisement 
(the  Procurement  Specialist  must  enter  the  date  of  the  IFAD  No  Objection  in  the 
PTS).  The  Administration  Assistant  (under  supervision  of  the  Procurement 
Specialist) is responsible for organizing and monitoring the advertising process.  PS 
is  in  charge  of  the  distribution  of  ITB  packages  to  prospective  bidders.  Sufficient 
copies of the bidding documents must be ready for sale at the PMU by the first day 
of  publication  of  the  ITB.  The  price  charged  must  only  reflect  the  actual  cost  of 
production  of  the  bidding  documents.  Prospective  bidders  are  allowed  to  briefly 
inspect  the  bidding  documents  prior  to  purchasing  them.  For  each  ITB  package 
purchased,  the  Procurement  Specialist  (i)  delivers  a  receipt  to  the  bidder,  (ii) 
records the name  and address of the bidder in a  register, (iii) obtains the bidder’s 
signature  on  the  declaration  of  ethical  conduct  and  (iv)  obtains  written 
acknowledgement  from the  bidder  that  samples  have  been inspected  (if the  bid is 
subject to conformity with samples). 
  The Administration Assistant acts as petty cash custodian for the cash received from 
the  sale  of  bids.  The  cash  is  kept  in  a  petty  cash  box  and  locked  in  a  safe.  It  is 
used  to  pay  for  expenses  related  to  the  preparation  of  bids,  the  bid  opening 
ceremony  and  the  bid  evaluation  meetings.  The  Administration  Assistant  keeps  a 
petty cash register to account for these monies, under the supervision of the MFA. 
There  are  no  major  procedural  differences  between  International  Competitive 
Bidding  and  National  Competitive  Bidding  apart  from  the  language,  advertising 
media  used  and  length  of  publication.  International  bids  must  be  advertised  (in 
English)  in  international  newspapers,  specialized  websites12  and  through  local 
representatives of member countries whose firms may potentially be interested. In 
addition,  a  longer  time  must  be  allowed  before  bid  closing  to  reflect  the  slower 
communications  involved.  National  bids,  on  the  other  hand,  are  advertised  in  the 
BPPRA  and  GLLSP-II  websites  or  bulletin  boards,  and  in  at  least  2  daily 
newspapers  (one  in  Urdu  and  one  in  English)  according  to  BPPRA  rules  and 
thresholds. 
12 United Nations Development Business (UNDB) online, or Development Gateway Foundation (market). 
IFAD’s assistance may be sought for the publication of Specific Procurement Notices in these websites. 
39 
  National shopping (goods USD >1,000 to ≤ 20,000; works ≤ USD 20,000): 
When  using  the  national  shopping  procedure,  the  competition  is  limited  only  to 
pre- identified suppliers who are known to be qualified to furnish the goods, works 
or services required. This is the preferred procurement method for readily available 
off-the-shelf  goods,  standard  specification  commodities,  simple  civil  works  of 
small  value  and  standard,  low  value  non-consulting  services.  National  shopping 
may  be  carried  out  at  PMU  level  for  small  value  contracts  (under  USD  1,000),  as 
agreed  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  authorized  by  the  PD,  and  under  the 
supervision of the Procurement Specialist. 
  Identification  of  suppliers  and  shortlisting:  In  order  to  facilitate  the 
procurement  process  when  national  shopping  is  used,  the Procurement Specialist 
develops  and  maintains  a  roster  of  suppliers  sorted  by  industry  and  area  of 
expertise  (i.e.  types  of  goods,  works  and  services  proposed).  This  database  is 
maintained  and  updated  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  with  assistance  from  the 
Administration  Assistant;  it  must  contain  the  following  data  for  each  potential 
supplier: 
a.  Name of company13 
b.  Details of supplier (address, telephone, fax, email, website, etc. - the country 
should be input in a separate field for reporting purposes) 
c.  Industry or area of expertise 
d.  References  (other  projects  or  GLLSP-II  partners  which  have  contracted  the 
supplier in the past) 
e.  Remarks (e.g. evaluation of supplier’s performance). 
f.  Many  sources  are  available  to  the  GLLSP-II  in  order  to  identify  potential 
suppliers, including: 
g.  IFAD headquarters and the IFAD Asia network 
h.  The GoP, GoB and affiliated institutions 
i.  Other  donor-funded  projects  in  Pakistan,  development  partners  and  other 
GLLSP-II partners, embassies of IFAD member countries in Pakistan 
j.  Specialized  procurement  websites 
(e.g.  UN  Development  Business, 
Development 
k.  Gateway Foundation, Development Ex, Compass, etc.) and search engines 
l.  Professional organizations or associations 
m.  Business seminars, visitors, trade representations 
n.  Trade  publications,  professional  journals,  catalogues,  and  other  commercial 
media 
o.  Local telephone directories. 
  A  background  check  should  be  conducted  on  all  entities  that  have  never  worked 
for  IFAD previously. When launching  a  restricted bid  under national shopping, the 
Procurement Specialist, in  collaboration  with  the  technical  staff,  is  responsible  for 
identifying  a  good  mix  of qualified candidates with  the  appropriate expertise  from 
the above sources, and preparing an official shortlist. 
  The  shortlist  is  prepared  on  the  basis  of  set  criteria  such  as  the  technical  and 
financial  capability  of  the  supplier,  capacity  to  supply  the  goods/complete  the 
works/provide the services  in  the  required  timeframe, past  performance,  etc.  The 
shortlist should contain 3 to 4 suppliers for very small value contracts or individual 
consultants,  and  5  to  7  suppliers  for  larger  value  contracts.  The  shortlist  is 
reviewed  by  the  technical  team  as  well  as  MFA  and  approved  by  the  Project 
Director.  Requests  for  quotations  are  prepared and issued  to  different vendors  on 
their  request/demand  and  award  framework  contract  with  the  lowest  evaluate 
vendor  for  the  whole  year  through  this  process.  Frame  work  agreement  shall  be 
generally adopted in the following cases: 
13 A separate roster is maintained by the FM for individual consultants  
40 
a.  Goods  that  can  be  procured  off-the-shelf,  or  are  of  common  use  with 
standard specification; 
b.  Non – Consulting services that are of a simple and non-complex nature and may 
be required from time to time. 
c.  Small value contractor for works under emergency operations. 
d.  Selection  of  vendors  for  the  whole  year  for  purchase  of  expendable  items  such 
as  stationery,  printer  tonner,  office  utilities,  repair  of  vehicles,  vehicles 
lubricants, fuel for vehicles, vehicles services etc. 
e.  The Administrative Assistant shall check availability of required goods form stores 
under any existing frame work agreement; 
f.  The Procurement Specialist and Administrative Assistant shall contact the existing 
vendor with whom arrangements are made under the frame work agreement; 
g.  The  Administrative Assistant  shall  convey  the  requirements  to  procurement  unit 
through approved purchase requisition form. 
h.  The  Procurement  Specialist  shall  convey  the  requirements  through  formal 
purchase order to the vendor. 
i.  The Procurement Specialist will place the order detailing the nature and amount 
of  procurement(s)  made,  date  of  placing  order  and  contact  details  of  vendor 
(conditions  are  already  agreed  with  the  vendor/supplier  under  the  frame  work 
contracting mechanism for each delivery of goods and services being made). 
  Request  for  Quotation14:  The  RFQ  selection  procedure  consists  of  comparing 
price quotations obtained from at least 3 shortlisted suppliers. The RFQ is prepared 
by  the  Procurement  Specialist and  should  contain  the  description  and  quantity  of 
the  goods,  specifications  of  works,  or  description  of  services,  and  the  desired 
delivery/completion  place  and  date.  It  is  reviewed  by  the  MFA  and  signed  by  the 
Project  Director.  After  the  RFQ  is  approved,  a  personalized  invitation  to  submit  a 
quotation  is  addressed  directly  to  each  shortlisted  firm;  a  written  receipt  of 
acknowledgement is obtained from each firm. 
  Restricted  bidding  (non-consulting  services:  Limited  international  or  national 
bidding procedures  are used for non-consulting services above USD 100,000. The 
procedure  is  similar  to  the  open competitive  bidding  described  above,  except that 
invitations  to  bid  are  directly  addressed  to  pre-identified  bidders  instead  of  being 
advertised.  This  is  also  an  appropriate  method  of  procurement  (i)  for  goods  and 
works of a very small value, (ii) in emergency situations, (iii) when the number of 
potential suppliers  is very limited, or (iv) when an open competitive bid has failed 
to result in an award of contract. 
4.  CONSULTING SERVICES 
  Expression  of  Interests  (EOIs):  Whether  from  consulting  firms  or  individual 
consultants,  ‘intellectual’  consulting  services  may  warrant  the  need  for  an 
expression  of  interest  (EOI),  which  is  the  equivalent  of  the  pre-qualification 
process  for  consulting  services,  and  presents  the  same  advantages.  The  EOI  is 
similar  to  the  pre-qualification  procedure  described  above.  The  main  difference in 
the content of the EOI notice is the indication of  whether the EOI is for consulting 
firms  or individuals.  The  evaluation  process  is  the same,  and  once  the  Evaluation 
Committee members sign the evaluation report, it is approved by the PD and sent 
to IFAD for No Objection along with the request for proposals document. 
  Request  for  Proposal  (RFP):  RFPs are issued for the procurement of consulting 
services valued (see threshold). The RFP is prepared by the Procurement Specialist 
and consists of four documents: 
a.  Letter  of  invitation  (brief  description  of  Project,  funding  source,  summary  of 
services  required,  specific  conditions  or  criteria,  currency  of  submission,  name 
of contact person for queries, date/time/address for submission of proposals) 
14 RFQs and RFPs are numbered using the format described in below Sections. 
41 
b.  Information  to  consultants  (evaluation  criteria  and  modalities,  level  of  key  staff 
inputs  or  total  budget,  clause  of  preference  for  developing  countries  firms, 
proposal validity period, and any other relevant information or instruction) 
c.  TOR provided by the requesting staff 
d.  Model contract. 
  The  RFP  is  validated  by  the  technical  team  and  approved  by  the  PD.  The  prior 
review of IFAD is required for services valued (see above threshold table), as well 
as  for all services  procured through  sole source  selection, regardless of the value. 
After  the  RFP  is  approved,  a  personalized  invitation  to  submit  a  proposal  is 
issued  directly  to  each  shortlisted  firm;  a written  receipt  of  acknowledgement is 
obtained from each firm. 
  Individual  consultants:  Individual  consultants  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  a 
comparison of CVs from at least three shortlisted individuals. IFAD’s prior review is 
required irrespective of value. The following criteria are taken into account for the 
selection: 
a.  Technical capacity of consultant 
b.  Academic qualifications and professional experience of consultant 
c.  Knowledge of the region/country 
d.  Proficiency in local  languages  or  other criteria  deemed  relevant  with  regard to the 
ToR.  Based  on  a  review  of  CVs  by  the  selection  committee  (including  the  MFA, 
the  M&E  and  the  requesting  staff/section  head),  the  Procurement  Specialist 
establishes  a  selection  report  and  submits  it  to  the  PD  for  contract  award  (after 
IFAD No Objection as required). 
  Special procurement:   Due to the nature of Project activities and the specificities 
of  the  local  context  in  Pakistan,  special  procedures  shall  be  applied  for  the 
procurement of certain items, as specified in the Project design report. 
5.  COMMUNITY PROCUREMENT:  
  The procurement at community level will be done as per the following procedures.   
  Objectives: These guidelines are developed for Community Organizations (COs) to 
carry-out  project  funded  procurement  of  livelihood  assets,  livestock,  construction 
material  for  physical  infrastructure  schemes,  hiring  of  skilled  and  un-skilled  labor 
etc.  The  main  objective  of  these  guidelines  is  to  provide  first-hand  guidance  to 
community enable them to carry out procurements effectively with acceptable cost 
and quality and in a timely manner. It will further, enable them to strengthen their 
local available options/practices and enable local market to boost their economy by 
creating  business  opportunity  at  grass-root  level.  It  would  help  underlining  the 
importance of record keeping and enable community institutions to maintain record 
at community level.  
  Overview of beneficiary selection: All households living in a hamlet/village are 
eligible to become members of the CO. While public goods financed by project will 
benefit  the  entire  community,  the  private  goods,  including  productive  assets  and 
technical vocational training, enterprise support etc. will be provided only to eligible 
ultra-poor and poor households as per project specified selection criteria. Targeting 
of ultra-poor and poor households will be guided by BISP Poverty Scorecard. A per-
validation  at  ultra-poor  and  poor  households  will  be  done  in  open  community 
meetings  to  address  any  errors  of  inclusion  and  exclusion  in  BISP  Poverty 
Scorecard.  Selection  of  productive  assets  for  the  ultra-poor  will  be  informed  by 
household’s  potential,  local  market  demand  and  a  Household  livelihood  plan 
formulated with assistance of social mobilization partner.  
  Transparency in Procurement: Transparency and quality of the goods & services 
is  the  most  important  element  of  the  community  procurement  which  is  to  be 
ensured by the respective community. To achieve this, the record of each step right 
42 
from  initiation  of  the  procurement  process  till  the  delivery  of  goods  to  the 
beneficiaries  should  be  maintained  so  that  it  may  be  made  public  as  and  when 
required.  
  Types  of  Goods  and  Services  Covered  by  Community  Led  Procurement: 
Community will be involved in two types of procurements; those involving delivery 
of productive assets at household level and community infrastructure.  
in 
  Formation  of  Purchase  Committee  for  Household  Assets:  To  carry  out  the 
transparent  and  systematic  way,  Procurement 
development  activities 
Committee’s at CO level will be established. The procurement of household assets, 
committee  should  consist  of  at  least  04  members  including  two  from  CO  office 
bearers, one from beneficiary households and one member from social mobilization 
partner(s). In case of livestock, the SMP will involve a livestock technician from the 
organization  or  livestock  department to  carry  out  health screening  of the  animals 
prior to finalization of purchase. 
functions 
including  accounting 
  Formation  of  Purchase  Committee  for  CPIs:  For  procurement  of  goods, 
materials and services for the approved CPIs at CO/VO level, the CO/VO will elect a 
purchase committee in general session of the CO/VO and convey this  selection to 
LSO and SMP in the form of a resolution. SMP will train and guide the committee in 
performance  of  their 
for  purchases,  stock 
maintenance, labor payments, work measurement, cash management etc. SMP SO 
and/or  engineer  will  supervise  the  committee’s  work  on  regular  basis  and  check 
their  accounts  at  least  once  every  month.  The  Committee  will  present  their 
progress  and  accounts  to  CO/VO  monthly  meeting.  Scheme  cost  will  be  paid  by 
SMP  to  CO/VO  in  instalments  with  an  initial  advance  and  subsequent  payments 
being  made  on  rendering  of  account  of  previous  advance  and  request  for  next 
instalment duly endorsed by CO through a resolution and supporting invoices. On 
completion  of  a  CPI,  SMP  will  certify  the  completion  and  render  full  account  and 
copies  of invoices  to  the  PMU.  For  CPIs  of  similar  and technical  nature  that  cover 
multiple COs/VOs e.g. Solar systems for lighting, RO plants etc., SMP will carry out 
bulk purchase through competitive bidding overseen by a committee consisting of 
SMP  Engineer,  PMU  Procurement  Specialist  and  two  representatives  from 
beneficiary LSOs.   
  Procurement  Plan:  The  procurement  plan  is  the  vital  part  of  the  procurement 
process  which encompasses the detail of the items to be procured and the timing 
of different activities to be carried out. The (Local Support Organization) LSO shall 
receive the resolution from VOs of the respective Union Councils and based on the 
resolutions, prepare a consolidated assets procurement plan. The committee of the 
CI  shall  initiate  the  process  according  to  that  plan.  The  plan  shall  include  the 
description  of  items,  detail  specification  and  the  quantity  to  be  procured.  An 
estimate of the goods is a must to ascertain the budget availability for the activity. 
The committee shall also plan; when the activities  will be performed. Further, the 
LSO  will  send the  plan  of  assets’  procurement to  Implementing  Partner  (IP)  after 
attestation from members of community organizations. After analysis, IP will send 
this plan to GLLSP-II Procurement Specialist for information. Once the procurement 
will  be  completed,  the  partner  organization  will  report  to  GLLSP-II  on  prescribed 
format.  
  Procurement  Process:  Procurement  of  goods  and  services  is  a  very  sensitive 
matter.  Information  about  price  and  quality  of  goods  is  gathered  from  different 
sources  to  ensure  the  value  for  money  and  right  use  of  funds.  Following  are  the 
stages pertaining to the procurement process in which quality and transparency is 
also deliberated upon in addition to the cost. 
  Solicitation  of  Quotations:  The  procurement  committee shall  conduct  a market 
survey  and  collect  at  least  three  quotations  in  written  form.  The  date,  contact 
number,  rate,  specification  and terms  &  conditions  must  be clearly  written  on the 
43 
quotes on supplier’s letterhead. In case of illiterate supplier, the committee would 
help him/her prepare the quote and get thumb impression on it. If goods  are not 
available locally, the nearest market will be approached to obtain the quotations. In 
remote areas where three quotations are not an option and only one shop/vendor 
is  not  available,  one  quotation  is  acceptable  provided the  price  is  reasonable  and 
quality is acceptable. Committee should record the reason for single quotation. 
  Evaluation of the Quotations: Once the quotes are solicited, the committee shall 
prepare  comparative  statement  signed  by  all  the  members  and  evaluate  them  in 
order  to  select  the  lowest  evaluated  bid.  During  evaluation,  the  rate,  quality, 
warranty and after-sales services shall be considered and choose the bidder which 
offers the best value of money. 
  Award of Contract/Purchase Order: The committee shall issue Purchase Order 
to  the  successful  bidder.  Purchase  order  must  contain  signatures  of  purchase 
committee.  It  must  contain  terms  and  conditions  clearly  indicating  that  violation 
shall result into cancellation of the purchase order. 
  Receipt  &  Inspection  of  Goods,  Works  and  Services:  It  is  necessary  to 
prepare  receiving receipt of all purchased items  that must contain receiving date, 
number of goods, and signature of recipients and hand over to beneficiaries or CIs. 
The  committee  shall  inspect  the  goods  according  to  the  specifications  given  in 
purchase order. Damaged goods or the goods not meeting the specifications must 
not be accepted and asked for immediate replacement at suppliers’ cost.  
  Tagging:  The  Committee  fixes  a  unique  tag  on  each  asset  procured  and  each 
scheme completed for proper identification.  
  Recordkeeping: Following points must be considered during record keeping 
LSO shall develop a standard record keeping format for  COs/VOs  and training the 
implementation Committees in proper  maintaining of the record. The secretary or 
manager  of  the  CO/VO  or  a  member  of  the  procurement  committee  will  be 
responsible for record keeping. 
All the members, representatives of POs and other stakeholders must have access 
to the record  
Recording should be accurate and understandable 
Record must be entered soon after the activity takes place 
Printed payment receipt is  mandatory to be obtained at the time of procurement, 
however, if not available, the stamp of the vendor would serve the purpose 
If both receipt and stamp are unavailable, the name, address and contact number 
of the shopkeeper must be written on plain paper.  
  Mistake should not be removed 
In case of wrong entry, mark (X) or encircle the amount (so that the wrong entry 
remains visible) and put signature beside it.  
  Procurement  of  Livestock:  If  the livestock to  be  procured  is  in  bulk,  it may  be 
procured from the nearest livestock market which is usually established on weekly 
basis. Such markets provide an opportunity to choose the best animals at cheaper 
price;  however,  transportation  from  the  market  to  the  community’s  destination 
incurs  cost.  Therefore,  if  the  animals  are  available  within  the  community,  it  is 
recommended to give preference to procure locally. To verify the prices, there are 
common  interest  groups  available  in  communities  or  the  local  livestock  vendor. 
Beneficiary  persons  presence  in  selection  and  health  screening  of  animals  by  a 
professional technician would be must prior to finalization of purchase.  
  Vendor  Mela  (Fair):  Vendor  Mela  (Fair)  is  organized  when  there  is  little 
information available for goods and services to be procured, Different vendors from 
44 
local and nearby markets are invited to come up with their suggestions/proposals. 
The  Community  Institution  chooses the  best vendor  in terms  of  quality,  rate,  and 
after-sale services. Another benefit of this exercise is that the community can have 
a data-base of vendors in their “Contact Directory” which could help them in future 
procurements. 
  Procurement  of  material  &  equipment  for  Small  Physical  Infrastructure 
Schemes  (CPIs):  Procurement  of  construction  material  like  sand,  crush,  bricks, 
iron  and  any  equipment can  be  done by  adopting three  or  a  single  quote  (as  the 
case may be) method. Due to technical nature of the procurement and monitoring 
of construction work, an engineer either from the community or from the IP should 
be  a  part  of the  procurement committee. The community  organization  along  with 
procurement  committee  is  responsible  for  vigilance  of  each  step  of  procurement 
process as well as verification of construction activities. 
6.  GENERAL PROCUREMENT 
  SOLE SOURCE:  Certain specialized goods, equipment or services may need to be 
procured  from  pre-identified  organizations  such  as  public  sector  extension, 
research  and  infrastructure  agencies.  The  use  of  direct  contracting  is  subject  to 
approval  by  the  Evaluation  Committee  and  the  PD,  and  No  Objection  by  IFAD 
regardless  of  the  amount  of  the  contract.  Regardless  of  the  selection  basis  used, 
the Procurement Specialist must enter (i) the names  and countries of origin of all 
shortlisted  suppliers  and  (ii)  the  number  and  date  of  issuance  of  competition 
documents (ITB, RFQ, RFP, etc.) into the PTS. 
  Enquiries  from  bidders:  In  order  to  maintain  the  integrity  and  transparency  of 
the  process,  potential  bidders  may  only  clarify  or  seek  additional  information 
related  to  the  relevant  bidding  or  proposal  documents  in  writing  and  not  by 
telephone  or  in  person.  In  the  same  way,  the  Procurement  Specialist,  after 
consultation with the requesting staff is necessary, shall only provide clarification in 
writing  and to  all invitees  (unless the  clarification  is  clearly  only  applicable  to the 
invitee who asked the question). The clarification shall be written in such a way as 
to maintain the anonymity of bidders and without mentioning the name of the firm 
that asked the question(s). 
  Bid  extension  and  cancellation:  Based  on  a  recommendation  from  the 
procurement, the PD may propose an extension of the closing date for submission 
of bids for  any practical or  justifiable reason, such as: modification to the bidding 
documents  after issue;  need  for  additional  research/effort  by  bidders to  submit  a 
responsive  bid;  request  for  a  time  extension  by  two  or  more  bidders;  and 
unforeseen  administrative  issues  requiring  a  postponement  of  the  proposed  bid 
opening. Proposals for extension of the bid deadline shall be referred immediately 
to the Evaluation Committee and the IFAD Country Director (through the PD) for a 
decision.  If  the  extension  is  granted,  the  extension  shall  be  notified  to  all 
prospective  bidders  at  the same time  and  in  writing.  Notification  of  the  extension 
must be copied to the procurement file and the new dates entered into the PTS. 
  A bidding process  may be cancelled  at any time before the deadline for  receipt of 
bids subject to the proposal of the Procurement Specialist, and the approval of the 
PD and IFAD. Justifications for cancellation are: 
The procurement need has ceased to exist or changed significantly; 
Insufficient funding is available for the procurement; 
There is a significant change in the required technical details, bidding or contracted 
conditions, such that the recommencement of proceedings is necessary; 
There is evidence of collusion among bidders; or 
Cancellation is deemed to be in the interest of national security. 
45 
  The  Procurement  Specialist  will  in  such  a  case  notify  prospective  bidders,  refund 
fees  paid  for  the  purchase  of  bidding  documents,  return  any  submitted  bids 
unopened and notify all other involved parties of the cancellation.  The cancellation 
must be documented in the procurement file and recorded in the PTS.  
  Waiver of competitive bidding: Beside the special procurement cases described 
above, there are certain circumstances in which competition may not be possible or 
practical. These are exceptional cases where direct contracting for goods/works or 
single-source  selection 
for  consultants  presents  a  clear  advantage  over 
competition.  These  exceptional  cases  are  listed  in  the  BPPRA  and  in  IFAD’s 
Procurement  Handbook.  Should  the  PMU  be  required  to  use  this  procurement 
modality, a request for  waiver  of competitive bidding would need to be addressed 
to  the  Project  Director  and  to  IFAD,  regardless  of  the  contract  value15.    The 
request for waiver must include the following information: 
Description of goods, works or services 
Full justification for waiver request 
Detail of costs and demonstration of reasonableness of costs 
Demonstration of the competitiveness of the retained proposal or quotation 
Past experience with the retained supplier. 
The procurement process will only be pursued if IFAD’s No Objection is secured. 
  Blacklisting  of  suppliers  and  contractors:  As  indicated  in  the  BPPRA,  any 
supplier or contractor that consistently fails to provide satisfactory performances or 
is found to be indulging in corrupt or fraudulent practices shall be permanently or 
temporarily  barred  from  participating  in  GLLSP-II  procurement  proceedings.  The 
supplier  or  contractor  to  be  blacklisted  is  given  the  opportunity  of  being  heard 
before  such  barring  action  is  publicized  and  communicated  to  the  BPPRA  and  to 
IFAD. 
  Selection of suppliers: Bid opening and evaluation committees: The GLLSP-
II  PS  will  be  in  charge  of  organizing  bid  opening  procedures  and  evaluation 
committee meetings. The PMU bid opening committee is composed of 5 members: 
The Project Director (as Chairperson), the MFA, the relevant component heads, IA 
and  the  Procurement  Specialist  who  serves  as  the  Secretary.  The  PS  is  therefore 
responsible for maintaining the attendance sheets and preparing the minutes of the 
bid  opening  meetings.  Due  to  the  nature  of  the  procurement  handled  at  regional 
level, there is normally no bid opening at PMU. 
  The  PMU  evaluation  committee  consists  of  five  members,  as  shown  in  the  table 
below: 
Rol
e 
Chairperson 
Permanent Member 
Rotating Member 1 
Rotating Member 2 
Rotating Member 3 
Secretary 
Title 
Project Director 
Manager Finance & Administration 
Heads of relevant component/M&E Specialist  
Infrastructure Specialist  
Representative of relevant end-user entity 
Procurement Specialist  
  In  addition  to  the  above,  the  Committee  may  co-opt  non-members  (such  as 
consultants  or  advisors  with  special  expertise)  to  its  meetings,  on  an  as-needed 
15 Except for petty purchases not exceeding PKR 50,000 (or USD 500 equivalent), for which direct cash purchase 
is allowed without a waiver 
46 
basis,  particularly  in  the  case  of  complex  procurement.  The  Procurement 
Specialist  is  not  a  member  but  serves  as  Secretary to the Committee; as such, 
s/he is responsible for guiding the evaluation process, ensuring that applicable rules 
and procedures are correctly followed, and drafting the evaluation reports. 
  For  low  value  procurement  at  PMU  level,  the  evaluation  committee  is  reduced  to 
three  members,  including  the  PD/DPD,  the  MFA  and  the  requesting  staff  or 
component  head.  The  Procurement  Specialist  serves  as  the  Secretary  for  the 
committee, and is responsible for drafting the bid evaluation reports. 
  Submission, receipt and opening of bids: The time  allowed for the submission 
of bids varies according to the size and complexity of the contract. Starting on the 
date  of  publication of the ITB, a minimum  of 6 weeks is generally allowed for ICB, 
while  at  least  4  weeks  are  allowed  for  NCB.  Bidders  may  send  their  offers  or 
proposals  in  a  sealed  envelope  by  mail  or  hand  delivery  to  the  GLLSP-II.  The 
Procurement  Specialist  (or  the  Administrative  Assistant  at  the  PMU)  receives  the 
bids,  stamps  the  envelopes  with  the  day’s  date  and  registers  them  in  a  special 
dedicated  logbook.  The  representatives  of  the  bidders  submitting  a  bid  are 
requested to sign the logbook. All bids are kept in a tender box located in a locked 
cabinet  until  the  bid  opening  date.  The  offers  or  proposals  received  after  the 
submission deadline are returned unopened to the bidders. 
  The bids16  are opened in public, preferably on the day of the submission deadline, 
in  the  presence  of  members  of  the  bid  opening  committee  and  representatives  of 
the  bidders.  The chairperson of the committee is responsible for opening each bid 
and reading aloud the following information17: 
a.  Sequential number attributed to the bid 
b.  Name / country of origin of the bidder 
c.  Currency, unit  price  and  amount  of the bid,  and  discounts offered, if 
any 
d.  Amount of bid security, if any18. 
  This information is  recorded  in the  bid  logbook  by  the  Procurement Specialist and 
signed  by  the  chairperson  of  the  committee.  Bids  that  are  obviously  not 
responsive  (e.g.  no  or inadequate  bid  security)  are  rejected  at  this  stage.  The 
representatives  of  bidders  are  requested  to  sign  the  attendance  sheet  and  are 
then  invited  to  leave,  and  no  further  communication may take place between the 
bidders and the GLLSP-II bid opening committee or evaluation committee until the 
contract  award  is  announced.  The  Procurement  Specialist  is  responsible  for 
preparing minutes of the bid opening meeting, which are signed by the chairperson 
and members of the committee. 
  In  the  case  of  RFQs,  quotations  may  be  sent  directly  to  the  PS  by  mail  or  hand 
delivered. Even though no  public  opening  of the  quotations  submitted is  required, 
all  quotations  must  be  opened  on  a  predetermined  date  and  time  to  avoid  the 
opportunity for any invitee to become aware of the prices quoted by other invitees. 
  Cancellation of bids after bid opening: ITBs, RFQs  and  RFPs may  be cancelled 
after  the  bid  opening  date  by  recommendation  of  the  Procurement  Specialist, 
following  validation  of  the  evaluation  committee  and  PD  approval,  and  subject  to 
IFAD’s No Objection, in the following instances: 
16 In the case of two-envelope bidding where separate technical and financial bids are submitted, only the 
technical bid will be  opened for  evaluation  at the  initial  bid  opening. The  financial  bids  are  retained 
unopened  pending  a  second public opening of those bids achieving more than the minimum technical score. 
17 The head of the committee may request the assistance of the Procurement Specialist or decide to 
delegate this task to another member of the committee or to the Procurement Specialist. 
18All bid securities are given to the Procurement Specialist for review, registration and safekeeping. 
47 
a.  Only one (or no) bid was presented or after rejection of all other bids only one (or 
no) bid remains for consideration; 
b.  The bids were presented with unacceptable reservations and conditions; or 
c.  The  evaluation  committee  confirms  that  the  lowest  priced  bid  is  higher  than  the 
budgetary provision. 
In such a case, the procurement unit will: 
a.  Obtain  approval  of  the  evaluation  committee  and  the  PD  for  cancellation  of  the 
ITB/RFQ/RFP; 
b.  Notify all bidders that the ITB/RFQ/RFP process has been cancelled and return any 
bid securities; 
c.  Depending  on  the  causes,  decide  whether  the  procurement  is  to  be  cancelled  or 
resumed, and by what method. 
d.  If  the  procurement  is  to  be  resumed,  resubmit  all  documents  to  the  requesting 
staff  for  preparation  of  revised  specifications/TOR,  or  prepare  new  bidding 
documents appropriate to the new procurement method proposed. 
  Extension  of  bid  validity:  If,  due  to  unforeseen  circumstances,  the  contract 
award  cannot  be  completed  within  the  duration  of  bid  validity  specified  in  the 
bidding  documents,  the  Procurement  Specialist  may  request  a  bid  validity 
extension  from  the  responsive  bidders,  upon  instruction  from  the  PD.  The 
additional time required to complete the evaluation, obtain the necessary approvals 
and  award  the contract is  estimated by  the Procurement Specialist  and a  new  bid 
validity  date  is  determined  accordingly.  Bidders  who  refuse  this  request  may 
withdraw from the bid  without incurring  any  penalty. However, bidders  who  agree 
are  required  to  extend  their  bid  securities  to  the  new  validity  date.  The  quoted 
price and other conditions of their bids must remain unchanged. 
  Evaluation  of  bids:  Bidders’  offers  and  proposals  are  evaluated  based  on  the 
criteria  and  procedures specified in the  bidding  documents and in conformity with 
national  procurement  rules  and  IFAD  guidelines.  The  first  step  in  the  evaluation 
process  consists  of  ensuring  that  (i)  the  bids  received  meet  the  eligibility 
requirements of the national procurement laws and IFAD requirements, (ii) the bids 
do  not  contain  any  material  computation  error,  are  properly  signed  and  are  in 
conformity  with  the  bidding  documents,  and  (iii)  the  required  bid  securities  are 
attached.  Material  deviations  from,  or  reservations  to  the  terms,  conditions  and 
specifications in the bidding documents, are causes for rejecting a bid or proposal. 
  Evaluation of offers: Offers from responsive bids are evaluated exclusively on the 
basis  of  the  criteria  spelled  out  in  the  ITB.  Under  the  single  envelope  bidding 
system,  the  evaluation  committee  conducts  the  technical  evaluation  followed 
immediately  by  the  financial  evaluation,  in  one  stage.  The  evaluation  criteria  are 
assigned  weights  in  order  obtain  an  adequate  score.  Besides  the  quoted  price 
(for  which  the  preference  margin  must  be  taken  into  account,  if  specified  in  the 
ITB), the following criteria may be considered in the evaluation: 
Conformity of goods/works to specifications and/or drawings 
Product quality, i.e. conformity to national/international standards 
a. 
b. 
c.  Manufacturer’s or distributor’s authorization where applicable 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
Delivery or completion time 
Compliance with GLLSP-II-II general terms and conditions 
Local after-sales service 
Spare parts availability 
Technical and financial capacity of the supplier. 
  The  evaluation  committee  tabulates  all  bids  on  a  summary  sheet.  Only  bids 
meeting  or  exceeding  the  specifications  of  the  ITB  shall  be  considered  as 
acceptable.  The  lowest  evaluated  responsive  bid  is  normally  recommended  for 
contract award. 
48 
  Evaluation  of  proposals:  The  RFP  method  normally  calls  for  using  the  two-
envelope  bidding  system,  i.e.  seeking  both  a  technical  and  financial  proposals  in 
two separate envelopes. The evaluation process is therefore, split into two separate 
stages.  The  weighting  to  be  given  to  each  proposal  must  first  be  determined. 
Usually,  the  technical  proposal  is  given  70%-80%  of  the  overall  score,  and  the 
financial  proposal  30%-20%.  The  more  complex  the  assignment  and  the  more 
significant  the  end  product,  the  less  comparable  the  proposals  and  the  less 
influence price should have on the selection; thus, the points allotted to the financial 
proposal  would  be  lower.  On  the  contrary,  for  tasks  of  a  more  straightforward 
nature, price  can  play a significant part in the selection process, provided that the 
other criteria are also met. 
  To achieve best value for money and to avoid any bias, it is preferable to develop 
a  detailed  list  of  pre-defined  evaluation  criteria.  Points  are  assigned  to  each 
selection  criterion,  including  the  price.  The  evaluation  committee  must  follow  the 
process  and  criteria  indicated  in  the  RFP.  Proposals  are  to  be  opened  accordingly 
(first technical, then financial proposals). The bidders should be considered qualified 
and  responsive if they score  at  least  60-70%  marks  (or  as  stated  in  the  RFP)  on 
the technical component. The bidders who do not meet this minimum score must be 
rejected as being non-responsive and their financial proposals are not to be opened. 
Approval on the technical evaluation is sought from the PD prior to proceeding with 
the  financial  evaluation. The financial proposal of only those bidders who meet the 
qualifying threshold  during  technical  evaluation  should  be  opened  and  examined. 
The  proposal  should  provide  the  detailed  cost  estimate  such  as  daily  fee  rate, 
number of workdays and travel cost estimates. The evaluation committee prepares 
a  sheet  summarizing  the  results  of  the  evaluation  for  both  the  technical  and  the 
financial proposals.  
  In the case of procurement using the QCBS method, recommendation  for award  of 
contract  is  normally  made  to  the  bidder  whose  technical  proposal  and  financial 
proposal, when taken together, achieve the highest overall score. In the case of the 
fixed  budget  selection  method,  the  consulting  firm  that  scored  the  highest 
technical points within the limits of the budget is selected. In the case of the least 
cost  selection  method,  the  firm  with  the  lowest  financial  proposal  is  selected, 
provided that it has attained the minimum technical score. 
  Post-qualification  of  bids:  Prior  to  finalizing  the  evaluation  report,  the 
evaluation  committee should  conduct  a post-qualification19  of the lowest evaluated 
responsive  bidder in  order to  determine  whether  it  has  the  resources,  experience 
and  qualifications  to  perform  the  contract  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Using  the 
criteria  specified  in  the  bidding  documents,  this  review  should  include  an 
assessment of the bidder’s financial and physical  resources available to undertake 
the contract (including  his  current  workload), based  on  the  evidence  requested in 
the  bidding  documents  and  submitted  by  the  bidders.  If  the  lowest  evaluated 
responsive  bidder  fails  post-qualification,  his  bid  should  be  rejected20,  and  the 
next  ranked  bidder  should  then  be  subject  to  post-qualification  examination.  If 
successful,  this  bidder  should  receive  the  award  based  on  the  PD’s  approval  and 
IFAD’s  No  Objection  (if  required).    If  not,  the  process  continues  with  the  other 
bidders.  The  results  of  the  post-qualification  exercise  must  be  included  in  the 
evaluation report, as well as the reasons for disqualifying any bidder. 
  Evaluation report:  The summary evaluation sheets are used as the basis for the 
PS to prepare a bid or proposal evaluation report describing the evaluation process 
19 If pre-qualification was conducted, the lowest evaluated responsive bid should be recommended for the 
award of contract, unless the bidder’s qualifications have since materially deteriorated, or if the bidder has 
since received additional work that reduces the available capacity. 
20 The rejection of a bid for reasons of qualification requires substantial justification, which should be clearly 
documented in the evaluation report. 
49 
and  justifying  the  recommendation  for  award  of  contract.  All  members  of  the 
evaluation  committee  must  sign  the  evaluation  summary  sheet  and  the 
recommendation  of  award.  They  are  attached  to  the  bid  evaluation  report  and, 
together with the minutes of the bid opening, are forwarded to the PD for approval. 
They are then transmitted to IFAD for No Objection. 
  Evaluation  of  quotations:  In  the  case  of  quotations  received  through  an  RFQ, 
the evaluation is based on the following factors: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Conformity to specifications/TOR 
Product quality, i.e. conformity to national/international product standards 
Promised delivery time 
Compliance with GLLSP-II-II general terms and conditions 
In-country after-sales maintenance facilities 
Landed price. 
  A  three-member  evaluation  committee  as  described  above  carries  out  the 
evaluation.  The  Procurement  Specialist  prepares  a  sheet  summarizing  all 
examined quotations. The quotation that is compliant with the requirements of the 
RFQ and offers the lowest price is recommended for award of contract or purchase 
order.  No  post-qualification  is  conducted  due  to  the  low  value  and  lack  of 
complexity  of  the  contract.  The  recommendation  for  award  is  indicated  at  the 
bottom  of  the  summary  sheet,  which  is  signed  by  all  members  of  the  evaluation 
committee. The award decision is made by the Project Director (who may delegate 
his authority to the Deputy PD at PMU). 
  Award and signature of contracts: The approval authority for contract awards is 
the  PD.  When  reviewing  the  evaluation  report  submitted  by  the  evaluation 
committee, the PD ensures that (i) there are  no inaccuracies  in the report, (ii) the 
evaluation  was  conducted  in  accordance  with  applicable  rules,  procedures,  and 
provisions of the bid documents, and (ii) the award recommendation is consistent 
with  the  evaluation.  Before  giving  approval,  the  PD  also  ensures  that  any  written 
complaints  made  by  bidders  concerning  the  procurement  process  have  been 
reviewed and responded to21. The PD may issue a full or a qualified approval to the 
award  of  contract  or  the  action  recommended  by  the  evaluation  committee.    In 
case of a qualified approval, the evaluation committee has 3 working days to make 
corrections to the report or provide clear explanations before final issue. 
  Once approved, the PD addresses a request for No Objection to IFAD, attaching the 
bid  opening minutes, the  evaluation report and  summary sheet  of  bids/proposals, 
and the award recommendation.  Only  once  IFAD’s  unconditional  No Objection  is 
received  should  the  contract  award  procedure  be  commenced.  The  Procurement 
Specialist can then enter the evaluation date, name of selected supplier and date of 
IFAD’s No Objection in the PTS, and update the procurement plan accordingly. 
  Once  IFAD’s  No  Objection  is  obtained,  the  Procurement  Specialist  informs  the 
unsuccessful bidders in writing and sends a notice  of award to the winning bidder 
who  is  invited  to  come  to  the  PMU  to  confirm  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
contract prior to the document being drafted. Award notices are published on  the 
B PPRA  websites  or  bulletin  boards  as  soon  as  the  evaluation  process  has  been 
completed and the contract has been awarded. 
  Complaints from bidders: Aggrieved bidders are allowed a maximum of 15 days 
after  announcement  of  the  bid  evaluation  report  to  file  a  complaint.  In  order  to 
investigate  the  complaint(s),  the  GLLSP-II  constitutes  a  special  committee 
(different  from  the  evaluation  committee  and  comprising  an  odd  number  of 
21If the complaint reveals a serious breach of procedures or ethics, or if directed by the independent 
Procurement Review Panel, the Committee shall reject the evaluation report and call for re-bidding. 
50 
persons)  that  has  15  days  to  make  a  decision.  Any  unsatisfied  bidder  may  then 
lodge an appeal in the relevant court of jurisdiction. 
  Preparation of  contract or  purchase  order:  The  Procurement Specialist  drafts 
the  contracts  based  on  the  standard  model  and  the  conditions  and  modalities 
contained  in  the  bidding  documents  and  the  offers/proposals.  The  contracts  are 
numbered  using  the  unique  procurement  case  identification  number  preceded  by 
the prefix GC (goods contract), WC (works contract), SC (services contract), or  PO 
(purchase  order).  The  drafted  contract  is  submitted  to  the  DPD,  MFA/IA/M&E 
Specialist  or  Component  Managers  for  review  and  validation.  It  is  then  reviewed 
with the supplier/contractor and the performance security, if any, is collected by the 
MFA  before  the  contract  is  submitted  to  the  PD  for  review.  Once  his/her  remarks 
are  taken  into  account,  the  final  version  is  printed  in  two  originals,  which  are 
signed by the PD and by the supplier/contractor. 
  As soon as the contract is effective, bid securities are returned to all bidders. Two 
copies of the contract must be sent to IFAD before the first withdrawal application 
relating to the contract. A copy of the contract is also sent to the P&DD GoB. The 
Procurement  Specialist  updates  the  contract  register  shown  in  Annex  1 
(Procurement) following instructions in the Letter to the Borrower. This  register is 
sent  to  IFAD  at  the  end  of  each  month.  The  contract  (or  PO)  amount,  date  and 
number  are  entered  into  the  PTS.  The  procurement  plan  is  also  updated 
accordingly. 
7.  TYPES OF CONTRACTS 
  Goods:  For  goods  valued  at  more  than  USD1,000  (procured  through  an  ITB),  a 
standard  contract  for  the  supply  of  goods  shall  be  issued.  The  contract  must 
indicate: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
The nature, quantity and unit cost of the goods 
The technical specifications and required norms or standards 
The general conditions of the contract 
The  special  conditions  of  the  contract  (e.g.    Guarantee  and  coverage  period, 
insurance, etc.) 
Special instructions relating to packing and freight 
Special instructions relating to delivery and invoicing 
Advance payments, if any 
Payment terms. 
  Works:  For works valued at more than USD 20,000 (procured through an ITB), a 
works standard contract shall be issued. The contract must include: 
A  detailed  description  of  the  works,  the  cost  of  the  works  (the  drawings, 
norms,  technical  specifications  and  supplier’s  detailed  estimate must  be  included 
as annexes) 
The  valuation  of  beneficiaries’  contributions  in  the  cost  of  the  works,  and  in 
each statement of acceptance of work to be invoiced 
The general conditions for the execution of the contract 
The  special  conditions  of  the  contract  (e.g.  guarantee  and  coverage  period, 
surety deduction, insurance, etc.) 
Schedule of works and corresponding delivery dates 
Advance payments, if any 
Payment   terms (completion   certificate   from   independent   firm, signature of 
statements of acceptance of work, etc.) 
Payment schedule. 
  Services:  For services provided by consulting firms (procured through an RFP), a 
services contract (for lump sum services or time-based payments) shall be issued 
(see  BPPRA/PPRA  website  for  sample  of framework  contracts).  The  contract  must 
include: 
51 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
A description of the nature and scope of the services  (the TOR must be  annexed 
to the contract) 
A reference to the technical proposal of the supplier 
A  description  of  resources  to  be  made  available  by  the  supplier  (human, 
material, etc.) 
The general conditions of execution of the contract 
The  list  of  expected  outputs  (e.g.  intermediary  and  final  report)  and  delivery 
dates 
The  cost  of  services  and  reimbursable  expenses  (with  a  reference  to  the 
proposal submitted by the supplier) 
The  procurement  modalities  for  any  assets  and  equipment  needed  in  the 
performance of the contract 
A  clause  on  the  ownership  of  data  produced,  copyrights  and  assets  acquired 
during the execution of the contract 
Payment terms (expense claims, supporting documents, financial reports, etc.) 
Payment schedule (deliverables, amounts and dates of invoicing). 
8.  FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS 
Framework  (or  “call-off”)  contracts  can  provide  an  efficient,  cost  effective  and 
flexible means to procure goods, works or services that are required continuously 
or  repeatedly  over  a  set  period  of  time  (see  BPPRA/PPRA  website  for  sample  of 
framework contracts). 
Framework  contracts  are  particularly  useful  for  small  scale  works  that  are 
readily available  from the  local  supply  market.    Although there  are no  set rules 
for  the  use  of  framework  Contracts,  it  is  generally  considered  that  if  there  is  a 
high  level  of  cumulative  annual  expenditure,  or  if  there  are  more  than  10-15 
separate  procurement  processes  initiated  in  a  year,  for  a  grouping  of  similar 
activities then a framework contract should be considered. 
The  objective  of  framework  contracts  is  to  minimize  the  cost  and  effort  wasted 
in  preparation of multiple similar small  procurement  processes  by  agreeing fixed 
prices  with  a  supplier  for  a  set  period  of  time.  The  aggregation  of  requirements 
will result in greater price competition among providers to win the right to supply 
all requirements for the subject of the framework contract. 
Routine  refurbishment,  repair  and/or  maintenance  of  offices  and  grounds  are 
examples  of  the  types  of  works  that  may  be  efficiently  purchased  under  a 
framework contract. 
  Advances:  Except  where  normal  commercial  practice  or  the  interests  of  the 
Project so requires, no contract or purchase order shall be signed which requires an 
advance  payment  or  payments  on  account  of  goods  or  performance  of  works  and 
contracted services. Wherever an  advance payment is agreed to, the Procurement 
Specialist records the reasons thereto in a note to the procurement file and enters 
the amount of the advance in  the PTS. The  Finance  Unit  also  records  the  advance 
in  the  contract  monitoring  form.  Except  the  Irrigation,  CPIs  Schemes,  where  the 
Project Director may approve the payment of advances up to 25% of total contract 
amount  without  any  bank  guarantee  or  collateral.  In  case  of  a  contractor  20% 
advance can be permissible. Regardless of the amount of the advance, suppliers are 
required  to  provide  a  bank  guarantee22  in  a  form  acceptable  to  the  GLLSP-II  and 
IFAD. The bank guarantee shall be valid for the duration of the contract or until the 
advance  has  been  fully  recovered.  Any  waiver  to  this  rule  requires  prior 
authorization from IFAD. To recover the  advance  payment,  the  progress  payments 
22  The  bank  guarantee  requirement  does  not  apply  to  government  institutions  contracted  by  the  GLLSP-II 
through MOUs as suppliers or implementing partners. 
52 
and  the  final  payment  shall  be  subject  to  a  percentage  deduction  equal  to  the 
percentage that advance represents over the total price of the contract. 
  Contract  amendments:  Contract  amendments  are  usually  required  in  two 
situations: 
a. 
b. 
Certain  aspects  of  the  contract  need  to  be  changed  at  the  request  of  the 
contractor (for example, a no-cost extension of the length of the contract) or 
The  original  contract  is  executed  as  planned  and  it  is  decided  that  further 
related works or services should be rendered by the same entity. 
c.  When  the  amendment  results  in  (i)  a  material  modification  of  the  initial 
contract,  (ii)  a  relinquishment  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  initial 
contract,  (iii)  an  extension  of  the  contract  duration  or  (iv)  any  other 
modification  resulting  in  a  10%  (or  more)  increase  in  the  initial  contract 
amount,  then  the  PD  must  inform  the  P&DD  GoB.  S/He  must  subsequently 
prepare a letter to be addressed by the P&DD GoB and IFAD for No Objection. 
This  letter  must  detail  all  the  modifications  to  the  contract,  and  provide  full 
justification for the amendment(s). 
  IFAD’s  decision  is  communicated  to  the  P&DD  GoB  in  writing.  In  case  of 
rejection,  IFAD  must  explain  the  reasons  why  the  amendment  is  considered 
contrary to the provisions  of  the  financing  agreement.  In  case  of  acceptance, the 
Procurement Specialist  prepares  the contract amendment, including all the clauses 
modifying  or  replacing  the  initial  contract,  and  the  new  or  amended  ToR.  The 
DPD/MFA/IA  reviews/validates  the  contract  amendment,  which  is  then  signed  by 
the  PD  and  the  supplier/contractor.  Copies  are  sent  to  IFAD  and  P&DD  GoB. 
Contract  amendments  are  recorded  in  the  contract  register,  the  PTS  and  the 
individual contract monitoring form. 
  Small  value  contracts:  Small  value  contracts  are  defined  as  contracts  for 
goods  and  works  and non-consulting services under USD 1,000 that are procured 
through  RFQ. After signature by the evaluation committee, the quotation summary 
sheet  containing  the  recommendation  for  award  is  transmitted  to  the  Project 
Director  along  with  the  quotations  received,  for  review  and  award  of  the 
contract.  In  these  cases,  the  contract  award  is  approved  by  the  Project  Director. 
The  related  files  are  kept  at  the  disposal  of  IFAD  and  P&DD  GoB  for  post  review 
purposes. 
  Purchase  orders  are  used  for  the  acquisition  of  small  value  goods  and  for  non- 
consulting  services  (e.g.  maintenance  and  repairs,  publications,  advertisements, 
etc.).  The  Procurement  Specialist  prepares  the  purchase  orders  from  the 
information  contained  in  the  supplier’s  quotation  or  estimate  (see  PO  model  in 
Annex 4(Procurement). The POs are signed by the PD and  the MFA, as well as the 
supplier.  At  PMU  level  (for  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  non-consulting 
services valued at less than USD 5,000), the purchase orders are signed by the RC 
(who receives a delegation of authority from the PD), the FAM and the supplier 
  For  small  value  works,  a  simplified  version  of  the  works  contract  described  above 
is  used.  Similarly,  a  simplified  version  of  the  services  contract  shall  be  used  for 
small  value  consulting  services  by  a  firm.  In  the  case  of  individual  consultants,  a 
specific  contract  (see  BPPRA/PPRA  website  for  sample  of  framework  contracts23). 
These contracts are also signed by the Project Director. The PO or contract amount, 
date and number are entered into the PTS, and the procurement plan is also updated 
accordingly. 
9.  CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION: 
23 http://www.bppra.gob.pk/uploads/publication/afa23b33e1d60816869ffa74a9dba8b0.pdf  
53 
  At  each  stage  of 
the  procurement  process  (purchase  requisition,  pre-
qualification,  preparation  of  bidding  documents,  advertisement,  bid  opening,  bid 
evaluation,  post-  qualification,  contract  signature  and 
final  delivery),  the 
Procurement  Specialist  updates  the  procurement  plan,  indicating  the  date  of  the 
event  immediately  after the  step  is  completed. All  relevant information  pertaining 
to  procurement  cases  is  also  entered  into  the  PTS  database  during  the  process. 
The  requesting  staff  must  remain  informed  of  ongoing  activities  relating  to  the 
contract,  as  s/he  is  responsible  for  the  monitoring  of  the  contract  implementation 
and  for  the  evaluation  of  the  supplier’s  performance.  In  collaboration  with  the 
Procurement Specialist, s/he must ensure that: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Deliverables  or  milestones  are  completed  by  the  supplier  in  a  satisfactory 
manner, and as scheduled in the contract, and 
GLLSP-II complies  with its obligations as specified in the contract in a timely 
manner (e.g. 
assistance  with  import  licenses,  approval  of  drawings  and  reports,  provision 
of storage/working facilities, letters of invitation for visas, etc.). 
S/he must inform the Procurement Specialist and the MFA of any modifications 
in  the  execution  of  the  contract,  or  any  issues  relating  to  the  supplier’s 
performance, so as to allow for timely 
action, 
prevention/handling of claims or disputes in a timely manner. 
contract  amendments  or 
the  preparation  of 
such  as 
  This information is also used by the Procurement Specialist to provide the MFA with 
an update on the execution of major contracts in the quarterly progress reports. In 
the case  of claims  or  disputes,  the  PD must  immediately  refer  to  the  P&DD  GoB 
who  will  in  turn  inform  IFAD  so  that  necessary  actions  may  be  taken.  The 
Procurement Specialist enters information relating to contract amendments, claims 
or disputes into the PTS as well.  As soon as a contract is signed by GLLSP-II, the 
MFA enters the relevant data into the TOMPRO accounting software, and the system 
automatically  creates  an  individual  contract  monitoring  form  based  on  the  IFAD 
‘C11’ model in Annex 2 (Procurement). The CMF contains the basic information on 
the  contract  (name/address  of  supplier,  procurement  file  number,  contract 
date/number/amount, AWPB activity code, brief description, bank guarantees) and 
details  the  payment  schedule,  including  the  milestones  for  each  payment.  Every 
time  an  invoice  is  received  and  a  payment  is  made,  the  DFA  enters  the  related 
information  into  TOMPRO,  which  automatically  updates  the  CMF.  The  CMF  is  also 
updated  whenever  there  is  an  amendment  to  the  contract.  At  the  end  of  each 
month, the Procurement Specialist checks the contract register against the CMF to 
ensure that all contracts are registered, and a CMF exists for each contract. 
  Delivery  of  goods,  works  and  services:  Delivery  of  goods:  Goods  are 
normally  delivered  to  the  PMU  office  in  Quetta,  or  the  SPMUs  in  the  concerned 
districts  (Gwadar/Lasbela).  The  Procurement  Specialist  and  the  Administrative 
Assistant  are  responsible  for  receiving  the  goods;  the  presence  of  the  requesting 
staff may be required for large value contracts. In the case  of  imported  goods,  the 
contract  may  specify  that  a  pre-shipment  inspection  of  the  goods  must  be 
conducted  by  an  international  third-party  agent.  All  shipping  documents  are  sent 
by  the  supplier  to  the  PMU  and  forwarded  to  the  Procurement  Specialist  for  tax 
and  duty  exemption  formalities.  Once  obtained  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the 
duty-free  concession  is  forwarded  to  the  supplier  who  is  responsible  for  clearing 
shipments  through  customs  upon  arrival  at  the  port/airport.  The  Procurement 
Specialist  or  Administrative  Assistant  must  be  present  when  goods  are  released 
from  customs.  All  external  abnormalities  to  the  shipment  (e.g.  dents,  holes, 
cracks)  or  missing  boxes/crates  must  be  noted  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  or 
Administrative  Assistant  in  the  clearance  receipt  or  bill  of  lading/airway  bill,  for 
reporting to the supplier and to the insurance company. 
54 
  Upon  receipt  of  goods  procured  by  way  of  a  goods  contract,  the  Procurement 
Specialist,  Administrative  Assistant  and  requesting  staff  conduct  a  detailed 
inspection of the goods before acceptance. They  immediately  fill  out  a  receiving  & 
inspection  report,  indicating  the  contract  number  and  whether  all  goods  ordered 
were  received  and  in  what  condition.  In  case  of  a  problem  (damaged  or  missing 
goods), the Procurement Specialist or Administrative Assistant notes the details on 
the RIR. S/he gives a copy of the RIR to the MFA for the accounting files, and uses 
the  original  to  file  the  claim  against  the  freight  carrier,  the  insurance  company 
and/or  the  supplier  under  the  supervision  of  the  MFA.  The  Procurement  Specialist 
files  the  original  RIR  in  the  procurement  file  and  inputs  the  date  and  number  of 
the RIR in the PTS. 
  For  small  value  goods  procured  by  way  of  a  purchase  order,  the  Procurement 
Specialist  or  Administrative  Assistant  checks  the  goods  received  against  the  PO 
directly  on  the  delivery  slip,  which serves as the RIR. Depending on the remarks 
or  reservations noted  on  the  delivery  slip,  the  supplier’s  invoice  is  either  partially 
paid or not paid at all until the object of contention is resolved. 
  Delivery  of  works:  The  delivery  of  works  is  usually  completed  in  several 
tranches.  The  technical  officer  (requesting  staff)  of  the  PMU  or  SPMU,  the 
Procurement  Specialist  and  the  representative  of  the  end-user/beneficiaries  all 
verify  the  work  and  sign  the  statements  of  work  issued  by  the  contractor.  For 
large contracts, the  supervising  engineer  (normally  from  a  contracted engineering 
bureau)  in  charge  of  the  monitoring  and  supervision  of  the  works  also  issues 
certificates of completion to certify the amount of works completed. 
  The  provisional  and  final  takeover  (i.e.  receipt)  of  works  is  carried  out  by  an  ad 
hoc  Inspection  and  Acceptance  committee.  In  the  case  of  small  value  works 
(less  than  USD 20,000), the committee is made up of the Procurement Specialist, 
the  requesting  staff,  a  representative  from  the  PMU  (if  applicable)  and  a 
representative  of  the  beneficiaries.  For large  value  works  (USD  20,000  or  more), 
the  committee includes, in  addition to the above-cited members, a  representative 
of the relevant line agency and the supervising engineer. In both cases, a takeover 
report  detailing  any  delay  or  fault  in  the  execution  of  the  works  is  signed  by  all 
members  of  the  Inspection  and  Acceptance  committee.  A  copy  of  the  report  is 
given  to  the  Procurement  Specialist  for  updating  of  the  PTS  and  for  the 
procurement files. As the works progress and partial payments are issued, the MFA 
enters the data into the TOMPRO accounting software, which automatically updates 
the  CMF.  Upon  completion  of  the  works  contract,  a  copy  of  the  final  acceptance 
certificate is given to the Procurement Specialist for updating of the PTS. 
  Delivery  of  services:  The  delivery  of  consulting  services  is  materialized  by  the 
production of reports, studies  or  surveys, as indicated  in  the contract. The  report 
is addressed at first to the requesting staff/component head who after review may 
send  comments  or  request  additional  information  from  the  consultant.  After 
validation by the component head, the final report is sent to the Project Director for 
final  review  and  approval.  The  acceptance  of  the  report  is  materialized  by  the 
signature  of  the  Project  Director  on  the  final  version  of  the  report. A  copy  of  the 
final  report  is  given  to  (i)  the  Procurement Specialist  for  updating  of the  PTS and 
(ii) to the Finance Manager to update the CMF. 
  Payment  and  reporting:  The  procedures  for  verification  and  certification  of 
invoices  as  well  as  payment  by  the  Finance  Unit  are  detailed  in  FM  sections.  The 
Manager Finance and Administration gives a copy of the invoices to the Procurement 
Specialist who enters the invoice date, number and amount into the PTS. Once the 
payment  is  made,  the  contract  monitoring  form  is  automatically  updated  in  the 
accounting software. 
  Reporting on procurement actions is achieved through the following documents: 
55 
a.  The procurement plan; 
b.  The PTS reports; 
c.  The contract register 
  Once  it  is  approved,  the  procurement  plan  is  updated  on  a  ‘real-time’  basis:  The 
Procurement  Specialist enters the  actual date  every time  one  of the actions in the 
procurement steps detailed in the PP is completed. At the end of the process, when 
the  contract  is  signed,  the  Procurement  Specialist  enters  in  the  PP  the  date  and 
amount of the contract, as well as the name  of the contractor. S/he also enters the 
details of the contract in the contract register, which is sent to IFAD at the end of 
each  month.  The  PP  also  contains  a  separate  sheet  (linked  to  the  detailed 
procurement  plan  sheets)  that  shows  PP  execution,  i.e.  actual  vs.  plan  by 
component and  by type of  procurement  (goods, works and services).  Throughout 
the  procurement  process,  the  Procurement  Specialist  updates  the  Procurement 
Tracking  System.  The  information  entered  in  this  database  allows  the  Project  to 
obtain  detailed  statistics  and  reports  on  the  various  stages  of  procurement 
activities, including processing delays, execution by component, sub-component or 
comparisons  by 
category, 
expense 
month/quarter/year, trends, etc. 
country  of  origin, 
suppliers  by 
  Promptly after the end of each month, the Procurement Specialist prepares a short 
section  on  the  status  of  execution  of  the  procurement  plan.  The  section  contains 
the summary of PP execution by component and by type of procurement, as well as 
an  analysis  of  significant  variances  between  actual  and  planned  amounts,  and 
explanations of delays in procurement execution. 
56 
Appendix 
Financial Management Manual 
Contents 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  III 
I. 
PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL  5 
V. 
PRINCIPLES OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
7 
VI. 
IFAD’S POLICY ON PREVENTING FRAUD AND CORRUPTION 
8 
A.  PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
B.  GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
C.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT/PROJECT 
D.  REPORTING 
E.  REMEDIES 
8 
9 
9 
9 
10 
VII.  FM ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE, ROLES AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
10 
A.  FM ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE 
10 
B.  ROLE OF MANAGER INTERNAL AUDIT 
10 
11 
C.  ROLE OF FINANCE MANAGER 
D.  ROLE OF BUDGET AND FINANCE OFFICER (2 IN PMU & ONE IN EACH SPMU)  11 
12 
E.  ROLE OF PROCUREMENT SPECIALIST 
VIII.  ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGETING 
14 
A.  PAKISTAN’S PFM SYSTEM AND ITS LINK WITH THE GLLSP II 
B.  PROJECT DESIGN CHANGES DURING PROJECT LIFE 
C.  AWP/BUDGET PROCESS 
D.  PREPARATION OF THE ANNUAL WORK PLAN 
E.  PREPARATION OF THE ANNUAL BUDGET 
F.  BUDGET MONITORING 
G.  BUDGET REVISION 
IX.  FLOW OF FUNDS  20 
A.  FINANCIERS OF THE GLLSP-II AND FLOW CHART 
B.  EVIDENCE OF AUTHORITY TO SIGN WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS 
C.  DESIGNATED ACCOUNT 
D.  IMPREST FUND 
i 
14 
15 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
E.  RECOVERY OF INITIAL ADVANCE 
F.  DIRECT PAYMENT PROCEDURES 
G.  STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE (SOE) PROCEDURE 
H.  PREPARATION OF WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS 
I.  COUNTERPART FUNDS 
J.  BENEFICIARIES’ CONTRIBUTIONS 
X. 
DISBURSEMENT PROCESS 
29 
XI.  ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES  32 
A.  ACCOUNTING RULES AND PRINCIPLES 
B.  FINANCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEM 
C.  RECORDING OF TRANSACTIONS 
D.  TRANSACTION VOUCHER (OR BILL FORM) 
E.  INPUT OF TRANSACTIONS 
F.  BACKUP OF ACCOUNTING RECORDS 
G.  FILING OF ACCOUNTING RECORDS 
H.  MONTHLY AND ANNUAL CLOSING OF ACCOUNTS 
I.  MONTHLY VERIFICATION OF ACCOUNTS 
J.  ANNUAL CLOSING OF ACCOUNTS 
XIV.  INTERNAL CONTROLS  40 
23 
25 
26 
26 
29 
29 
32 
33 
33 
33 
34 
34 
34 
35 
35 
35 
A.  GENERAL 
B.  SEGREGATION OF DUTIES 
C.  AUTHORIZATION 
E.  RECONCILIATION AND CHECKS 
G.  RESTRICTED ACCESS 
H.  MONITORING AND REVIEW 
J.  COSO INTERNAL CONTROL FRAMEWORK 
K.  STRENGTHENING CONTROLS VIS-À-VIS SMPS AND OTHER NON-GOVERNMENT 
PARTNERS 
M.  CHECKLIST FOR SOCIAL MOBILIZATION PARTNER 
40 
41 
41 
41 
42 
42 
42 
43 
43 
XV.  FINANCIAL REPORTING 
45 
A.  ANNUAL PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
B.  INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTS 
C.  ANALYTICAL REVIEWS 
XVI.  INTERNAL AUDIT 47 
A.  RESPONSIBILITIES 
XVII. EXTERNAL AUDIT 
48 
A.  GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
ii 
45 
46 
46 
47 
48 
B.  TYPES OF AUDIT OPINION 
C.  KEY REQUIREMENTS IN MANAGEMENT LETTER 
D.  PMU AND AUDIT QUALITY 
E.  AUDIT FOLLOW-UP 
49 
50 
51 
51 
XVIII. 
COMPLETION AND FINANCING 
52 
XIX.  IFAD’S FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT  53 
A.  OVERVIEW OF IFAD SUPPORT 
53 
B.  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO IFAD SUPPORT 
53 
ANNEXURE I-ANNUAL WORK PLAN/BUDGET FORMAT 
55 
ANNEXURE-II MEASURING PROGRESS AGAINST THE AWP/B 
56 
ANNEXURE-III CHECKLIST FOR REVIEWING WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS 
57 
ANNEXURE-IV  DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION (IMPREST FUND) 
60 
ANNEXURE V- SAMPLE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
61 
ANNEXURE VI- INTERIM REPORTING FORMAT 
72 
ANNEXURE-VII TORS OF INTERNAL AUDITING FIRM 
75 
79 
ANNEXURE-VIII FINANCIAL TABLES FOR THE SUPERVISION MISSIONS 
ANNEXURE-VIII FORMAT FOR MEASURING COMPLIANCE WITH LEGAL COVENANTS  80 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AWP/B  
Annual Work Plan/ Budget 
ADP 
           Annual Development Programme 
COs 
           Community Organizations 
COSO            The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
CPIs              Community Physical Infrastructure 
C&W              Construction and Works Department 
DAC               Departmental Accounts Committee 
CMFS     
Community Managed Financial Services 
GLLSP-II        Gwadar Lasbella Livelihood Support Project (Phase-II) 
GoB 
           Government of Baluchistan 
GoP 
           Government of Pakistan 
IFAD 
           International Fund for Agriculture Development 
LSO 
           Local Support Organization 
M&E 
            Monitoring and Evaluation 
MTR 
           Mid Term Review 
iii 
NRSP                 National Rural Support Programme 
O&M 
                Operation and Maintenance 
P&DD                   Planning and Development Department 
PEFA                   Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
P4R                     Programme for Results 
PMU 
                 Project Management Unit 
SOE 
                 Statement of Expenditure 
SPMU                   Satellite Project Management Unit 
TOR 
                  Terms of Reference 
WA 
                 Withdrawal Application 
iv 
I. 
PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL 
This  manual  has  been  developed  to  assist  the  project  management—especially  the 
project’s  financial  management  team  in  understanding  the  basic  fiduciary  requirements 
while  implementing  an  IFAD-funded  project.  The  draft  draws  on  IFAD’s  guidelines  and 
references  have  been  made  where  appropriate  so  the  users  can  expand  on  their 
knowledge by consulting primary sources of information.  A sound understanding of such 
requirements is critical to ensuring (a) proper control, accountability and reliability over 
funds and financial information; and (b) compatibility of PMU’s processes with IFAD and 
GoB policies and requirements. 
Information on Reference material: 
This document should be read together with the: 
  Project financing agreement entered into between the Borrower and IFAD;  
  Letter to the Borrower; 
 
 
 
IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing; 
IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook; (links given in this manual) 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-funded projects ( links given in this manual) 
Updates and changes to financial management arrangements 
GLLSP  II  is  an  IFAD-funded  Project,  therefore,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  efforts  to  capacitate 
and support projects, this section was developed during the project design process. It is 
envisaged  that  ongoing 
financial  management 
improvements  and  updates 
arrangements  be  updated  in  this  section  of  the  PIM  under  supervision  of  the  Financial 
Manager and subject to IFAD no objection. 
to 
Updates and changes to financial management arrangements 
GLLSP  II  is  an  IFAD-funded  Project,  therefore,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  efforts  to  capacitate 
and support projects, this section was developed during the project design process. It is 
envisaged  that  ongoing 
financial  management 
improvements  and  updates 
arrangements  be  updated  in  this  section  of  the  PIM  under  supervision  of  the  Financial 
Manager and subject to IFAD no objection. 
II.  PROJECT SUMMARY  
Project Name  
to 
Financiers, Contributors, Facilities  
Gwadar Lasbela Livelihoods Support 
Project II 
IFAD Loan $ 60 million 
IFAD Grant $ 3 million 
Government Contribution $ 8.6 million   
Beneficiary Contribution $ 0.99 million  
Project Effective Date 
Implementation Period  
Project Completion Date  
Project Closure Date 
Project Area 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
To be inserted later 
III. PROJECT CYCLE AND FINANCIAL AMANGEMENT ACTIVITIES  
The  Financial  Management  of  GLLSP  II  will have  final  responsibility  for  the  execution  of 
the financial management activities at each stage of the Project cycle as outlined below: 
5 
Start-up
Implementation
Project closure 
and completion
FM activities at each stage of the Project cycle 
closure  and 
Project 
completion 
 
IFAD 
completion 
closure procedures  
Specific 
and 
  Final audit  
  Asset  and 
handover 
inventory 
  Budget wrap up 
Start-up 
Implementation 
  Fill staff vacancies 
 
project 
Implement 
module  in  Quickbooks 
accounting software 
Identify 
Quickbooks  
customisations 
and 
implement  (related  to 
financial reporting) 
possible 
 
  Preparation  of 
first 
annual  work  plan  and 
budget  
  Opening 
bank 
of 
accounts  
  Start-up training 
  Attend  anticorruption 
workshop  hosted  by 
IFAD. 
  Conclude  MOUs  with 
SMPs  
  Ongoing 
improvements  to  the 
Financial Manual 
and 
  Budgeting  
  Accounting  
  Disbursements 
withdrawals 
  Record keeping  
 
Internal controls  
  Cashflow forecasting 
  Auditing  
  On-going training 
 
Implement 
performance 
evaluation24 
  Financial  reporting  to 
IFAD  
IFAD ongoing support 
NB: GLLSP II Financial Manager will have the final responsibility to prepare consolidated financial reports for submission 
to IFAD. Refer to XII. for more detail. 
IV.  PRE-IMPLMENTATION ACTIVITIES  
During  the  start-up  of  the  Project  it  is  recommended  that  Project  staff  undertake  the 
following  activities.  These  activities  are  recommended  to  ensure  that  Project  staff  are 
well  informed  and  knowledgeable  with  regards  to  the  financial  management  aspects  of 
the Project once implementation commences: 
Activity 
Financial 
management 
staff 
appointment 
Overview 
  Fill vacancies within PMU and SMPUs to ensure that all agencies 
are  capacitated  to  manage  the  Project.  Refer  to  (VIII)for  the 
proposed organogram. 
 
24 Develop (in consultation with the Project Coordinator) a performance evaluation process for FM staff 
within 1 year of project commencement and document process in the PIM. This process should identify skills 
gaps and assist with identifying appropriate training interventions.  
6 
Accounting 
software  
Open 
accounts 
bank 
Preparation 
of 
first  annual  work 
plan and budget 
Staff training and 
capacity building 
  PMU  to  ensure  that  new  staff  are  trained  in  the  use  of 
accounting software; 
  The  software  to  use/incorporate  correct  chart  of  accounts 
(categories and components) in line with the detail in Schedule 
2 of the Financing agreement with IFAD. 
  Upload the Cost Table (Schedule 2 of the Financing Agreement) 
to  the  accounting  software  for  the  purposes  of  budgeting  / 
monitoring. 
  PMU  examine  if  Quickbooks  can  meet  the  project/IFAD’s 
requirements  fully.  In  case  it  is  determined  that  QB  does  not 
meet  the  requirements,  the  switch  over  to  TOMPRO  is 
suggested.  Cost  of  TOMPRO  is  tentatively  included  in  the 
proposal 
  The  Financial  Manager,  with  the  assistance  from  the  provincial 
Finance  Department  will  be  responsible  for  the  opening  of  the 
Project  bank  accounts.  (Refer  to  Fund  of  Flows  section  – 
Designated Account for details).  
  The Financial Manager will be responsible for the compilation of 
the  first  Annual  Work  plan  and  Budget,  as  directed  by  the 
Project  Director,  subject  to  IFAD  no-objection.  This  budget  will 
be  a  consolidation  of  the  budgets  obtained  from  SPMUs, 
following  the  process  as  outlined  in  Annual  Work  Plan  and 
Budgeting section. 
  Newly  appointed  financial  Management staff  will  be  required to 
complete  the  IFAD  FM  e-learning  and  submit  completion 
certificates  to  IFAD  within  1  month  of  date  of  appointment. 
Refer to the Useful links below for the training link. 
  Existing financial management staff will be required to complete 
IFAD  FM  e-learning  within  1  month  of  project  start-up  (if  not 
yet completed) and submit the completion certificate to IFAD. 
  All staff  are  required  to  study the  project  related  documents  at 
project start-up. 
**Other training at project start-up: 
o  PMU  Financial  management  training  workshop  for  SPMUs.  This 
training to be presented by the PMU Financial Manager. Training 
to  focus  on  PMU  requirements  (monthly  reporting,  document 
retention ect.) and cover practical issues / lessons learnt. 
V.  PRINCIPLES OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
IFAD requires the recipient of IFAD’s funds to make arrangements to ensure that 
the proceeds of any financing are used only for the purposes for which the financing was 
provided,  with  due  attention to  considerations of  economy,  efficiency  and  social  equity. 
This  responsibility  is  generally  described  as  a  “fiduciary  obligation”  with  respect  to  the 
investment funds approved for financing provided by IFAD. 
The  primary 
the 
borrower/recipient  (B/R)  to  maintain  financial  management  (FM)  arrangements  that 
assist  in  meeting  fiduciary  obligations  and  that  provide  reasonable  assurance  to 
stakeholders that funds have been used as intended. IFAD’s role is to support the B/R’s 
fiduciary  obligation 
responsibility 
rests  with 
for 
7 
capacity  to  meet  this  responsibility  and  to  provide  general  oversight  on  the  design  and 
functioning  of  FM  arrangements  during  project  implementation.  Financial  management 
refers  to  the  organization,  budgeting,  accounting,  internal  control,  funds  flow,  financial 
reporting  and  internal  and  auditing  arrangements  by  which  B/Rs  receive  funds,  spend 
them and record their use. 
The  country’s  inherent  risk  rating  has  been  “Medium”  and—accordingly  the 
project  would  be  using  country  PFM  system  for  implementation.  Several  actions  have 
been proposed in this part of the manual to keep fiduciary risks to acceptable level. PMU 
would implement specific actions to mitigate risks posed by identified weaknesses during 
implementation.  
IFAD  will  monitor  FM  performance  of  GLLSP-II  at  regular  intervals  and  provide 
implementation  support  as  needed.  IFAD  assesses  disbursement  risk  initially  on  the 
basis  of  overall  project  FM  capacity  and  risks  determined  in  the  project  design  phase. 
This assessment informs appropriate project disbursement arrangements. 
During project implementation, IFAD Supervision/Implementation Missions would 
examine  the  extent  to  which  the  project  is  identifying  and  managing  fiduciary  risks.  
IFAD  will  process  disbursements  after  considering  these  FM  risks,  in  addition  to  the 
specific  characteristics  of  withdrawal  applications  (WAs),  and  will  determine  the  timing, 
frequency and scope of ex-post checks to be performed on the applications. 
In  the  light  of  disbursement  experience,  and  where  appropriate,  IFAD  also 
updates  FM  risk  ratings  and  modifies  disbursement  arrangements  for  the  remainder  of 
the  project  period.  IFAD  will take  remedial measures  in  case  it  is not satisfied  with  the 
way the project funds are being managed.  
VI.  IFAD’S POLICY ON PREVENTING FRAUD AND CORRUPTION 
IFAD  recognizes  that  the  prevention  and  mitigation  of  fraud  and  corruption  in  its 
activities and operations are core components of its development mandate and fiduciary 
duties. It does not tolerate the diversion or waste of its resources25. 
A. 
Prohibited practices 
The  following  practices  are  considered  to  be  prohibited  practices  when  engaged  in 
connection with an IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity: 
(a)  A  “corrupt  practice”  is  the  offering,  giving,  receiving  or  soliciting,  directly  or 
indirectly,  of  anything  of  value  in  order  to  improperly  influence  the  actions  of 
another party; 
(b) A  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission, including  a  misrepresentation, 
that knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party in order to 
obtain a financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation; 
(c)  A  “collusive  practice”  is  an  arrangement  between  two  or  more  parties 
designed  to  achieve  an  improper  purpose,  including  improperly  influencing  the 
actions of another party; 
(d)  A  “coercive  practice”  is  impairing  or  harming,  or  threatening  to  impair  or 
harm,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  party  or  the  property  of  the  party  in  order  to 
improperly influence the actions of that or another party; 
25 IFAD’s Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations is available at 
file:///C:/Users/Lenovo/Desktop/BRS%20New%20Project%20IFAD/Financial%20Management%20Section%20P
IM%20GLLSP/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf 
8 
(e)  An  “obstructive  practice”  is:  (i)  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering  or 
concealing  evidence  that  may  be  material  to  an  investigation  by  the  Fund  or 
making  false  statements  to  investigators  in  order  to  materially  impede  an 
investigation by the Fund; (ii) threatening, harassing or intimidating any party in 
order  to  prevent  that  party  from  disclosing  its  knowledge  of  matters  relevant  to 
an investigation  by the  Fund  or  from  pursuing such  an investigation;  and/or  (iii) 
the  commission  of  any  act  intended  to  materially  impede  the  exercise  of  the 
Fund’s contractual rights of audit, inspection and access to information. 
B.  General principles 
The  Fund  has  no  tolerance  towards  prohibited  practices  in  its  activities  and  operations. 
All individuals and entities involved in implementing the GLLSP-II must take appropriate 
action to prevent, mitigate and combat prohibited practices as stipulated below. 
IFAD  protects  Individuals  and  entities  that  help  to  prevent  or  report,  in  good  faith, 
allegations  of  prohibited  practices  are  protected  against  retaliation  and  to  protect 
individuals and entities that are the subject of unfair or malicious allegations. 
C.  Responsibilities of the Provincial Government/Project 
The  provincial  government/project  will take  appropriate  action to  prevent,  mitigate  and 
combat prohibited practices. In particular, they will: 
(a)  Adopt  appropriate  fiduciary  and  administrative  practices  and  institutional 
arrangements  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  proceeds  of  any  IFAD  financing  or 
financing  managed  by  the  Fund  are  used  only  for  the  purposes  for  which  they 
were provided; 
(b)  when  taking  action  to  enter  into  contractual  relationship  with  a  third  party, 
conduct appropriate due diligence to ensure that the selected bidder or potential 
contractor is  not publicly debarred by any of the IFIs and it otherwise  is eligible. 
 (c)  Take  appropriate  action  to  inform  third  parties  and  beneficiaries  of  the 
prohibited practices and how to comply with IFAD’s Anti-corruption Policy; 
(d) Include provisions in procurement documents and contracts with third parties 
to facilitate the implementation of IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy: 
The  policy  encourages  the  government  to  have  in  place,  in  accordance  with  their  laws 
and  regulations,  effective  whistle-blower  protection  measures  and  confidential  reporting 
channels  in  order  to  appropriately  receive  and  address  allegations  of  fraud  and 
corruption relating to IFAD-financed projects. 
D.  Reporting 
GLLSP II can contact the IFAD Officer of Audit and Oversight to report events. Relevant 
information is provided in the box. 
9 
How to contact the IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight 
A designated confidential and secure e-mail address for the receipt of allegations of prohibited practices is available on the 
Fund’s  website.  if  anyone  suspects  misconduct  or  wrongdoing,  or  have  an  allegation  to  report,  he  or  she  may  contact 
anticorruption@ifad.org. This is secure and confidential channel managed by the Investigation Section of IFAD. 
All communications are treated with the utmost CONFIDENTIALITY. 
By phone: +39 06 54592888 
By fax: +39 06 54597888 
By e-mail: anticorruption@ifad.org 
Through the online complaint form: 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm 
In person or by mail to: 
IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight, Investigation Section 
Via Paolo di Dono, 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
(Mark all mail “Personal and confidential”) 
Remedies 
E. 
The  GLLSP-II  should  also  have  similar  reporting  mechanism  to  get  information  on  fraud,  waste  or  abuse  of  funds  from 
anyone who may have such information. The project should promote awareness that such safeguards have been provided to 
minimize risk of fraud, waste and abuse in the use of IFAD’s funds. 
In case it is determined—after due process, that an individual or an entity is involved in 
any  of  the  prohibited  acts  stipulated  above,  the  project  would  take  a  prompt  remedial 
action.  Detailed  guidance  is  available  in  the  IFAD’s  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and 
Corruption. 
VII.  FM ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
A. 
FM Organizational Structure  
The  FM  team  is  headed  by  a  full  time  Finance  Manager  who  reports  to  Project  Director 
directly. The FM is supported by two Budget and Finance (B&F) Officers in PMU and one 
B&F Officer each in SMPUs. The flowchart exhibits the organizational arrangement for the 
FM section.  
The B&F  Officers  in SPMUs  would  be  reporting to  Finance  Manager  directly  though they 
would  be  supporting  the  Deputy  Project  Directors  who  will  head  the  SPMUs.  The 
responsibilities  of  Manager  Internal  Audit,  Finance  Manager  and  B&F  Officers  are 
summarized below:  
B.  Role of Manager Internal Audit 
10 
Manager Internal Audit will work as chief compliance officer who will keep track of how 
actions established for compliance by supervision missions, external audit, and project 
director are being implemented. Broadly, the incumbent would be responsible for: 
  Adequacy and effectiveness of financial, operational, and management controls 
against relevant risks; 
  Compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations; 
  Economy, efficiency and effectiveness in managing operations (VFM); 
  Safeguarding of organizational assets 
  Suitability, accuracy, reliability, integrity of financial and other relevant 
 
information 
Integrity of the process to establish adequate protection against errors, frauds, 
and losses of all kinds 
  Mitigating other fiduciary risks—especially ones arising from public procurement 
and corrupt practices 
  Supporting improvement in governance process at PSC’s level with a view to 
improve public image of the government 
Details are provided on this role in a separate section later in this manual. 
C.  Role of Finance Manager  
This  position  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  managing  the  accounting  and  internal 
controls  systems,  reviewing  and  clearing  documents  and  transactions,  controlling  the 
posting  of  transactions  and  the  accuracy  of  the  books,  monitoring  the  budgets  and 
treasury, Project funds and donor contributions, overseeing the closing of accounts, and 
preparing financial reports, year-end financial statements and annual audits. 
  Liquidity Management/ Following up with AGPR, SBP and NBP 
  Bigger  Picture  Management  and  minimal  personal  activity  in  day  to  day 
operations. 
  Withdrawal Application Review and Submission 
  Financial Statements Review and Submission 
  Financial Reporting Review from Accounting 
  Regular AWP&B & PP Monitoring 
  Solicit response on delays and underspending 
  Focal Person for all Finance Department queries from Project Side 
D.  Role of Budget and Finance Officer (2 in PMU & one in each SPMU) 
  Post activity & Pre payment Review of documents 
  Cash Forecasting Liquidity Planning 
  Organization wide Financial Reporting 
  Advances Monitoring, Civil Works, IPs, Line Departments 
  Loan Covenants Monitoring 
  Regular AWP&B and  PP Execution monitoring and 
generate 
management. 
reports 
for 
  Organization  wide  contract  Management  and  compliance  with  contracts  by  IPs, 
vendors and suppliers for payment purposes. 
  Payroll Validation 
  Fixed Assets register updating and Inspection 
 
Journal Entry Payment Voucher Process 
11 
  Bank Reconciliation 
  Monthly Withdrawal Application 
  Budget Vs Actual Monitoring 
  Regional Financial Record Review 
  Budget Planning and Controlling 
  Disbursement Reports Monitoring 
Journal Entries Review of PMU/SPMUs 
 
  Processing of Advances and all Payments 
  SPMUs 
record 
review  encompassing  Line  Department 
review 
including 
directorates. 
Journal Entry Payable Voucher Processing 
  Payroll Entry Processing 
 
  Tax Withholding on each payment 
  Fixed Asset Tracking Management 
  First Post Activity and Pre Payment Review of documents for processing. 
  Verifying Correct Journal Entry, Payment Voucher Process 
  Review Records of all Line departments within the District 
  Processing of Advances and all Payments 
  Cash Forecast/ replenishment Requests 
  Fixed Assets Physical Inspection with the Assets list provided by PMU 
  Review all the travel plans 
  Verify vehicles log books & compare with the fuel consumption reports 
  Monthly review of all the SMTs financial records with in the district 
  Check and securitize invoices and payment requisitions for accuracy 
  Cheques process and record all payments 
  To prepare Bank Payment Vouchers and Journal Vouchers. 
  Data entry into accounting software 
  Assistance in the preparation of budget and provision of information for audit 
  Handling cash and petty expenses 
  Support to administrative and logistical services 
  Maintenance  of vehicle log  books  and  maintain mileage  statement  and  issue  fuel 
coupons. 
  Maintenance of filing system ensuring safekeeping of confidential material 
  Custodian for management of office stationery supplies including maintenance of 
stock list of stationery and supplies and maintain log book. 
  To  keep  check  &  control  of  all  the  process  of  procurement  and  supply  of  daily 
office necessities. 
  To maintain daily cash book & cash flow management. 
  To maintain and update regional stock register 
The Finance Manager will distribute work between the B&F Officers so as to get the most 
out of these officials for the project.  
E.  Role of Procurement Specialist 
The position is responsible for supporting PMU in procurement and contract 
management. Specific responsibilities are listed below: 
  Preparation of Project’s Annual Procurement Plans, as part of Project’s AWP/B, 
for approval of Project Steering Committee and IFAD NOL.  
12 
  Ensure  that  goods,  works  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in 
accordance with the loan agreement and the IFAD Procurement guidelines; 
Installation  of  appropriate  procurement  systems  and  procedures  for  effective 
planning and monitoring of procurements under the project; 
 
  Prepares and advertises the project’s general procurement notices (GPN) and 
SPNs and maintain the Register of Expression of Interests.  
  Prepares  all  procurement  planning  documents, 
including  procurement 
packaging, selection methods, the project procurement plan. 
  Reviewing and analyzing bids, expressions of interests and proposals.  
  Preparing  comparative canvass  sheets,  preparing  the  contracts  and  purchase 
orders.  
  Ensuring the timely inventory coding and safe keeping of the goods purchased 
and its dispositions as and when required.  
  Work  closely  with  Government  Line  Departments  (P&DD,  C&W  and  Fisheries 
Department)  to  develop  quarterly/annually  procurement  plans  (based  on 
quarterly distribution plans and annual work plan) to ensure timely availability 
of the products for project activities  
  Track and evaluate vendor performance and improvements related to pricing, 
contractual terms, and/or scope of services.  
  Supervise  the  procurement  products  including  materials,  promotional  items, 
goods, etc.  
  Review  all  contracts  (for  product  and/or  service  procurements)  to  ensure 
quality standards are met, prior to submitting for review and approval.  
  Outsourcing  (supplies  and  services),  both  from  local  and  international 
markets.  
  Work  with  suppliers/agencies  in  the  selection  of  the  most  qualified  and  cost-
effective vendors 
  When  the  prior  review  of  the  bidding  or  proposal  document  is  required, 
submits the document through the Project Director to IFAD for its review and 
‘No Objection’.  
  Ensure  that  all  the  due  tendering  processes  are  adhered  to:  sufficient 
publications,  strict  adherence  to  deadlines,  transparency  in  communications, 
publication of bid results, etc.; 
  Reviews  and  passes  all  bid  securities  to  the  Financial  Officer  for  secure 
storage,  recording  amounts  and  validities  and  ensures  that  validities  do  not 
expire  prior  to  notification  of  award  and  requests  extensions  as  and  when 
required.  All  bid  securities  must  clearly  show  the  date  the  security  expires 
rather than state a specified number of days after bid submission. 
  Ensures  that  the  performance  securities  provided  by  Suppliers  and 
Contractors  are  valid  and  in  the  correct  amount  and  updated  and  amended, 
when necessary. 
  Certify that all the conditions for the release of the performance security and 
retention  monies  have  been  met  and  recommend  for  their  release  to  the 
Suppliers/Contractors, as applicable.   
  Train  staff  to  prepare  and  update  the  Annual  Procurement  Plan  (including 
procurement  method,  types/kinds,  quantity,  value,  delivery  requirements, 
sources, etc.); 
  Assist  SMP  in  establishing  a  robust  system  for  community  led  procurements 
and supervise its effective implementation.  
  Handling  project  procurement  related  complaints,  including  logging  and 
recording,  notifying  the  IFAD,  and  preparing  response  to  the  complaints, 
13 
including  in  the  preparation  of  qualitative  justifications  for  settlement  of 
disputes with consultants and suppliers; 
  Ensure  acceptable  record  keeping  in  procurement  with  at  least  a  complete 
procurement  file  for  each  procurement  from  start  to  contract  finalization. 
Maintain  all  procurement  records  in  a  form  appropriate  for  regular  auditing 
and spot checks by supervision missions; 
  Prepare bi-annually progress reports with implementation of the procurement 
plan,  and  regularly  inform  the  PM  of  problems  and  make  proposals  to 
overcome bottlenecks; and 
  Any other task assigned by the PD 
Detailed guidelines on public procurement and contract management under the GLLSP-II 
are provided in a separate Procurement Manual. 
VIII. ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGETING 
Annual Work  planning  and  budgeting is  a  key  project  activity since it  allows  the  project 
to  plan  and  manage  its  financial  resources  to  support  the  implementation  of  its 
activities. It  is  important  for  the  PMU  in  general  and  the  finance  team  in  particular  to 
understand  the  country  PFM  system—inasmuch  as  it  affects  AWP/B  of  the  GLLSP. 
Accordingly,  a  brief  review  of  Pakistan’s  PFM  system  with  its  link  to  IFAD  is  provided 
before getting into AWP/B process for the GLLSP-II. 
A. 
Pakistan’s PFM system and its link with the GLLSP II  
THE PLANNING COMMISSION, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN IS RESPONSIBLE  FOR ESTABLISHING 
CRITERIA  AND  GUIDELINES---INCLUDING  TEMPLATES  FOR  FORMULATING  DEVELOPMENT 
PROJECTS  FOR  FEDERAL  AND  PROVINCIAL  GOVERNMENTS26.  AS  PER  CURRENT  ARRANGEMENTS, 
IF  THE  COST  OF  A  PROVINCIAL  DEVELOPMENT  PROJECT  EXCEEDS PKR 10  BILLION,  THE P&DD 
OF  A  PROVINCE  WILL  HAVE  TO  SEEK  THE  APPROVAL  OF  THE  EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE  OF  THE 
ECONOMIC COUNCIL (ECNEC) FOR THAT PROJECT. ECNEC IS THE HIGHEST FORUM TO REVIEW 
AND  APPROVE  DEVELOPMENT  PROJECTS  IN  PAKISTAN.  A  WELL-DEFINED  PROCESS  IS  IN  PLACE 
FOR THIS PURPOSE. 
i. 
ii. 
The Provincial Development Working Party (PDWP)—which is the clearing 
house of development project would review and recommend the project for 
consideration of the federal government; 
The Central Development Working Party (CDWP)—housed in the Planning 
Commission, Islamabad, conducts financial and economic analysis of the 
projects and—the projects it finds well-designed, are recommended to ECNEC 
for review and approval; 
iii. 
ECNEC is the final approving authority for any provincial projects costing 
beyond 10 billion and all projects with foreign component. 
THE  PROVINCIAL  GOVERNMENT  MUST  PREPARE  PC-1  FOR  THE  GLLSP-II  AS  ITS  ESTIMATED 
COST IS HIGHER THAN PRK 10 BILLION. THE PROVINCIAL P&DD IS TO PREPARE THE PC-1 IN 
COMPLIANCE  WITH  APPLICABLE  REQUIREMENTS  AND  TO  ENGAGE  WITH  RELEVANT  GOVERNMENT 
AGENCIES  TO  OBTAIN  APPROVAL  OF  THE  PC-1  FROM  THE  PWDP,  THE  CWDP,  AND  ECNEC. 
ANY  PC-I  DOCUMENT  THAT  IS  SUBMITTED  WITH  MISSING  ELEMENTS  IS  NOT  ACCEPTED  BY 
PWDP/CWDP/ECNEC.  TO  AVOID  DELAYS  IN  THE  PROCESSING  OF  THE  PC-1,  THE  P&DD 
SHOULD  START  PREPARING  THE  PC-1  BASED  ON  THE  PDR.  THIS  IS  CRITICAL  SINCE  ANY 
26 Details about how to formulate project proposal are provided in the Manual for Development Project, 
Planning Commission available at https://www.pc.gov.pk/uploads/downloads/perform/Manual-for-
development-projects.pdf 
14 
SIGNIFICANT  DEVIATION(S)  FROM  THE  PROJECT  DESIGN  MAY  REQUIRE  CHANGING  THE  PC-1 
FORM  WHICH,  IN  TURN,  COULD  MEAN  GOING  THROUGH  A  LONG  BUREAUCRATIC  TIER  OF 
APPROVAL. 
B. 
Project design changes during project life 
IFAD’s  projects  are  subject  to  performance  reviews  periodically.  These  reviews  in 
identifying what is working and what is not and taking remedial measure to enhance the 
implementation  effectiveness  of  the  project  vis-à-vis  the  intended  outcomes  of  the 
project.  While  minor  adjustments  are  carried  out  subsequent  to  each  supervision 
mission,  the  Mid  Term  Review  (MTR)---carried  out  when  a  project  is  almost  half  way 
through  implementation,  is  the  time  to  revisit  the  whole  design  and  make  significant 
adjustments  in  the  design—if  such  a  response  is  warranted  by  implementation 
experience. 
IFAD  considers  reallocations  of  funds  between  difference  categories  of  expenditure  to 
make  the  most  of  available  resources.  The  purpose  of  these  reallocations  is  to  divert 
resources toward the activities that are contributing more effectively toward the intended 
project  outcomes.  The  categories  of  expenditure  where  the  project  performance  is  not 
acceptable, it does not make sense to keep funds idle.   
The current planning guidelines—applicable to the GLLSP-II requires that in cases where 
the overall actual project cost does not go beyond 15% of the approved project cost, no 
revision in the PC-1 is required. 
C.  AWP/Budget process  
The budgeting process can be broken down in four steps: 
  Preparation of the annual work plan 
  Preparation of the annual budget 
  Budget monitoring 
  Budget revisions. 
The annual work plan describes in detail all the activities that must be carried out by the 
Project  during  the  year  based  on  management  priorities;  it  includes  a  chronogram  for 
for 
each  activity,  the  verifiable 
implementation.  The  annual  budget,  which  is  derived  from  the  work  plan,  aims  at 
providing  detailed  cost  estimates  for  the  implementation  of  project  activities  as  well  as 
the  operation  of  the  PMU  and  SPMUs.  These  two  parts  of  the  Project  planning  process 
(the  work  plan  and  the  budget)  are  brought  together  in  a  unique  document  called  the 
annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
indicator(s)  and  the  staff/entities  responsible 
The AWPB is an essential management tool that serves to establish priorities for Project 
implementation, set out activities in a timeline, and forecast the resources (both financial 
and human) needed to achieve the set objectives. It is also required for the mobilization 
of  funding  by  the  various  Project  financiers.  Finally,  it  represents  the  main  tool  for 
Project management, IFAD and the GoB to control costs and assess Project performance. 
The  preparation  of  the  AWPB  is  a  participatory  exercise  involving  the  beneficiaries,  the 
representatives  of  the  decentralized  local  government  (at  district  levels)  and  the 
implementing  partner  /service  providers,  under  the  direction  of  the  PMU.  The  Project 
Steering Committee and IFAD are responsible for the review and approval of the AWPB. 
The AWPB  covers the  period from  July  to  June each  year,  in line  with  the  Project  fiscal 
year. It integrates both IFAD and GoB planning processes.  
15 
D. 
Preparation of the Annual Work Plan 
The annual work plan sets the Project objectives for the coming year, details activities to 
be conducted, specifies deliverables and outputs (along with key M&E indicators), as well 
as 
institutional 
responsibilities.  During the  life  of the  Project,  and  particularly  during  the first year,  the 
Project design report and PC-1 serve as a framework for the preparation of the AWPB. 
implementation  delays,  and 
resources  needed  and 
identifies 
Preliminary  meeting.  The  preparation  of  the  annual  work  plan  starts  with  a  preliminary 
meeting within the PMU, to which the SPMUs and implementing partners are invited. The 
purpose of the meeting is to: 
  Set the objectives of the Project for the coming year, for each district and overall 
  Establish    priorities,    taking   into    account    the    results    obtained   to   date    and  
the recommendations of supervision missions 
  Assess  the  achievements  of  the  current  AWPB  so  as  to  (i)  take  any  necessary 
corrective measures and (ii) determine the activities that will not be completed in 
the current year and will need to be carried over to the year Y+1 
  Agree  on  the  different  steps  and  set  the  schedule  for  the  preparation  of  the 
AWPB. 
Identification of needs. Planning meetings with implementing partners, SMPUs at district 
levels.  This  exercise  is  coordinated  by  the  SPMUs  technical  staff  to  ensure  that  the 
planning  at  district  level  are  in  line  with  the  Project  objectives  and  priorities  set  during 
the AWPB preliminary meeting with regard to the management of the Project, the FM is 
in  charge  of  identifying  PMU/SPMU  staff  members’  needs  relating  to  financial 
management  and  administration,  while  the  M&E  Specialist  is  responsible  for  defining 
Project needs in terms of internal monitoring. 
District  work  plans.  The  SPMU  M&E  Officers  under  the  supervision  of  M&E  Specialist 
consolidate the district level plan in close coordination with GLLSP-II finance section and 
other  implementing  partners  to  ensure  that  the  district  level  plan  is  in  line  with  the 
overall Project objectives and the targets sets out in the preliminary meeting. 
An AWPB workshop is then organized at district level, with the participation of technical 
staff  from  and  SPMUs  and  other  IPs,  in  order  to  review  the  district  work  plan  in  detail. 
Other donor-funded projects in the area may be invited to participate so as to harmonize 
interventions and avoid duplication. During the workshop, the participants are invited to 
formulate  observations  on  the  draft  district  work  plan,  particularly  regarding  priority 
activities.  The  observations  made  during  the  workshop  are  taken  into  account  by  the 
SPMU  M&E  Officers  to  finalize  the  work  plan,  under  the  guidance  of  the  M&E  Specialist 
from PMU. 
PMU  Work  Plan.  At  PMU  level,  each  component  head  is  responsible  for  drawing  out  a 
detailed  list  of  activities  to  be  conducted  during  the  year  (including  activities  to  be 
carried  over  from  the  previous  year).  In  addition  to  the  technical  activities  to  be 
implemented  at  PMU  level,  this  also  includes  the  M&E  and  KM  and  the  finance  & 
administration  activities.  This  process  is  coordinated  by  the  M&E  Specialist  to  avoid 
duplication  and  to  ensure  overall  coherence.  Once  the  PMU  work  plan  is  drafted,  the 
Project  Director  organizes  a  planning  meeting  at  the  PMU  to  discuss  and  finalize  the 
document. 
Consolidated  work  plan.  The  M&E  Specialist  is  in  charge  of  preparing  a  GLLSP-II 
consolidated  work  plan  based  on  district  work  plan  and  the  PMU  work  plan.  Once  the 
16 
Project  Director  validates  the  finalized  document,  the  FM  and  M&E  Specialist  work 
together  on  the  codification  of  each  work  plan  activity,  using  the  accounting  system’s 
codification structure for AWPB activities. The next step is the preparation of the budget. 
E. 
Preparation of the Annual Budget 
Based on the finalized work plan, the IPs, SPMUs and PMU technical staff are requested 
to  estimate  the  cost  of  the  various  activities  to  be  conducted.  The  cost  estimates  must 
take  into  account  all  cost  elements  related  to  the  activities,  including  mission’s  costs, 
consultant’s  fees,  workshops,  training,  procurement,  etc.  The  FM  and  Procurement 
Specialist  may  be  consulted  if  necessary  to  assist  in  the  costing  of  certain  items.  The 
sources,  assumptions  and  calculation  bases  used  for  determining  each  cost  estimate 
must be clearly documented in the budget. 
The PMU operating budget is prepared by the FM and FM which includes: 
  Salaries,    social    security    contributions,    allowances,    per    diem    and    other  
personnel charges 
  Staff training costs 
  Procurement of goods, works and services for the PMU and SPMU offices 
  Office running costs (utilities, telephone, maintenance and repairs, supplies, fuel, 
vehicle costs, etc.) 
  Other expenses (meetings, consultants’ fees, audit fees, etc.). 
The  detailed  cost  estimates  prepared  by  the  technical  staff  for  each  Project  component 
are forwarded to the FM who reviews them to ensure that: 
  The costs estimate for each activity are reasonable; 
  The  budget  by  activity, sub-component  and component  is  coherent  as  compared 
to  the  annual  cost  estimates  defined  in  the  COSTAB  and  the  GoB  Public  Sector 
Development Plan; and 
  Funds will be available in each expense category. 
The  FM  then  compiles  the  detailed  budget  data  by  component/sub-component,  and 
determines  the  funding  source  for  each  activity  based  on the  allocation in the  COSTAB. 
Funding  sources  for  GLLSP-II  activities  include  the  IFAD  loan,  the  GoB  counterpart 
contribution,  and  the  beneficiaries’  contribution.  For  the  GoB  counterpart,  the  budget 
must  clearly  distinguish  between  the  funding  related  to  duty  &  tax  exemptions  and  in-
kind contributions and the funding from GoB cash contributions. 
The FM can then present the detailed budget worksheet by component/sub- component 
and  by  activity,  with  an  indication  of  the  funding  source  and  the  expense  category  for 
each activity. The budget worksheet includes separate sheets showing for each activity, 
the budget assumptions, the sources and the calculation bases for the unit costs. This is 
essential in order to (i) facilitate budget monitoring and budget-actual variance analysis 
and (ii) prepare the budget in the following year(s). 
The budget includes the following categories, in line with the eligible expense categories 
as detailed in the financing agreement: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Civil works 
Vehicles & Motorcycles  
Equipment and materials 
Grants to Beneficiaries 
Revolving Funds 
Training and Studies 
17 
• 
• 
Salaries & allowances 
Operating Costs. 
The  budgets  by  component  only  include  those  expense  categories  relating  to  the 
activities to be conducted. It is essential for the FM to ensure that funds are available in 
each expense category to accommodate the cost estimates. 
A  budget  conference  is  held  at  the  PMU  to  discuss  any  necessary  modifications  to  the 
budgets  by  component  and  by  expense  category,  and  to  conduct  budget  arbitration 
between  activities  and/or  components.  The  budget  is  finalized  and  consolidated  by  the 
FM on the basis of the decisions made during this conference. 
The  final  step  is  the  consolidation  and  formatting  of  the  AWPB  by  the  FM  and  the  M&E 
Specialist. The main document covers the following: 
Physical progress made by the Project in the previous year (including quantitative 
• 
data) and activities to be carried over to the coming year 
•    Financial progress in the previous year, including cost overruns and savings 
•    Procurement performance 
•     Constraints  and  problems from the  previous  year,  and  recommendations  to  resolve 
them 
•    Lessons learned and rationale for the activities proposed 
•    Main activities proposed for the current year, by component/sub-component 
•    Consolidated budget. 
The main document is complemented with annexes including; 
Detailed work plans and budgets by component/sub-component with an indication 
• 
of the district; 
•    The procurement plan -- A  schedule  showing,  by  expense  category,  the  financing 
allocation  (per  the  financing  agreement),  the  cumulative  disbursements  to  date,  the 
current  AWPB  projections  and  the  remaining  balance.  This  schedule  serves  to 
demonstrate that sufficient funds are available in each expense category to cover for the 
budget projections. 
• 
The  same  schedule  as  above,  by  component  and  sub-component  (the  initial 
allocation is  obtained  from the  PDR  and  COSTAB  rather than  the  financing  agreement); 
and. 
•    The staff development plan. 
After  validation  by  the  Project  Director,  the  AWPB  is  forwarded  to  the  head  of  the  PSC 
who  convenes  a  steering  committee  meeting  for  the  review  and  approval  of  the 
document. The  Project  Director,  DPD  and the  PMU technical  staff  attend the meeting  to 
answer questions from the PSC members. The AWPB is modified and finalized taking into 
account  the  observations  from  the  PSC.  The  finalized  version  of  the  AWPB  and 
Procurement Plan must be sent to the PSC and to IFAD for no objection. In the absence 
of  comments  from  IFAD  within  30  days  after  receipt,  the  AWPB  shall  be  deemed 
approved.  The  approval  of  AWPB  by  PSC  shall  be  deemed  as  the  final  approval  for  the 
GoB counterpart contribution. 
A template for the AWPB is provided as Annexure-I to this Manual. It will be customized 
to reflect all components, activities and relation financial information.  
F. 
Budget Monitoring 
18 
The AWPB serves as the reference document for the PMU to assess the Project physical 
and  financial  implementation  progress.  As  soon  as  the  AWPB  is  approved,  the  Deputy 
Finance  Manager  inputs  the  annual  budget  into  the  accounting  system..  The  budget  is 
entered  by  account,  component,  sub-component,  AWPB  activity,  financier,  expense 
category and district. After it is input and verified by the FM, the Finance Manager prints 
out the budget and distributes copies to the Project Director, the technical staff and the 
M&E section. 
The finance section is responsible for monitoring the budget by comparing it with actual 
expenditures.  Project  expenses  recorded  in  the  general  accounts  are  simultaneously 
recorded  against  the  budget.  Thanks  to  this  unique  data  entry  system,  all  Project 
expenses are automatically recorded in the “actual expense” column of the budget. The 
accounting  system  can  generate  budget-monitoring  statements  showing  the  status  of 
the  budget  by  component/sub-component,  by  activity,  by  expense  category,  by  district 
and/or  by  financier  for  any  period  requested.  These  statements  show  the  budgeted 
amount, the cumulative expenditures to date, the available balance and the percentage 
execution.  The  FM  prints  a  budget-monitoring  statement  at  the  end  of  each  month 
preferably  or  quarterly,  or  whenever  necessary  and  distributes  to  the  Project  Director, 
M&E, component heads and DPD. 
During  the  first  week  of  each  quarter,  the  Project  Director  organizes  a  budget  review 
meeting during which the FM, M&E Specialist, Procurement Specialist and DPDs analyze 
the  budget-monitoring  statement  of  the  previous  quarter.  This  exercise  may  also  be 
carried out monthly if deemed necessary by GLLSP-II team the objective is to determine 
whether funds are being utilized as planned, and to take corrective actions if necessary. 
Any  significant  variance  between  the  budget  and  actual  expenses  is  investigated  and 
discussed during the meeting. The FM then prepares a budget progress report explaining 
all variances and formulating recommendations, which may include the need for budget 
reallocation  or  revision.  The  quarterly  budget-monitoring  statement  is  attached  to  the 
report.  This  budget  report  serves  as  the  source  document  for  the  AWPB  execution 
section of the quarterly financial report prepared by the FM. 
A  template  has  been  provided  to  assess  technical  and  financial  progress  of  the  project 
against the approved AWP/B at Annexure-II. 
G.  Budget Revision 
The Project Director or Project team may decide to reallocate funds from one budget line 
or activity to another as long as the impact is less than 15% of the initial budget amount 
for that budget line. In this case s/he sends a memo instructing the FM to proceed with 
the  reallocation.  When  the  impact  is  more  than  15%,  a  request  a  meeting  will  be  held 
with relevant staff members and submit it for PSC approval. This exercise may be carried 
out  at  PMU  with  the  revision  requested  submitted  by  relevant  department,  then  a 
meeting  will  be  held  PD,  FM  and  requesting  department  head.  These  will  then  be 
forwarded  to  finance  section  to  update  the  system  accordingly.  If  the  changes  are 
substantial  and  affecting  the  overall  budget  more  than  10%  shall  be  forwarded  to  the 
PSC’s head for his approval and subsequently will be forwarded to IFAD for NOC. 
In  addition,  depending  on  the  Project  performance  during  the  first  half  of  the  year  (or 
due to unforeseen circumstances), it may become necessary to conduct a full revision of 
the budget for the rest of the year. The decision to carry out a budget revision is made 
by  the  Project  Director  and  materialized  in  a  memo  sent  to  all  concerned  parties.  The 
IPs,  SPMUs  and  technical  PMU  staff  are  requested  to  prepare  a  revised  work  plan  and 
budget  taking  into  account  achievements/disbursements  to  date  and  detailing  the 
19 
activities  that  can  be  implemented  before  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.  The  consolidation, 
approval and recording process for the AWPB revision is the same as described above. 
IX.  FLOW OF FUNDS  
A. 
Financiers of the GLLSP-II and Flow Chart 
The funding of GLLSP-II comes from three sources (i) the IFAD Loan; (ii) IFAD TA 
Grant;  and  (iii)  the  Counterpart  Contribution  from  GoB  and  (iv)  Beneficiaries’ 
Contributions.  The  project  would  access  IFAD  funds  through  the  Imprest  Fund 
methodology. For this purpose, the PMU would open Designated Accounts—one each for 
the  IFAD  Loan  and  IFAD  TA  Grant  and  request  IFAD  to  release  initial  advance  to  these 
accounts.  The  PMU  would  spend  funds  and  replenish  these  accounts  to  keep  enough 
funds in the Imprest Funds to meet its expenditure requirements.   
The  BoG’s  counterpart  funds  would  be  allocated  through  normal  government 
budgetary  process.  The  provincial  government’s  annual  budget  cycle  starts  usually  in 
November/December  when  provincial  Finance  Department  (FD)  issues  a  Budget  Call 
Circular (BCC). The BCC includes forms to be used for recurrent and development budget 
and  detailed  guidance  on  how  to  fill  these  forms.  The  PMU  is  required  to  work  out  the 
requirement  of  the  counterpart  funds  and  ensure  its  inclusion  in  the  budget.  The  PMU 
shall  open  a  Designated  Account  to  receive  the  releases  of  counterpart  funds  quarterly 
and must follow-up on this issue with the FD consistently.  
Details  on  Designated  Accounts,  Imprest  Fund  Procedures,  and  Recovery  of  Initial 
Advances given to the PMU are provided later in this section. The flowchart depicts how 
IFAD funds and Counterpart funds would flow through the project. 
20 
The community would contribute toward the cost of the project at the time a CPI starts 
and  when  it  is  handed  over  for  O&M  to  the  community.  The  SMP  is  responsible  for 
maintaining  account  of  this  funding  source  and  sharing  report  thereon  which  shall  be 
kept updated in the GLLSP-II accounting system. 
B. 
Evidence of authority to sign Withdrawal Applications 
IFAD  requires  the  B/R’s  representative,  as  designated  in  the  financing  agreement,  to 
furnish  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  authority  and  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of 
the  individuals  who  will  sign  WAs  on  behalf  of  the  borrower.  This  evidence  must  reach 
the  Fund  before  the  first  WA  is  presented  by  the  borrower  and  should  be  the  original 
(photocopies,  facsimiles  or  other  means  of  transmission  are  not  acceptable).  Each  WA 
should  be signed  by  such  duly  authorized  individuals,  and the  Fund must  be  notified  of 
any change in the signatories authorized to withdraw funds from the loan/grant account. 
For this purpose, the B/R shall provide the names and specimen signatures of the newly 
appointed  signatories  and  include  the  date  when  such  change  is  to  take  effect.  The 
original of such changed documentary evidence is to be provided to the Fund. The PMU 
shall use the following format for correspondence with IFAD on this issue.  
21 
Flow of funds                                  IFAD: Initial advance and replenishments / GoB: Counterpart funding IFAD: Withdrawal applications / GoB’s Funds release request (based on Annual Development Plan) Invoices / Supporting documents / Statements of Expenditure (SOE) Payments  
C.  Designated Account 
The flow of funds for the Project starts with the opening of the project Designated 
Account  (DA),  denominated  in  US  Dollars,  in  the  national  central  bank,  in  accordance 
with the Funds requirements identified in the Financing Agreement and the Letter to the 
Borrower.  The  FM  is  responsible  for  opening  and  managing  the  Designated  Account 
including receiving on a monthly basis the DA Statement of Account from the bank and 
reconciling  it  against  PMU’s  records.  Disbursements  from  the  DA  should  be  recorded  in 
the  PMU’s  account  records  as  of  the  date  they  are  made,  that  is  when  the  checks  are 
issued. 
These  funds  can  only  be used  for  expenditures  relating to  the  execution  of the  Project. 
The  PMU  cannot  make  financial  commitments  or  authorize  disbursements  over  and 
above  the  funding  made  available  to  the  Project.  In  the  case  of  insufficient  funds  to 
conduct  certain IFAD-financed  Project  activities,  a  request  for  reallocation  of  loan  funds 
may  be  presented  to  IFAD  through  the  EAD.  The  IFAD  contribution  comprises  an  IFAD 
loan  of  SDR  (to  be  inserted  later).  The  loan  funds  are  made  available  to  the  Project  in 
several installments and using the impress account modality27. 
27 Details on different disbursement methods are available in the IFAD Financial and Administration Manual available at  
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39637251 
22 
EVIDENCE OF AUTHORITY TO SIGN WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS  (Sample letter – to be submitted on letterhead) [to include full street address, city, country] International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Date:  Via Paolo di Dono, 44 00142 Rome, Italy  Attention: Finance Administration Services Accounting and Controller’s Division  Subject: IFAD Loan/Grant/Financing No.: Project Name:  Dear Sirs/Madams:  I refer to the Financing Agreement between IFAD and [Name of Borrower/Recipient], dated [       ]. In accordance with the provisions of Section 4.04(b) of IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated 29 April 2009 as may be amended from time to time, I hereby  designate the following person (or persons) whose authenticated specimen signature(s) appear(s) below as authorized, on behalf of the Borrower/Recipient, to sign Applications for Withdrawal under the above-referenced IFAD Loan/Grant/Financing. This notification enters into effect as of [        date ------]:  (Optional) The following is the official email address which will be used by the  Borrower/Recipient  to submit Applications for Withdrawal and other official communications to IFAD:   . Any communication not originating from this address should be disregarded.    (Name(s) and Title(s)) Specimen signature  (Name(s) and Title(s)) Specimen signature  (Name(s) and Title(s)) Specimen signature (Indicate if the authorization to sign is jointly with another person(s)).  Signed by:   Title of the Borrower/Recipient’s Designated Representative (as provided in the Financing Agreement)  
D. 
Imprest Fund 
The imprest fund procedure is a disbursement procedure where IFAD makes an advance 
disbursement from the Loan Account for deposit to an Imprest Fund Account to be used 
exclusively  for  the  IFAD’s  share  of  eligible  expenditures.  The  main  objective  of  this 
procedure  is  to  help  the  borrower  reduce  cash  flow  difficulties  in  financing  project 
expenditures, thereby facilitating project implementation. Other objectives are providing 
the  borrower  with  more  control  over  payments  and  reducing  the  number  of  withdrawal 
applications (WAs), particularly for payments for small expenditures and related costs. 
  PMU  opens  a  Designated  Account  denominated  in  the  USD  to  receive  funds  as 
Imprest. A parallel account in PKR is also made operational to pay against project 
liabilities; 
  An  initial  deposit  (or  authorized  allocation)  amounting  to    the  estimated 
expenditure  for  first  six  months  of  implementation  will  be  drawn  as  an  advance 
for the start-up phase once the project becomes effective at the request of EAD. 
The  ceiling  of  the  initial  advance  may  be  increased  if  it  is  not  enough  to  meet 
project disbursement. 
  Periodic  replenishments  of  the  designated  account  corresponding  to  the 
reimbursement  of  eligible  expenditures  incurred  by  the  Project  throughout  its 
implementation period. 
  The  initial  deposit  would  be  recovered  by  deducting  a  portion  of  the 
replenishment  amount  requested  in  each  withdrawal  application  submitted  to 
IFAD towards the end of the implementation period. 
  Direct  payments  by  IFAD  of  expenditures  incurred  by  the  Project  (above  USD 
100,000), based on a direct payment request issued by the PMU. 
The periodic replenishments will be made upon request from the PMU (in the form 
of  withdrawal  applications),  based  on  which  IFAD  withdraws  funds  from  the  loan 
account. The minimum withdrawal amount is normally set at 30% of the initial advance 
amount. In order to avoid cash flow problems, the PMU is required to submit at least one 
withdrawal  application  (WA)  to  IFAD  every  quarter.  When  preparing  the  WAs,  the  PMU 
shall  follow  the  instructions  contained  in  IFAD’s  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook  (which  also  contains  model  documents  and  forms  to  use)  and 
the procedures described below. 
E.  Recovery of Initial Advance 
To avoid an excessive outstanding advance at the financing closing date, recovery 
of  the  advance  is  required  ideally  to  begin  six  months  before  the  Project  Completion 
Date  (PCD)  where  advances  are  large,  and  at  the  latest  three  months  before  the  PCD 
where  special  circumstances  may  warrant  this.  Recovery  of  the  advance  may  begin 
either:  (i)  six  months  before  completion  date;  or  (ii)  when  the  undisbursed  balance  of 
the financing (including outstanding special commitments) is equal to twice the amount 
of the advance. In cases where the imprest account is applicable, the Fund will effect a 
23 
gradual recovery of the advance – normally by applying part of the amount documented 
in  each  replenishment  application  to  reduce  the  outstanding  advance.  This  offers  the 
most  effective  means  of  ensuring  that  some  funds  remain  available  to  finance  eligible 
expenditures to be incurred using the imprest account. 
A template to guide the finance team in recovering the initial advance is shown in 
the  box  on  next  page.  Detailed  guidance  is  provided  in  the  IFAD  Handbook  on 
Disbursement. 
24 
F.  Direct Payment Procedures  
The  direct  payment  procedure  is  a  disbursement  procedure  where  IFAD,  at  the 
borrower’s  request,  pays  a  designated  beneficiary  (e.g.,  supplier,  contractor,  or 
consultant) directly.  
A signed withdrawal application (WA) must be submitted to IFAD together with a 
summary  sheet  and  the  required  supporting  documents.  The  PMU  shall  use  the 
standardized form for estimating its funding needs and prepare a WA for direct payments 
where  necessary.  To  prove  the  requested  disbursement  is  for  eligible  project 
expenditures  incurred,  the  PMU  has  to  provide  following  supporting  documents  with 
every withdrawal application that it submits to IFAD: 
25 
Sample Recovery Plan-Designated Account    IFAD Loan No.:   IFAD Loan Amount (SDR) 20 000 000.00            Project Completion Date:  31-Dec-12  Loan Closing Date:  30-Jun-13           Reporting Period   WA No.   Date   US $   EUR   SDR  Unjustified balance USD SDR   Authorized Allocation  1  18/01/2006  $ 250 000.00  € -  172 648.51    0.00    (77 351.49)      € -  172 648.51      0.00  #VALUE!    Exchange Rate:     Justification:   Ref. No.    WA No.    Date   Estimated WA value (SP)   Estimated WA value (USD)   Proposed Recovery %   Recovery Amount (USD)   Commulative Recovery Amount (USD)  Commulative Unjustified balance  (USD) 1 40 21-Feb-12  111 832.56  45%  50 324.65  50 324.65  (50 324.65) 2 41 3-Mar-12  72 685.11  35%  25 439.79  75 764.44  (75 764.44) 3 42 5-May-12  74 685.11  35%  26 139.79  101 904.23  (101 904.23) 4 43 7-Jul-12  70 885.11  42%  29 771.75  131 675.98  (131 675.98) 5 44 5-Sep-12  64 885.11  40%  25 954.04  157 630.02  (157 630.02) 6 45 31-Dec-12  82 627.66  80%  66 102.13  223 732.15  (223 732.15) 7 46 10-Jun-13  26 065.11  100%  26 267.85  250 000.00  (250 000.00) 8          TOTAL 503 665.77 USD 250 000.00 USD           In accordance w ith IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date w ill be promptly refunded to IFAD.           Prepared by:      15-Oct-11     Date           Confirmed by:           Date   
Payment for  Payment type 
Goods 
One 
or 
Instalment payment 
time 
Services 
Advance Payment 
Progress Payment 
Civil Works 
Advance Payment 
Progress Payment 
Release 
Retention Money 
of 
or 
invoice 
invoice 
service  provider’s 
service  provider’s 
Required supporting documents 
Supplier’s  invoice,  or  purchase  order  (indicating 
date, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Consultant’s 
or 
(indicating amount 
of advance payment and bank account details) 
Consultant’s 
(indicating date, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Contractor’s invoice (indicating date, amount, and 
bank 
account details) 
Contractor’s 
certificate a or 
summary  of  work  progress  (indicating  period 
covered, 
amount, and bank account details) 
Contractor’s invoice (indicating date, amount, and 
bank 
account 
guarantee 
interim  payment 
invoice  and 
unconditional 
details) 
bank 
and 
G.  Statement of Expenditure (SOE) Procedure 
For any expenditure item costing less than (to be inserted later based on FA) the 
PMU  can  use  this  procedure  for  replenishment  of  its  imprest  fund.  The  statement  of 
expenditures  (SOE)  procedure  is  a  simplified  procedure  requiring  no  submission  of 
supporting documentation of expenditures. The procedure derives its name from the SOE 
form which is submitted with the WA. The SOE replaces the usual supporting documents 
and the summary sheet. The SOE form provides data on contracts and disbursements of 
individual payments (up to any applicable SOE ceiling).  
While using  this method,  PMU  certifies that  (a)  expenditures  have  been  incurred 
and paid for proper execution of project activities under the terms and conditions of the 
loan  agreement;  (b)  all  documentation  authenticating  these  expenditures  has  been 
retained  and  will  be  made  available  for  examination  by  PMU  upon  request;  and  (c)  for 
projects  with  an  SOE  ceiling,  payments  have  not  been  split  to  enable  them  to  pass 
through such ceiling. 
The  PMU  shall  use  a  standardized  form  (Summary/Statement  of  Expenditure 
Sheet) for preparing claims for withdrawal of funds for the project.  
H. 
Preparation of Withdrawal Applications 
The  WA  is  a  standard  IFAD  package  comprising  several  forms  and  documents, 
which are all described in detail in the LTB and IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook: 
  Form  100  –  the  application  for  withdrawal,  which  indicates  the  amount  of 
replenishment  requested  in  the  WA  currency  and  the  payment  instructions.  It 
26 
contains  the  signatures  of  the  authorized  representatives,  i.e.  the  GLLSP-II  PD 
and the FM. 
  Summary  sheet  –  the  recap  schedule  showing  the  amounts  claimed  (in  local 
currency and in the WA currency) by expense category under Forms 101 and 102 
  Form  101 sheets  – used  for  expenditure  exceeding the  SOE threshold  or  for the 
Direct Payment procedure (see below). Copies of supporting documents must be 
attached  to  the  Form  101  sheets  and  sent  to  IFAD.  In  order  to  facilitate 
processing  by  IFAD,  the  item  numbers  on  the  summary  sheets  are  cross-
referenced to the supporting documents. In addition, the IFAD no objection date 
is included in the “Remarks” column, if applicable. 
  Form  102  sheets  –  used  to  detail  all  expenditure  claimed  under  the  SOE 
procedure  (all  expenditure  under  USD  50,000),  for  which  no  supporting 
documentation  is  sent  to  IFAD.  The  relevant  supporting  documents  must  be 
retained  instead  by  the  PMU  for  periodic  inspection  by  representatives  of  IFAD 
during supervision missions,  and  by the  auditors  as  part  of  the  annual  audits.  It 
should be noted that the SOE threshold applies to the value of the contract rather 
than the amount of the payment. Form 102 sheets must be separated by expense 
category,  and  certified  by  the  FM  and  the  Project  Director  as  authorized 
signatories. 
  Form  104  –  the  designated  account  reconciliation,  which  serves  to  reconstitute 
the  IFAD  advances  from  bank  balances,  WAs  in  process  and  unclaimed 
disbursements.  Any  difference  between  the  outstanding  IFAD  advance  and  the 
total accounted for must be justified and cleared as soon as possible.  
  Form  105 – the WA  checklist must  be completed  to  make  sure  that the WA  was 
properly completed in accordance with IFAD instructions. 
In  addition,  the  PMU  is  required  to  submit  with  each  WA,  an  updated  contract  register 
and contract-monitoring forms (for all contracts with more than one payment). 
The  production  of  the  WAs  should  preferably  be  automated  in  Accounting 
Software.  At  least  at  the  end  of  each  quarter  (following  month-end  verification 
procedures  detailed  in  Section  1.4),  the  Deputy  Finance  Manager  launches  the 
preparation of a WA, which necessitates three steps: 
i. 
Preliminary  verifications:  The  check  stubs  and  bank  transfers  for  the  month  are 
checked  against  the  bank  journal  to  ensure  that  all  disbursements  have  been 
recorded in the Accounting Software and are supported by proper documentation. 
The  bank  journal  is  reviewed  in  detail  to  ensure  that  the  description  of  the 
transactions posted in the system are sufficiently clear and complete. Finally, the 
Deputy  Finance  Manager  ensures  that  bank  reconciliations  have  been  completed 
for all accounts. 
ii. 
Accounting system processing: The accounting system is set up so as to exclude 
advances from the amounts claimed for reimbursement in the WA. The FM selects 
the financing under which the WA is prepared, the period covered by the WA, and 
27 
enters  the  SOE  threshold  (USD  50,000)  and  the  month-end  exchange  rate.  The 
system then shows all ‘claimable’ disbursements since the previous WA issued. 
iii.  WA  printing:  Once  the  processing  is  complete,  the  WA  number  and  period  are 
automatically  generated  by  the  system,  and  the  WA  forms  100,  101,  102,  and 
104, as well as the summary sheet, can then be printed. 
The FM makes copies of all supporting documents backing up the WA and cross- 
references  them  to  the  summary  sheets.  Copies  of  the  bank  statements  for  the 
corresponding  months  are  also  attached  to  the  WA.  After  having  checked  the  WA  to 
ensure  that  the  references,  amounts,  and  other  details  are  correct,  the  FM  fills  out  the 
PMU checklist to ensure that all steps have been properly followed. The FM also verifies 
the  WA,  signs  the  relevant  forms  and  completes  both  the  PMU  and  the  WA  checklists. 
S/he  then  forwards  the  entire  package  to  the  PD  for  review  and  approval.  The  WA 
checklist (form 105) is verified by the PD as s/he performs a final check on the WA prior 
to signing it.  Before to sending the WA to IFAD, the FM scans and makes a copy of the 
entire  signed  WA  package  for  PMU  records.  Withdrawal  applications  are  sent  to  IFAD 
along  with  all  supporting  documents  through  the  online  WA  submission  portal  and  it  is 
duly verified by FM & PD. 
IFAD  financing  proceeds  may  also  be  obtained  through  direct  payments.  This 
procedure  is  used  for  eligible  Project  expenditures  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD  to 
suppliers,  contractors,  consultants,  or  third  parties  as  authorized  by  the  Borrower.  The 
direct  payment  procedure  may  be  used  to  request  the  payment  of  one  or  several 
invoices  (totaling  more  than  USD  100,000),  but  to  the  same  supplier/contractor.  The 
Direct Payment package includes Forms 100 and 101 described above. 
Once the payment is processed, IFAD sends a payment advice to the EAD (with a 
copy to the PMU), including the value date of the payment, the amount and currency of 
the  payment,  the  SDR  equivalent  of  the  WA  and  the  categories  charged.  The  FM  uses 
this  information  to  fill  out  the  monitoring  schedule  for  WA  and  IFAD  reimbursements. 
This schedule allows the FM to monitor the payment delays, and the differences between 
the amounts of the WA submitted and the amounts paid by IFAD, if any. In addition, at 
the end of each month, the FM requests the status of funds by category from IFAD and 
reconciles it  with  the  PMU  accounts.  Any  difference  must  be investigated  and  explained 
as soon as possible. 
Annexure-III  indicates  the  checks  that  the  finance  team  is  required  to  apply  while 
preparing  withdrawal  applications.  Annexure-IV  shows  the  steps  involved  in  the 
reconciliation of the Designated Accounts 
Introduction to IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook 
The effectiveness of the finance team to manage project funds depends on its understanding of the Imprest Fund procedures 
and the ability to use withdrawal application formats and proper documentation to draw on IFAD’s funds. The finance team 
will prepare withdrawal applications frequently, carry out monthly reconciliation of the designated accounts with the NBP, 
and prepare disbursement reports etc. The finance team should consult IFAD Handbook for Disbursement—in addition to 
what is explained in this manual to ensure that it complies with IFAD’s relevant instruction in its work. 
This  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook is  intended  to  familiarize  both  borrowers  and  recipients  with  the  procedures  for 
withdrawing  proceeds  of  loans/grants/financing  provided  by  and  through  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural 
Development, when financing is to be administered and the project supervised by the Fund. 
The Loan Disbursement Handbook is available at https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39635782 
28 
I. 
Counterpart Funds 
The  GoB  contribution  is  in  the  form  of  cash  contributions  and  tax  exemptions. 
Once the AWPB is approved by the PSC, and the counterpart contribution is recorded in 
the  PSDP,  the  GoB  makes  these  contributions  available  as  follows  (for  those 
expenditures  earmarked  in  the  approved  AWPB  as  being  financed  from  government 
funds): 
  Cash  contribution:  at  the  beginning  of  each  quarter,  the  FM  prepares  a  funds 
request  letter  for  25%  of  the  annual  amount  earmarked  in  the  approved  AWPB 
and  PSDP.  The letter is  signed  by  the  PD  and  sent  to  the  ACS,  P&DD.  When the 
funds  requested  are  released,  the  PMU  receives  a  confirmation  letter  from  the 
Accountant  General  Balochistan  Office,  which  is  responsible  for  maintaining  the 
GLLSP-II assignment account in which counterpart funds are held. 
  Tax  &  duty  exemption:  the  GoB  contribution  takes  the  form  of  a  tax  exemption 
certificate  that  the  PMU  obtains  from  the  Federal  Board  of  Revenue  for  all 
expenditures that normally bear taxes or duties.  
  The  PMU  then  makes  the  related  payments  without  tax,  and  the  amount  of  the 
tax  is  recorded  in  the  accounting  system  as  both  an  expense  and  a contribution 
from GoB. 
J. 
Beneficiaries’ Contributions 
The  beneficiaries’  contribution  is  in  the  form  of  cash  contribution.  The 
beneficiaries contribute at two points: 
i. 
ii. 
At the time a CPI is approved and work starts ( x% of the estimated cost); 
and 
At the time the CPI is complete ( x% of the total cost for the O&M of the 
scheme) 
The PMU is required to maintain updated information on the beneficiaries’ contribution to 
the  project  in its  accounting  system.  This  is  critical to  ensuring  that  all relevant project 
investment is properly accounted for and reported in the project financial statements. 
To  ensure  the  authenticity  of  the  beneficiaries’  contribution—reported  by  the  Social 
Mobilizer  Partner,  the  PMU  will  carry  out  periodic  review  of  the  primary  data  sources 
being used by the Social Mobilizer Partner for this purpose.  
X.  DISBURSEMENT PROCESS 
The  GLLSP-II  incurs  two types  of  expenses:  administrative expenses  (relating to 
the  operation  of  the  PMU  and  SPMUs)  and  project  expenses  (relating  to  the 
implementation  of  Project  activities).  Administrative  expenses  are  normally  initiated  by 
the  Project  Director,  the  FM,  the  Deputy  Finance  Manager,  the  SPMU  F&A  Officers,  the 
29 
M&E, the SPMU M&E Officers. Project expenses may be initiated by IPs and any technical 
staff. 
The  eligible  expense  categories  for  the  Project  are  in  accordance  with  the 
financing  agreement.  For  certain  categories,  expenses  may  be  administrative  or 
programmatic  in  nature.  The  financing  agreement  specifies  the  total  amount  allocated 
for each of the categories, and the percentage of the expenses that is financed by IFAD. 
In  order  to  facilitate  the  management  of  Project  resources  and  corresponding 
actions, annual expenditure plans are prepared from the AWPB for the 3 main classes of 
expenditure incurred by the GLLSP-II: 
  The procurement plan, prepared by the Procurement Specialist, details the goods, 
works  and  services  to  be  acquired  for  the  Project  in  the  following  12  months;  it 
includes quantities, estimated costs and the anticipated acquisition date; 
  The  intervention  plan,  prepared  by  the  PMU  technical  staff  in  coordination  with 
the  IPs  which  includes  all  project  interventions  to  be  implemented  during  the 
following 12 months; 
  The  annual  personnel  plan  prepared  by  the  Admin  &  HR  at  PMU  and  SPMUs, 
shows  the  core  posts,  temporary  personnel  and  individual  consultants  to  be 
engaged  in the  coming  year.  For  each  post  or assignment, the  anticipated  dates 
and duration, the type of contract and the estimated cost are specified. 
Each of these plans identifies the component and AWPB activity corresponding to 
the expenditure forecasted. Once they are approved by the Project Director, these plans 
are distributed to the finance and administrative team for implementation. 
Expenditure Request and Authorization 
All  Project  expenditures  are  initiated  by  a  request  prepared/signed  by  the 
requesting  staff  and  indicating  the  nature  of  the  expenditure  and  other  relevant 
information,  the  amount,  AWPB  activity,  and  the  transaction  coding.  Expenditure 
requests  may  take  the  form  of  a  purchase  requisition  (for  the  procurement  of  goods, 
works  or  services),  an  activity  request  (for  the  organization  of  workshops,  training  or 
demos  sessions,  meetings,  or  other  activities  directly  implemented  by  Project  staff),  a 
request  for  temporary  assistance  (for  the  engagement  of  temporary  personnel  or 
individual  consultants),  the  monthly  payroll  statement  (for  the  salaries  of  Project  staff) 
or a travel authorization (for official missions). 
Requests are first sent to the FM who verifies that (i) the expenditure is included 
in  the  appropriate  annual  plan  and  the  AWPB  and  (ii)  funds  are  available,  before 
forwarding  it  to  the  Project  Director  for  approval.  The  request  is  only  approved  by  the 
Project  Director  if  the  relevance  of  the  expenditure  and  the  availability  of  funds  have 
been established. Project funds cannot be committed unless the request has been signed 
by  the  FM  and  approved  by  the  Project  Director.  Once  the  request  is  approved,  the 
expenditure  process  is  launched  via  a  procurement  action,  an  advance,  a  recruitment 
action or a travel authorization. 
At the SPMU level, the requests (usually from the SPMU technical staff) are sent 
to the Finance Officers who sends it to the PMU Finance section for signature of FM and 
30 
approval  of  Project  Director.  No expenditure  may  be  approved  if it  exceeds the  amount 
budgeted, unless there is prior written approval from the Project Director. 
Payment Request 
Payment  requests  may  take  different  forms,  depending  on  the  type  of 
expenditure:  it  can  be  an invoice  or  progress  payment request (for the  procurement  of 
goods,  works  or  services),    a    fee    payment    request    (for    temporary    personnel    or  
individual  consultant’s services), an advance request (for workshops or meetings), or a 
travel expense claim (for official travel). 
For invoices (or progress payment requests), suppliers/contractors are requested 
to attach a copy of the contract or purchase order and the delivery slip or statement of 
acceptance of work (or certificate of completion of work) when submitting an invoice for 
payment.  After  receiving  invoices  by  the  relevant  section,  invoices  are  sent  to  the 
Finance Manager who: 
  Verifies the mathematical accuracy of the invoice 
  Ensures  that  the  “pack”  is  complete  (invoice,  purchase  requisition,  contract  or 
purchase  order,  delivery  slip/statement  of  acceptance  of  works/certificate  of 
completion,  etc.)  and  checks  that  the  information  is  the  same  on  all  the 
supporting documents. 
  In  the  case  of  progress  payment  request  for  infrastructure,  verifies  that  the 
contractor’s request matches the approved measurement book maintained by the 
Project. 
  Ensures  that  the  invoice  was not  previously  paid  (by  checking in  the  Accounting 
Software and the contract monitoring form) 
  Updates the contract monitoring form. 
For  fee  payment  requests,  consultants  are  requested  to  attach  their  report.  The 
payment  request  is logged  in  by the  FM  (or  Finance  Officers  at the SPMUs)  and sent  to 
Finance Manager who: 
  Verifies the mathematical accuracy of the request 
  Prepares the payment pack (payment request, request for temporary assistance, 
contract, copy of report if applicable) and checks that the information is the same 
on all the documents 
  Ensures acceptance of the report by GLLSP-II, if applicable 
  Ensures    that    the    fee    payment    request    was    not    previously    paid    (by  
checking  in Accounting Software). 
For advance requests, the Deputy Finance Manager verifies that: 
  The  cash  advance  request  is  duly  approved  by  the  FM  and  the  Project  Director, 
and 
  All  supporting  documents  are  attached  (approved  TOR,  activity  request  and 
budget). 
For the travel claims, the Deputy Finance Manager verifies: 
  The approval of the FM and the Project Director. 
  The  completeness  of  supporting  documents  justifying  the  expenses  claimed 
(including the travel authorization with proof of travel). 
  The  accuracy  of  computation  of  mission  costs  by  the  traveler  (compared  to  the 
travel authorization). 
31 
The  above  verifications  are  materialized  on  the  transaction  voucher  used  for 
inputting the payment in the accounting system. In case of an error or omission on any 
of  the  payment  documents,  the Finance  Manager  returns the  document to the  supplier, 
consultant  or  Project  staff  member  for  them  to  be  corrected  and  re-issued.  Once  the 
verification procedures are satisfactory, the Finance Manager sends the payment request 
(invoice or fee payment request) to the originator of the expenditure (i.e. the requesting 
staff)  for  certification.  The  originator  of  the  expenditure  must  sign  the  invoice  or 
payment request to certify the goods have been delivered, works completed or services 
rendered  in  accordance  with  the  contract  or  purchase  order.  Invoices  must  be  marked 
“goods delivered” or “services rendered” followed by the date, to indicate that they have 
been certified for payment. All invoices or payment requests must also bear the Project 
Director’s signature (for payment approval) before payment can be processed.  
XI.  ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES 
A.  Accounting Rules and Principles 
The  accounting  method  used  for  the  GLLSP-II  is  the  cash  basis  of  accounting; 
financial  statements  therefore  only  reflect  cash  receipts  and  cash  disbursements. 
Consequently, fixed assets are expensed at the time of purchase. Financial commitments 
at the end of the year are shown as footnotes to the financial statements. The GLLSP-II 
uses  double-entry  accounting,  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  international 
accounting principles. 
Generally  accepted  accounting  principles  are  the  foundation  upon  which  the 
GLLSP-II’s  financial  information  system is  built and  which  (i)  determine  the methods  of 
evaluation  and  recording  of  financial  transactions  and  (ii)  guarantee  the  quality  of  the 
financial statements. The main principles are: 
  Consistency in accounting principles and methods used from one year to the next 
  Going concern (up to the Project completion date) 
  Matching revenues and expenses within the same fiscal year 
  Historical cost basis for recording financial transactions 
  Non-offsetting of assets and liabilities or revenues and expenses 
  Conservatism, regularity and fairness of accounts and financial statements 
  Materiality    (full    disclosure    of    material    information/data    and    omission    of  
immaterial information/data in the financial statements). 
The Project does not generate revenues; instead it receives subsidies from donors 
in  order  to  finance  its  activities.  Due  to  the  nature  of  these  activities,  the  Project  must 
follow  the  principle  of  balance  between  expenses  and  subsidies.  In  order  for  the  net 
result at the end of each fiscal year to be nil, a balance must be stricken between: 
Investment subsidies and expenditures (i.e. acquisition of capital assets), and 
 
  Operating  subsidies  and  expenditures  (i.e.  expenditures  relating  to  Project 
activities). 
Project  accounts  are  maintained  in  Pakistan  rupee  (PKR);  however,  in  order  to 
facilitate financial monitoring on the part of IFAD, financial reports are also presented in 
USD or SDR. The Project fiscal year goes from July 1st to June 30th. 
32 
B. 
Financial Information System 
The  Project  uses  an  Accounting  Software  for  recording  transactions  in  the 
financial,  analytical  and  budgetary  accounts,  as  well  as  for  the  production  of  various 
financial and accounting reports (accounting journals, trial balance, general ledger, etc.). 
The  Project  is  required  to  use  an  accounting  software  that  can  help  it  comply  with  the 
reporting  requirements  of  IFAD  while  also  meeting  its  financial  management  needs.  At 
minimum, the accounting software needs to have following functionalities:  
  General chart of accounts (for actual and budget transactions) 
  Analytical/cost accounting codes 
  Currencies used for Project’s financial reporting (PKR, US dollars and SDR) 
 
  Suppliers 
  Other third parties (banks, government, etc.) 
  Balance sheet, income statement and statement of sources and uses of funds. 
Journals (purchase, bank, direct payment, subsidiary ledgers, etc.) 
The  software  is  used  to  input  transactions  in  the  accounts,  to  process 
transactions,  to  view  movements,  transactions  coding  and  balances  on  the  screen,  to 
make  inquiries,  and  to  consult  accounts  and  journals.  The  system  also  allows  for 
reporting and printing journals, ledgers and trial balances using different criteria. 
C.  Recording of Transactions 
GLLSP-II’s  financial  transactions  are  recorded  in  the  accounts  using  the 
Accounting software. The recording of transactions is completed in four steps: 
1.  Preparation of a transaction voucher 
2.  Input of the transaction in the appropriate subsidiary ledger 
3.  Back-up of accounting records 
4.  Filing of accounting records. 
D. 
Transaction Voucher (or bill form) 
The Deputy Finance Manager at PMU/Admin & Finance Officers at SPMUs prepares 
the  transaction  voucher.  The  voucher  must  be  backed  up  by  a  supporting  document 
approved  by  the  authorized  officer.  The  supporting  document  can  be  an  invoice,  a 
progress  payment  request  for  works,  fee  payment  request,  advance  request,  travel 
expense claim, payroll statement, check or bank transfer, bank debit or credit advice, or 
an adjusting entry sheet. 
The transaction voucher serves two purposes: 
 
 
It  materializes  the  preliminary  verifications  carried  out  by  the  Deputy  Finance 
Manager on the supporting documents; 
It serves as the support for inputting transactions into the accounting system. 
The voucher number is obtained from the input screen, as entries are being input 
into  the  system.  The  numbering  sequence  used  for  the  vouchers  is  therefore  the  same 
as the one generated automatically by the Accounting Software. 
The following information is indicated on the voucher: 
33 
Journal 
IFAD and GoB share 
 
  Nature, date, description and amount of the transaction in PKR 
  Name of recipient (supplier, consultant, etc.) 
  Reference of the supporting document 
  Amount of income tax and VAT 
 
  Exchange rate 
  Coding  for  general  accounts,  analytical  accounts,  budgetary  accounts  and  PC-1 
code.  The  coding  of  transactions  for  general  accounts,  analytical  accounts, 
budgetary accounts and PC-1 code are based on the Accounting Software’s charts 
of  accounts.  The  AWPB  activity,  the  district,  the  source  of  funding  and  the 
expense category are also indicated on the voucher. 
At  PMU  level,  once  the  voucher  is  filled  out,  it  is  signed  by  the  Deputy  Finance 
Manager,  and  verified  and  signed  by  the  FM.  In  the  case  of  a  payment,  the  Project 
Director also approves the voucher. 
E. 
Input of Transactions 
Transactions  are  input  into  Accounting  Software  using  a  “transaction  entry” 
window.  The  journal  entry  number  generated  automatically  by  the  system  is  noted  on 
the  voucher.  Using  the  information  on  the  voucher,  the  transaction  type  and  date, 
source  document  code  and  reference,  currency,  account  numbers  and  transaction 
amount are entered into the system by the FM/F&AOs for each transaction. 
At  the  PMU,  the  Deputy  Finance  Manager  or  the  Admin  &  Finance  Officer  inputs 
transactions  on  a  daily  basis  for  the  vouchers  that  have  been  checked  by  the  FM  and 
approved  by  the  Project  Director.  Transactions  entered  into  the  system  are  directly 
posted into the Project’s general ledger. 
F. 
Backup of Accounting Records 
Once they have posted, transactions can only be modified or deleted by inputting 
a correcting or adjusting entry in the system. At the end of each day, all the data input 
into  the  system  is  backed  up  automatically  to  the  server.  In  addition,  FM/F&AOs  are 
responsible  to  backs  up  the  accounting  data  on  an  external  device  at  the  end  of  each 
week; this weekly backup on external device is kept by the FM/PD. These backups allow 
for  restoring  of  posted  transactions  in  case  of  power  failure,  errors  on  the  data  or  any 
other problem. 
G. 
Filing of Accounting Records 
The  Deputy  Finance  Manager  is  responsible  for  printing  the  journals  and  other 
accounting reports, and for filing all accounting records. The original accounting records 
are  filed  as  a  package  composed  of  the  voucher  and  the  corresponding  supporting 
documents.  They  are  filed  in  chronological  order  by  transaction  type  (one  or  more 
separate file(s) for each month). The accounting records are grouped on a monthly basis 
with a separate binder for each of the following transaction journals: 
  Purchases 
34 
  Payroll 
  Subsidies 
  Bank – Designated Account 
  Bank – Project Account 
  Direct payment (if any) 
  Correcting/adjusting entries. 
Reports  may  be  printed  as  and  when  needed  by  the  Finance  Unit  staff.  Two 
complete  sets  of  accounting  reports  are  printed  as  part  of  the  monthly  and  annual 
closing of accounts, after all transactions have been posted, verifications carried out and 
adjustments  recorded  (one  for  the  FM  and  one  for  the  files).  These  printouts  are 
stamped with a stamp marked “Final” to indicate that this is the last version. 
H.  Monthly and Annual Closing of Accounts 
GLLSP-II accounts are verified at the end of each month and closed at the end of 
the  fiscal  year.  The  objective  of  the  accounts  verification  and  closing  procedures  is  to 
provide  the  users  of  financial  information  with  an  accurate  and  reliable  accounting  and 
financial situation, as well as to meet the Project’s legal obligations. Because the monthly 
financial  and  accounting  reports  are  for  internal  use  only,  the  monthly  verification 
exercise is more limited in scope than the annual closing of accounts. 
I. 
Monthly Verification of Accounts 
Project  accounts  are  closed  at  the  end  of  each  month  in  order  to  provide  the 
Finance Unit and Project Management with: 
  A  complete  and  accurate  cash  and  disbursements  situation,  for  proper 
monitoring; 
  Accurate  and  up-to-date  accounting  and financial  data for the  preparation  of  the 
monthly financial report, the quarterly IFRs and the withdrawal applications. 
Monthly  verification  procedures  are  carried  out by the  FM  and  the  FM  during the 
first 10 days of the following month and include: 
  Review and validation of financial reporting packages 
  Posting of outstanding transactions 
  Checking  of  accounting records  against  journals  and  payment documents  (check 
stubs,  bank  transfers)  to  verify  the  completeness  of  transaction  entry  and  the 
accuracy of transaction coding (for general, analytical and budgetary accounts) 
  Reconciliation of the IFAD status of funds statement with the Project accounts (for 
cumulative disbursements to date by expense category) 
  Bank reconciliations 
  Designated Account reconciliation 
  Reconciliation of the financial commitments schedule (generated from Accounting 
Software) with the individual contract monitoring forms and the contract register. 
  Physical inventory of supplies. 
J. 
Annual Closing of Accounts 
35 
The  main  objective  of  the  annual  closing  of  accounts  is  the  preparation  of  the 
year- end financial statements, in accordance with the financing agreement and national 
regulations. Annual closing procedures start at the beginning of June each year and must 
be  completed  prior  to  the  end  of  August  of  the  following  fiscal  year,  so  that  year-end 
financial statements may be presented to the PSC and IFAD at the latest on 31st August. 
The  FM  prepares  an  annual  closing  schedule  and  communicates  it  to  all  Project 
staff  by  30th  of  June.  This  schedule  lists  the  different  steps  of  the  closing  process  and 
indicates deadlines and responsible staff. It contains: 
  Deadlines  for  carrying  out  certain  tasks  (processing  of  travel  authorizations  and 
travel  expense  claims,  processing  of  purchase  requisitions  and  requests  for 
temporary assistance, payment of suppliers, etc.) 
Instructions for the year-end inventories (fixed assets and supplies) 
Instructions for the closing of accounts 
 
 
  List of documents to obtain or prepare for the annual closing 
  List of documents to prepare for the external auditors 
  Deadlines  for  the  production  of  reports,  statements  and  other  accounting  and 
financial information. 
The  annual closing  procedures  are carried  out by  the  PMU  Finance  Unit  (FM  and 
A&FOs), with assistance from the MAHR as needed, and include: 
  Collection and review of financial reporting packages 
  Posting of outstanding transactions 
  Checking  of  accounting  records  against  journals  and  payment  documents  for  the 
month of June 
  Analysis  and    justification  of  balances  for  each    general    and    auxiliary  account 
(this procedure is preceded by the printing of ledgers and balances) 
  Determination  of  estimates  for  accrual  and  deferral transactions  (for inclusion  in 
the footnotes to the financial statements) 
Input of correcting and adjusting entries 
 
  Reconciliation of the IFAD status of funds statement with the Project accounts (for 
cumulative disbursements to date) by expense category 
  Bank reconciliation 
  Designated Accounts reconciliation 
  Reconciliation of the financial commitments schedule (generated from Accounting 
Software) with the contract monitoring forms and the contract register. 
  Physical inventory of fixed assets 
  Physical inventory of supplies. 
XII.  Records Management 
1-  Maintenance of separate accounts and records 
In terms of IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Finance: 
“The  Project  Parties  shall  maintain  separate  accounts  and  records  in  accordance 
with consistently maintained appropriate accounting practices adequate to reflect 
the  operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  Project  until  the 
Financing Closing Date…”  
36 
In order to comply with the above requirement, PMU and other implementing 
agencies are required to maintain accounts. Such accounts and records may 
include: 
Type 
Example 
Electronic 
information 
  Data and information maintained within the Quickbooks 
accounting software 
  Other documents and files maintained electronically, 
either on desktops, laptops or removable storage devices 
Correspondence    Emails 
  Hard copy correspondence (letters) 
  Bank statements 
  Supplier documentation 
Documents 
received 
external 
sources 
from 
Internally 
generated 
information 
  Employee files 
  Withdrawal applications 
  Forms 
All documents and information are the property of GLLSP II and may not be 
removed. 
2-   Filing and storage of the financial records 
PMU and other implementing agencies are responsible for filing records. To fulfil 
this responsibility: 
  Project parties should maintain files in a chronological order, assigning appropriate 
codes/sequential numbers; 
  Project parties should perform filing activities on a regular basis to prevent the 
accumulation of papers and to ensure that the financial records are always 
maintained in an up-to-date manner. 
  Project parties should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in 
paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to 
which access is controlled and limited.  
  Project parties should also classify the financial records as "Confidential", or 
"General".  
3-  Off-site archiving of financial records 
The respective Financial Managers should ensure that the financial records are 
archived at an off-site location on a regularly basis. Once a year, the Financial 
Managers should make sure that the completed or inactive files are archived in a 
manner that will allow for easy retrieval of the files in case they are required at 
some future date.  
4-   Electronic back-up procedures 
Back-up of electronic information is an important function to be undertaken under 
instruction from the Financial Manager. It is required that: 
  Daily:  Electronic information at each Project office is backed up on the local server 
  Weekly: Electronic information is saved on an external storage device and kept in a 
locked cabinet  
37 
Project staff access to backup files are subject to authorisation by the Project 
director or Financial Manager. The access of external persons is prohibited except 
for the auditors and IFAD staff.  
5-  Retention period 
Project  parties  are  required  to  retain  accounts  and  records  for  at  least  ten  (10) 
years  after  Financial  Close.  The  Financial  Manager  should  ensure  that  all 
documents and records (electronic and paper) are handed over to GoP at financial 
closure to ensure that records can be maintained for the 10-year period. 
XIII.  Fixed Asset Management 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets 
for  the  purposes  of  financial  accounting  and  to  ensure  preventive  maintenance, 
and  theft  deterrence.  Adequate  Fixed  asset  maintenance  also  increases  the 
sustainability of the Project. There are three elements in fixed asset management 
that require the attention of the Financial Managers:  
  Purchase of equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting up a plan for disposal and/or handover of the asset once the Project is 
completed  
1-   Purchase of Equipment  
The  Accountants  should  follow  the  following  process  for  each  fixed  asset 
purchased: 
  Assign a unique, sequential asset number (excluding minor items such as stationary).  
  Tag each item with its unique asset number.  
  Record the item of equipment in fixed asset register  
2-   Fixed asset register 
The  accountants  must  maintain  a  fixed  asset  register  in  the  asset  management 
module of the accounting software. The asset register should record the following 
information for each individual piece of equipment:  
  Asset description 
  Asset number 
 
Individual responsible for asset 
 
Implementing agency responsible for purchase 
  Source of funding of asset (IFAD, government etc),  
  Location of the asset 
  Date of purchase 
  Cost of purchase and invoice number 
  Remarks regarding the condition of the asset 
The  Finance  Controller  shall  ensure  that  the  consolidated  fixed  asset  register  is 
maintained and updated regularly.  
38 
Assets purchased for beneficiary use should be included in the fixed asset register 
if the assets remain under the ownership of the Project (therefore beneficiaries to 
return to Project at Project closure). 
3-   Asset Verification Review 
Under  the  management  of  the  Financial  Manager,  GLLSP  II  must  conduct  an 
annual asset verification process whereby the following checks are performed: 
  Verify that all fixed assets are still held in the location recorded on the register;  
  Confirm  the  completeness  and  accuracy  of  the  information  recorded  on  the  fixed 
asset register; 
  Check  that  equipment  and  vehicles  are  still  in  a  reasonable  state  of  repair  and  that 
remarks  regarding  the  condition  of  the  assets  are  correct  as  recorded  in  the  fixed 
asset register; 
The  verification review must  be  performed  by different  staff  from those  who use 
the  equipment,  to  ensure  adequate  segregation  of  duty.  Discrepancies  between 
the  verification  exercise  and  the  fixed  asset  register  should  be  investigated. 
Where  assets  are  missing  or  seriously  damaged,  they  should  be  removed  from 
the asset register. The removal should be formally documented and approved by 
Financial  Manager  and  Project  Director.  Moreover,  the  Financial  Manager  will 
undertake random verification of fixed assets during field visit. 
4-   Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
Drivers  are  required  to  maintain  waybills/itinerary  lists  and  vehicle  history 
records. 
No cash shall be advanced to drivers for the purposes of refueling. 
  Each  vehicle  to  have  dedicated  fuel  card  which  indicate  the  vehicle  registration 
number. 
  Each fuel card to have a set daily / monthly limit based on average consumption. 
  Changes to the monthly limit is subject to approval by the Financial Manager (which 
will be approved base on approved trips). 
  The  waybill  shall  indicate  the  reading  of  odometer  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
period, i.e. the mileage of the car, as well as fuel consumption. This process shall be 
checked  by  an  accountant  based  on  GPS  system  (“Teltonika  FM  4200)  in  the  data 
server  of  “Realcom”  LLC,  which  is set  in  each vehicle  of  PMU. Using the  device,  one 
can  track  the  route,  stop  time,  kilometers  traveled,  etc.  The  data  shall  be  entered 
into Quickbooks which distributes fuel by projects, depending on whether one or the 
other  trip  was  made  on  any  project.    (Manual  recording  /  monitoring  at  PMU  is 
acceptable given limited number of vehicles) 
  Fuel  stations  shall  provide  a  monthly  summary  report  on  fueling  and  invoice  which 
the accountant shall compare to the fuel invoices attached to the waybill. Differences 
to be followed up/resolved. 
  Provision of fuel and lubricants shall be strictly limited per each vehicle per month in 
accordance with the order signed by the Management.  
Vehicle insurance 
39 
The Financial Manager should ensure that all Project vehicles are comprehensively 
covered  and  that  all  drivers  are  noted  on  the  insurance  policy.  Under  no 
circumstanced  may  uninsured  drivers  drive  the  vehicles.  The  insurance  policies 
should be renewed annually or as stipulated in the policy. The safety of cars is the 
responsibility  of  the  drivers  assigned  to  the  vehicles.  Consequently,  they  must 
ensure that  the vehicles  are  parked in  a secure  area  when  not  in use  or  outside 
working hours.  
Maintenance 
The  drivers  are  required  to  monitor  the  maintenance  of  their  assigned  vehicles. 
The  drivers  must  notify  the  xxxx  of  maintenance  needs  so  that  the  cars  can  be 
serviced  on  a  timely  basis.  The  xxx  is  required  to  request  the  car  maintenance, 
subject to approval by the Project Director. 
The  assigned  cars  must  always  be  taken  to  the  selected  garage  for  repairs  and 
maintenance.  
XIV.  INTERNAL CONTROLS 
A.  General 
It is recommended that the Financial Managers of PMU and SPMUs consider the guidance 
outlined  in  Guidelines  for  internal  controls  for  Public  Sector  Entities  (INTOSAI  GOV 
9100)(refer  to  XXII  useful  links)  when  developing/improving  the  system  of  internal 
control (also see COSO Integrated Framework – Internal Control). 
In terms of the Guidelines for Internal Control Standards for the Public Sector (INTOSAI 
GOV 9199): 
What are internal Controls: INTSAI GOV 9100 
Internal  control  is  an  integral  process  that  is  affected  by  an  entity’s  management  and 
personnel  and  is  designed  to  address  risks  and  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  in 
pursuit of the entity’s mission, the following general objectives are being achieved: 
 
  executing orderly, ethical, economical, efficient and effective operations;  
. 
 
  complying with applicable laws and regulations;  
fulfilling accountability obligations;  
safeguarding resources against loss, misuse and damage 
In  general  terms,  Internal  controls  are  policies  and  procedures  that  are  established  to 
ensure that an organization realizes the purposes for which it has been established.  The 
PMU  has  been  established  to  achieve  clearly  defined  outputs—and  eventually  to 
contribute  to  poverty  alleviation  in  the  target  districts.  Accordingly,  the  PMU  requires 
internal controls to ensure (a) effectiveness and efficiency of operations; (b) reliability in 
financial reporting; (c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations; (d) safeguarding 
of  physical  assets;  and  (e)  PMU’s  reputation  as  driver  of  poverty  alleviation  agenda  in 
the province.  
The  provincial  Finance  Department,  Planning  and  Development  Department,  and  the 
Accountant  General  Baluchistan  have  established  internal  controls  and  the  annual 
external  audits  by  the  DGA  (Quetta)  review  and  report  on  the  effectiveness  of  these 
40 
controls. The project, however, needs to ensure that a robust internal control system is 
working. Key features of the internal control system are summarized below: 
  Segregation of duties; 
  Authorization; 
  Reconciliation and checks 
  Restricted access; and 
  Monitoring and Review 
B.  Segregation of duties 
An  important  element  in  any  control  system  is  the  separation  of  those  duties  which 
would, if combined, enable one individual to record and process a complete transaction. 
It  is  the  Finance  Manager’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  following  duties  are 
segregated  under  the  project:  preparation,  authorization,  execution,  custody,  recording 
and the and operation of systems 
C.  Authorization 
Authorization  controls  require  the  certification  that  a  transaction  or  event  is  acceptable 
for further processing. Several types of authorization are in effect at the project, mainly 
in  the  procurement  cycle,  payment  cycle,  bank  and  cash  management  cycle  including 
reconciliation. The Financial Controller should ensure that the authorizations of PIU staff 
ensure  efficient  implementation  while  keeping  the  risk  as  low  as  possible.  The 
authorization of project staff should be in line with their respective job descriptions. 
D.  Verification 
Transactions  and  significant  events  are  verified  before  and  after  processing,  e.g.  when 
goods are delivered, the number of goods supplied is verified with the number of goods 
ordered. Afterwards, the number of goods invoiced is verified with the number of goods 
received. 
E.  Reconciliation and checks 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data are a key control for 
identifying errors and discrepancies in balances. The Financial Controller should perform 
the following reconciliations each month: 
  Bank reconciliation 
  Reconciliation between system and special account receipts and payments 
statement 
  Any reconciliation or balancing amount should be promptly cleared. Unusual 
or long outstanding reconciling items must be brought to the attention of the 
financial officer. The financial officer will review and sign all reconciliations as 
evidence of his review. 
In addition, physical checks should be performed on assets held and on petty cash—if 
maintained. 
F.  Reviews of operating performance 
Operating performance is reviewed against a set of standards on a regular basis, 
assessing effectiveness and efficiency. If performance reviews determine that actual 
accomplishments do not meet established objectives or standards, the processes and 
activities established to achieve the objectives should be reviewed to determine if 
improvements are needed. 
41 
G.  Restricted access 
All  data,  records  and  assets  should  be  kept  in  a  physically  secure  environment.  This 
should  cover  safe  keeping  of  finance  records  such  as  official  order  forms  and  bank 
details.  In  addition,  any  petty  cash  should  be  kept  securely.  Financial  data  and  other 
records  should  also  be  protected in the form  of  back up  procedures. All  work should  be 
regularly backed up and copy records stored securely off site. 
H.  Monitoring and review 
As  detailed  in  financial  reporting  section  later,  periodic  financial  reports  must  be 
prepared  and  submitted  to  the  fund.  For  the  purposes  of  internal  control,  the  same 
information  should  be  prepared  and  monitored  by  the  project  Director  on  a 
monthly/quarterly  basis.  The  reports  should  be  prepared  on  a  timely  basis  and  should 
normally be available for distribution two weeks after the end of the reporting period to 
which they relate. The periodic reports should be reviewed by the finance officer and the 
project  director  as  a  minimum.  Where  necessary,  corrective  action  should  be  taken  to 
ensure the authorized budget and procurement plan is not exceeded 
I.  Supervision 
Competent supervision helps to ensure that internal control objectives are achieved. This 
includes assigning, reviewing, and approving an employee's work. 
J. 
COSO Internal Control Framework 
IFAD requires that R/B to follow COSO Internal Control Framework in designing internal 
controls  for  the  project.  The  COSO  Framework  has  five  internal  control  components 
which should guide the design of internal control for the GLLSP-II28. These components—
along with performance benchmarks for the project are briefly explained below: 
Internal 
Control 
Components 
Control 
Environment 
Risk 
Assessment 
Control 
Activities 
Performance Benchmarks  
Individuals involved in project are of high integrity and suitably 
qualified for their respective jobs. Project leadership—within the line 
departments and PMU believe in delivering results. The PMU has an 
organizational structure suited to the effective implementation of the 
project—with authority and responsibility clearly delineated. HR policies 
are set out and followed in decision making. 
PMU has a system of identifying, preventing, and rectifying problems. 
The leadership is driven by the project outcomes and taking corrective 
action promptly as soon as first signs of trouble in implementation 
show up. The PD keeps heads of line departments engaged for 
sustained buy-in for the project. 
The project has established policies and procedures in the form of 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM). PIM responds to all material 
risks that can negatively affect project. The staff involved in project 
implementation is aware of the established policies and procedures and 
a system of compliance assessment vis-à-vis these policies and 
standards is in place. Accounting system is secure with appropriate 
back-up plans which are operational. 
Information and  PMU periodically reviews implementation status, prepares reports and 
28 For details, please visit the website https://info.knowledgeleader.com/bid/161685/what-are-the-five-components-of-
the-coso-framework  
42 
Communication 
Monitoring 
share relevant information (i.e. risks) with line departments, PSC, and 
other stakeholders. The Provincial Steering Committee (PSC) holds 
meetings regularly, reviews critical issues, and makes decisions to 
mitigate emerging risks. P&D, line departments, SMP and other 
stakeholders are alert to risks and talking to the PMU for risk 
mitigation. PMU is responsive to the queries/risks flagged by line 
departments.  
PMU has developed reporting template for continuous monitoring risks 
to the project and taking prompt remedial measures. Monitoring 
reports are shared with key stakeholders for their input/action.  
K.  Strengthening controls vis-à-vis SMPs and other non-government partners 
Under  the  GLLSP-I,  the  performance-based  contract  with  the  NRSP  proved  effective  in 
accelerating  project  implementation  and  disbursement  rate.  However,  several  internal 
control  weaknesses  are  noted in  the  contract  with the  NRSP.  For  example, the  contract 
(including  addenda)  did  not  include  provisions  for  the  NRSP  to  (a)  submit  supporting 
documents  with  invoices;  (ii)  comply  with  tax  obligations  and  report  thereon;  and  (iii) 
report  on  beneficiaries’  contributions.  The  government  contribution  to  the  project 
is  because  most 
remains  much 
procurement/expenditure  has  been 
through  NRSP  and  Community 
Organizations.  This  has  potential  to  create  reputational  risk  for  IFAD  as  one  of  the 
implementing  partners  may  not  be  complying  with 
in 
implementation. Considering that the Social Mobilization Component under the GLLSP-II 
is three times as large as it was under the GLLSP-I, explicit provisions would be included 
in contractual agreement with SMPs to mitigate these risks. 
that  estimated  at  design 
the  applicable 
incurred 
lower 
than 
laws 
L.  Information and technology related controls 
Information and technology controls can be both general and related to applications. The 
major  categories  of  general  controls  are  (1)  entity-wide  security  program  planning  and 
management,  (2)  access  controls,  (3)  controls  on  the  development,  maintenance  and 
change  of  the  application  software,  (4)  system  software  controls,  (5)  segregation  of 
duties,  and  (6)  service  continuity.  Application  controls  are  the  structure,  policies,  and 
procedures  that  apply  to  separate,  individual  application  systems,  and  are  directly 
related to individual computerized applications. These controls are generally designed to 
prevent,  detect,  and  correct  errors  and  irregularities  as  information  flows  through 
information systems. 
M.  Checklist for Social Mobilization Partner  
  Visit Regional Offices of the SMP to ensure that they are fully staffed and 
operational. Further, check that the Regional Offices are maintaining proper 
record of activities that are being implemented by the SMP; 
  Conduct periodic reconciliations with the SMP’s bank managing Community 
Managed Financial Services to ensure that all funds disbursed to the SMP are duly 
accounted for, and reported by the SMP; 
  Checks that requests for funds is duly supported by the Quarterly Work Plan 
which is also updated periodically; 
43 
  Review the existing reporting templates with the SMP and improve them to 
ensure effective technical and financial reporting against the work assigned to the 
SMP. Review the SMP’s reports thoroughly to be sure that the SMP is fully 
complying with the reporting requirements; 
  Check that that the SMP is sharing soft copies of the requisite documents along 
with claims for payment; 
  Require quarterly certificate from the SMP confirming that—where applicable, 
taxes are being deducted from the payments they are making to different 
beneficiaries and duly paid off to the relevant tax authorities; 
Community Development 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Copy of the Needs Assessment Report 
Community Resolution for the constitution of a Purchase Committee 
Copy of Agreement between the SMP (s) and the Community Organization 
establishing the responsibilities of each party 
Copies of quotations for procurement 
List of beneficiaries—including CNIC number and home address; 
Community Resolution for transferring the assets to the beneficiaries as 
per the list of beneficiaries 
Record of receipt of assets by the beneficiaries 
Technical/Vocational Training/Exposure Visits 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Copy of the Training Plan(s) 
Selection criteria and list of individuals selected 
Training Schedule—for each training selected for the target beneficiaries 
A copy of training material (hard or soft) for record 
Copies of certificates awarded to the trainees 
A training report for each major training—3-4 pages with annexes i.e. list 
of  participants (CNIC,  address, title  and  duration  of training,  certificate  of 
completion for accredited courses issued by the training institute, pictures 
etc. 
Fisheries Development/Community Managed Financial Services 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Criteria used for identifying beneficiaries LSOs 
List  of  eligible  Local  Support  Organizations  (LSOs)  and  how  they  have 
been organized 
Copy  of  the  Community  Resolution  showing  specific  needs/interventions 
that the LSOs want resolved 
Copy of the formal agreement between the SMP and the LSOs 
In  case  where  micro-financing  tool(Community  Managed  Financial 
Services) is to be used, criteria used for this purpose i.e. age group, social 
status, amount of each loan, recovery time etc. 
Record  of  funds  going  to  the  LSOs’  and  subsequently  disburse  to  end-
beneficiaries. 
Record of recovery of funds back to the LSO’s bank account 
44 
viii. 
In  case  of  training  of  fishermen,  the  documents/record  mentioned  above 
(Technical/Vocational Training/Exposure Visit) should be kept by the SMP 
Community Physical Infrastructure (CPI) 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Copy of Village Development Plan (VDP)  
Copy of approval of the CPIs—through Community Resolution  
Copy  of  the  Community  Resolution—asking  for  the  release  of  funds  (for 
each tranche, a resolution is required) 
Copy of bank statement showing the utilization of previous tranches 
The  GLLSP-II  will  have  arrangement  for  internal  audit  to  strengthen  internal  controls 
within the project. A position of Manager Internal Audit has been included in the PMU for 
this purpose. 
The  GLLSP-II  will  have  arrangement  for  internal  audit  to  strengthen  internal  controls 
within the project. A position of Manager Internal Audit has been included in the PMU for 
this purpose. 
The  Financial  Manual  incorporates  practical  guidance  on  recommended  control  activities 
in  the  sections  that  follow  which  can  be  considered  by  the  Financial  Managers  of  PMU 
and  SPMUs  when  developing/improving  internal  controls.  New/improved  controls 
should  be  documented  in  detail  in  the  Financial  Manual  Controls  should  be 
considered at all implementing agencies 
XV.  FINANCIAL REPORTING 
IFAD  requires  borrower/recipient  to  maintain  accounting  records  that  are  adequate  to 
reflect  the  operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  project  up  to  the 
Financing/grant  Closing  Date.  In  addition,  the  borrower/recipient  is  required  to  deliver 
detailed financial reports on its operations, in accordance with standards and procedures 
that are acceptable to IFAD. Project accounting records and financial statements must be 
prepared  in  accordance  with  IPSAS-Cash  Basis  Accounting.  This  information  should  be 
specified in the notes to the audited financial statements29. 
A.  Annual Project Financial Statements  
IFAD  requires  the  project  to  deliver  unaudited  project-specific  financial  statements 
annually,  within  four  months  of  financial  year-end,  covering  the  duration  of  the 
implementation period. The  Financial statements  must  contain  all  material  and  relevant 
information required to provide IFAD and other stakeholders with a full understanding of 
the  project’s  activities  and  financial  position.  The  reporting  period  will  be  a  period  of 
twelve months—starting from 1 July to 30 June coinciding with Pakistan’s financial year. 
The  content  of  the  project’s  financial  statements  is  prescribed  under  the  applicable 
accounting  standards  used  as  the  basis  of  preparation.  IFAD  also  requires  certain 
additional  specific  disclosures.  A  summary  of  the  required  content  for  project  financial 
statements is given below: 
i. 
Comparison of budget and actual amounts; 
29 Details are available in the IFAD’s Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing available at  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Reporting+and+Auditing+of+IFAD-
Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-aef95b79dd67 
45 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Notes  (a  summary  of  significant  accounting  policies  and  other  explanatory 
notes); 
Statement of cash receipts and payments; 
Fixed asset schedule; 
Withdrawal application statement; 
Sources and uses of funds statement; and 
Designated Account statement and reconciliation. 
The  PMU  will  ensure  that  IFAD-specific  disclosures  referred  to  above  are  easily  and 
clearly traceable. The PMU will disclose the contribution of the Government’s Counterpart 
Funds  and  the  Beneficiaries  Contribution  (both  in  cash  and  in-kind)  in  the  financial 
statements.  The  quantification  of  the  contribution  should  be  consistent  with  the  policy 
agreed  with  IFAD  and  readily  available  for  verification  by  external  review  i.e.  IFAD, 
External Audit etc. 
To  provide  guidance  to  the  GLLSP  finance  team,  sample  financial  statements  that  may 
be customized further for meaningful and effective financial reporting to IFAD have been 
attached as Annexure-V to this manual.  
B. 
Interim Financial Reports 
It  is  important  for  any  project  to  monitor  its  financial  performance  continuously.  IFAD 
emphasizes  the  need  for  such  monitoring.  The  PMU  needs  to  analyse  significant 
variations between planned and actual spend, take remedial actions—where required and 
submit  interim  financial  reports  to  IFAD.  This  practice  needs  to  be  established.  Several 
IFAD’s supervision missions recommended this action and require that Interim Financial 
Reports (IFRs) may be used to operationalize this practice. However, this remains to be 
done. To facilitate this, a reporting template is proposed for interim financial reporting at 
Annexure-VI. 
The requirement of the GLLSP-II submitting IFRs to IFAD need to be complied with. The 
project may discuss the format and narrative part of the report with IFAD. 
C.  Analytical Reviews 
The  PMU,  while  finalizing  financial  statements,  must  carry  out  an  analytical  review  to 
ensure that financial statements present a fair view of the financial health of the project. 
The  external  audit  will  also  review  these  statements  from  this  perspective.    Analytical 
reviews  will  minimize  the  risk  of  errors  and  irregularities  being  reported  in  financial 
statements.   
 
 
Is the financial information consistent with the available record? 
Is  any  expenditure  unusual  or  ineligible?    Does  the  PMU  have  any  solid 
justification  to  explain  such  differences  away?  Has  such  justification  been 
properly  examined,  agreed  on  with  the  relevant  stakeholders,  and  fully 
documented for internal/external scrutiny? 
  Are  there  trends  or  comparisons  that  should  be  clarified?  Is  expenditure 
pattern broadly aligned with the activities envisaged in the AWPB? 
  Are  reported  expenditures  within  budget  and  consistent  with  the  cost 
estimates?  
46 
  Are  there  significant  computational  errors  and/or  inconsistencies  in  the 
information presented 
  Are there any indications of fraud and corruption noted in the review?  
The  PMU  shall  prepare  monthly  and  quarterly  financial  reports  to  identify  possible  cost 
savings,  detect  possible  misuse  of  project  funds,  and  ensure  that  operating  remains 
within  agreed  budget.  The  report  is  for  internal  consumption.  The  report  will  indicate 
expenditure  incurred  against  budget  during  the  month  and  the  cumulative  expenditure 
recorded till the end of the preceding month. Further, the expenditure by categories and 
by  sources  of  funds  shall  be  documented  in  the  report.  The  report  will  also  indicate 
balance of imprest funds and preparedness for next WA.  
These reports should be linked with the AWPB to ascertain whether the activities are on 
track, if they are not, what needs to be done to make mid-course correction 
XVI.  INTERNAL AUDIT 
A.  Responsibilities 
The GLLSP-II will have arrangement for the internal audit activity. A position of Manager 
Internal  Audit  has  been  included  in  the  PMU  to  provide  for  internal  oversight  of 
governance,  risk  management  and  internal  controls  within  the  PMU  and  other  entities 
that will be involved in GLLSP-II. Usually, the scope of internal audit covers the following 
aspects of an organization: 
  Adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  financial,  operational,  and  management 
controls against relevant risks; 
  Compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations; 
  Economy, efficiency and effectiveness in managing operations (VFM); 
  Safeguarding of organizational assets 
  Suitability,  accuracy,  reliability,  integrity  of  financial  and  other  relevant 
information 
  Integrity  of  the  process  to  establish  adequate  protection  against  errors, 
frauds, and losses of all kinds 
  Mitigating  other 
fiduciary 
risks—especially  ones  arising 
from  public 
procurement and corrupt practices 
  Supporting improvement in governance process at PSC’s level with a view to 
improve public image of the government 
Manager Internal Audit would be responsible for (i) drafting TORs of the internal auditing 
firm;  (ii)  coordinate  with  the  SMP  during  planning,  executing  and  reporting  on  the 
auditing firm; (iii) following up on internal audit findings/recommendations. As such, the 
role is one of broad coordination of internal audit activity to be outsourced to an internal 
auditing firm.  
Aside  from  leading  the  process  of  engaging  and  managing  internal  auditing  firm—
primarily  for  SMPs,  Manager  Internal  Audit  would  also  coordinate  with  the  provincial 
Director  General  Audit  (Quetta)  for  statutory  external  audits  and  follow-up  on  audit 
findings  for  a  prompt  settlement  of  audit  observations.  Manager  Internal  Audit  would 
47 
also  ensure  that  the  recommendations  of  the  IFAD’s  Supervision  Mission  are  fully 
complied with by the project. 
The  PMU  will  obtain  three  quotation  for  hiring  the  services  of  an  internal  auditing  firm 
and  a  reputable  organization  will  be  engaged  for  the  job.  The  firm  would  be  engaged 
primarily to carry out audit of the SMPs.  
XVII.  EXTERNAL AUDIT 
A.  General considerations 
The PMU is required to have the GLLSP-II accounts audited regularly in accordance with 
standards  and  procedures  that  are  acceptable  to  IFAD.  An  audit  is  required  to  confirm 
whether the financial  statements  provide  a true  and fair view in  all material respects  of 
the  financial  activities  undertaken.  IFAD  promotes  the  use  of  internationally  accepted 
auditing  standards  and  requires  that  all  projects  submit  audit  reports  prepared  in 
accordance with one of the following standards: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (known as the ISSAIs); 
International Standards on Auditing (ISA) 
National/Regional Standards—if deemed appropriate by IFAD 
Key Source Document for External Auditing  
The IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects is 
available online for public use and dissemination. It is primarily intended as a guide for 
IFAD borrowers and recipients and other external stakeholders on operational aspects and 
requirements related to financial reporting and auditing of IFAD-funded projects. Tailored 
guidance is provided for investment projects and for grants, both those subject to the Policy 
for Grant Financing and those financed by supplementary funds. The finance team should 
use the guidelines in external auditing matters. 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Rep
orting+and+Auditing+of+IFAD-Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-
aef95b79dd67 
For the GLLSP-II, the Office of the Auditor-General of Pakistan (OAGP) will carry out the 
external audit of the project. Under the Constitution of Pakistan, the Office of the OAGP 
has the mandate to carry out external audit of government operations and it decides on 
the  nature  and  extent  of  such  audits.  The  OAGP  conducts  different  types  of  audits 
including  compliance,  financial,  and  performance  audits  of  government  entities  at 
national and provincial level.  
The  PMU  has  to  engage  with  the  Director  General  Audit-Baluchistan(DGA)—based  in 
Quetta  to  timely  start  and  complete  the  project  audit  so  that  the  audited  financial 
statements  can  be  submitted  to  IFAD  within  six  (6)  months  of  the  end  of  preceding 
financial year. The external audits are, in general, carried out for following purposes:  
  Provide an independent assurance of accountability; 
  Give credibility to the financial statements and other management reports; 
 
  Verify  compliance  with  financing  agreement  provisions  relating  to  financial 
Identify weaknesses in internal controls and financial systems; 
matters; and 
48 
  Make recommendations for improvement. 
The PMU is responsible for preparing the audit (financial statements, accounting reports 
and  other  necessary  documents),  providing  adequate  office  space  and  other  facilities, 
and assisting the auditors in the course of their mission. In addition to the preparation of 
year-end  financial  statements  and  other  reports,  getting  ready  for  the  annual  external 
audit entails the following: 
  Printing of all year-end accounting ledgers and reports 
  Verifying that all vouchers and supporting documents exist 
  Verifying  that  all  accounting  ledgers,  accounting  records  and  supporting 
documents are properly filed 
  Preparing  a  complete  file  for  the  auditors  (including  financial  statements  and 
reports, accounting ledgers, individual account justifications, reconciliations, etc.). 
  Ensuring  that  the  IPs  have  prepared  for  the  audit  (including  separate  financial 
reports and statements detailing the utilization of GLLSP-II funds) 
  Organizing  all  site  visits,  meetings  and  work  sessions  at  the  request  of  the 
auditors. 
Sample project financial statements have been provided as Annexure-VII which may be 
refined for meaningful financial reporting as per the requirements of IFAD. 
B. 
Types of audit opinion 
The auditors are required to issue a report including the audited financial statements and 
expressing  their  opinion  on  the  Project  financial  statements  covering  (i)  the  Project’s 
compliance  with  national  and IFAD  rules  and  guidelines in the  area  of  procurement  and 
disbursement, and (ii) the project’s compliance with financing agreement covenants. The 
external  audit  will  examine  SOEs,  particularly  the  adequacy  of  the  procedure  used  for 
preparing  the  SOEs,  the  eligibility  of  SOE  expenditures,  and  the  extent  to  which  IFAD 
can  rely  on  this  disbursement  method.  Further,  the  external  audit  will  examine  the 
designated account statements and reconciliations, indicating whether the funds received 
and disbursements made are fairly presented in the statements. 
While  certifying  project  financial  statements  of  a  project,  the  OAGP  can  express  either 
one of the following opinions:   
  An  unqualified  opinion  indicates  the  auditor’s  satisfaction  in  all  material 
respects  with  the  preparation  of  the  financial  statements,  and  with  their 
regulations,  statutory 
consistency,  adequacy,  and  compliance  with 
requirements  and  any  additional  requirements stated in the  request  for  audit 
sent to the DGA (Quetta) by the PMU; 
 
 A  qualified  opinion  reflects  that  the  auditor  has  some  reservations  on 
specific areas and concludes that an unqualified opinion cannot be issued, but 
deems that the effect of any disagreement, uncertainty or limitation of scope 
of  the  audit  does  not  require  an  adverse  opinion  or  a  disclaimer  of  opinion. 
The  PMU  should  urge  the  auditor  to  clearly  state  the  financial  effect  of  the 
qualification in the report. 
  An  adverse  opinion  is  issued  when  the  effect  of  the  disagreement  is  so 
pervasive  and  material  to  the  reliability  of  the  financial  statements  that  the 
49 
auditor  concludes  that  a  qualification  of  the  report  will  be  insufficient  to 
disclose the misleading or incomplete nature of the financial statements.  
  A disclaimer of opinion is issued when the possible effect of an uncertainty 
or of a limitation on the scope of the auditor is so significant that the auditor 
is unable to express an opinion on the financial statements. 
C.  Key requirements in Management Letter 
The  auditors  are  also    required    to    issue    a    management    letter    addressing    the 
adequacy of the accounting and internal controls systems and more specifically: 
  Commenting  on  the  financial  and  accounting  records,  systems,  procedures  and 
 
controls that were examined during the course of the audit; 
Identifying  specific  deficiencies  and  areas  of  weakness  in  systems  and  internal 
controls; 
  Bringing  to  the  Borrower’s  and  IFAD’s  attention  any  other  matters  that  they 
consider significant and 
  Providing  recommendations  to  improve  the  accounting  and  internal  controls 
systems. If deemed necessary, the management letter may also provide: 
  Comments  on  the  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  use  of  Project 
resources; 
  Comments  on  the  achievement  of  planned  Project  results  and  communicating 
matters  that  have  come  to  their  attention  during  the  audit  which  might  have  a 
significant impact on the implementation and sustainability of the Project; 
  Comments  on  the  extent  of  compliance  or  non-compliance  with  the  legal  and 
financial obligations and commitments of the Project. 
The  management  letter  must  also  show  evidence  of  the  auditors’  follow-up  of 
recommendations issued during the previous year’s audits. 
The auditors’ reports are discussed with the PMU management before being presented to 
the  P&DD Balochistan.  This provides  the  FM  and  Project  Director  with  an  opportunity  to 
respond  to  the  findings  and  recommendations  of  the  auditors  relating  to  the  internal 
controls  system.  The  FM  and  Project  Director  are  responsible  for  implementing  the 
auditors’ recommendations, the monitoring of which is recorded in an audit log. 
The final  audit  reports  must  be communicated to  IFAD  at  the latest 6  months  after the 
end  of  the  fiscal  year,  i.e.  before  December  31st  of  the  following  year.  The  financing 
agreement and the General Conditions attached thereto specify IFAD’s remedies in case 
of non-submission of the audit reports within the required timeframe, which may include 
the  suspension  of  the  Borrower  right  to  request  withdrawals  from  the  loan/grant 
accounts. 
IFAD’s  Financial  Management  Services  Division  conducts  a  detailed  review  of  the  audit 
report  in  order  to  assess  the  quality/reliability  of  the  audited  financial  statements  and 
audit reports, as well as the performance of the auditors. Within 60 days of receiving the 
audit  report,  IFAD  informs  the  GoP  of  the  results  of  this  review.  In  the  case  of 
problems/irregularities arising from IFAD’s review or from the audit report (e.g. qualified 
or  adverse  opinion,  or  disclaimer  of  opinion),  IFAD  communicates  to  the  GoP  an  action 
plan  detailing  the  remedial  actions  to  be  implemented,  as  well  as  the  corresponding 
deadlines.  The  GoP  is  required  to  keep  IFAD  informed  as  to  the  progress  of 
implementation of the action plan. 
50 
D. 
PMU and Audit Quality 
The  PMU  should  engage  with  the  DGA  (Quetta)  at  an  early  stage  to  get  its  specific 
requirements included in the scope of external audit. The PMU may prepare TORs for this 
purpose  and  engage  with  the  DGA  (Quetta)  to  secure  an  agreement  on  the  TORs.  This 
would increase the effectiveness of external audit.  
It  needs  to  be  appreciated  that  the  DGA  (Quetta)  pepares  an  annual  audit  plan  and  at 
times  some  projects  are  not  included  in  the  audit  plan  because  it  has  limited  financial 
and HR capacity. The PMU’s engagement with the DGA (Quetta) will ensure that (a) the 
audit  of  the  project  is  included  in  the  annual  audit  plan  of  the  DGA  (Quetta);  (b)  the 
external  audits  are  completed  within  the  timelines  stipulated  in  project  agreement  and 
(c) audit report is of high quality and acceptable IFAD.  
E.  Audit Follow-up 
Follow-up  on  audit  recommendations  usually  assesses  the  adequacy,  effectiveness  and 
timeliness  of  actions  taken  by  the  project  and  those  charged  with  governance  on 
observations  and  recommendations  given  in  audit  reports.    Audit  reports  generally 
include  actions  that  seek  to  correct,  prevent  or  improve  the  working  of  the  auditee. 
Further, such actions indicate agreed timeframe for implementation. A weak follow-up is 
likely  to  render  external  audit  ineffective  because  the  systemic  improvements 
emphasized  in  audit  reports  would  not  be  implemented.  This  is  the  reason  IFAD  gives 
importance to these follow-ups. 
IFAD requires the project to maintain an Audit Log on the following template: 
Sr. No 
Audit 
Observation 
Total 
Amount of 
observation  
Status 
Total Amount 
not settled / 
outstanding 
Remarks 
AUDIT LOG (TEMPLATE) 
Insert 
# 
Reproduce 
Audit 
Observation 
from the 
External 
Audit Report 
Indicate the 
value held 
under audit 
observation 
What is the viewpoint of 
the project? What is the 
decision of the 
Departmental Accounts 
Committee (DAC) on the 
audit observation? Has it 
fully or partly settled the 
observation? In some 
cases, only a fraction of 
the amount held under 
audit observation is 
settled whereas the 
material fraction remains 
unsettled. In some cases, 
the observation may not 
have any amount 
attached but the nature 
of observation would be 
serious enough to 
warrant a DAC decision? 
What is the 
amount 
settled/unsettled 
etc. 
Is the action 
taken by the 
DAC/PMU 
appropriate 
in the 
circumstance 
and no 
further 
action is 
required? Or 
what else 
should 
happen? 
The  PMU  is  required  to  be  alert  to  the  follow-up  actions.  This  will  require  it  to  engage 
with  the  DGA  (Quetta)  and  provincial  P&DD  to  hold  frequently  DAC  meetings.  Rigorous 
51 
follow-up is  likely to improve internal  control  environment  and  contribute to the  project 
delivering results. 
XVIII. COMPLETION AND FINANCING 
The  GLLSP-II  completion date  is set  at 30  September  2022  and  the  closing  date 
six months later, on 31 March 2023. One year before completion date, the Project must 
start  reducing  its  activities,  and  concentrating  on  the  setup  and/or  capacity  building  of 
the  entities  that  will  take  charge  of  Project  activities  after  completion.  On  completion 
date, all activities under IFAD funding must be completed. Only expenditures relating to 
goods  delivered,  works  completed,  and  services  rendered  on  or  before  30  September 
2022  are  eligible  for  reimbursement  by  IFAD.  The  FM  and  Procurement  Specialist  must 
therefore  carefully  and  periodically  review  the  procurement  plan  during  the  last 
implementation year, so that contracts that cannot be executed on time are cancelled as 
soon as possible. 
On  completion  date,  Project  staff  contracts  must  be  terminated,  except  for  key 
staff  who  are  needed  during  the  winding  up  period  (i.e.  the  six  months  from  Project 
completion  to  the  closing  of  the  financing).  The  key  staff  generally  include  the  Project 
Director, the  FM,  the  M&E  Specialist, the  MAHR  and the  required  support  or  outsourced 
staff (for example, one driver, one office helper and one guard). 
The  only  expenditures  authorized  during  the  completion  period  are  key  staff 
salaries,  operating  costs,  and  expenses  related  to  the  preparation  of  the  completion 
report  and  the  final  audit.  In  addition,  during  this  6-month  period,  the  disbursements 
related to contracts fully executed prior to the completion date are authorized, provided 
they are eligible. The FM is responsible for preparing the related withdrawal applications, 
and must ensure that all eligible expenditures are claimed before closing date. 
During  the  last  Project  implementation  year,  the  FM  prepares  an  initial  advance 
recovery plan and submits it to IFAD for no objection. The recovery of the initial advance 
by IFAD is triggered by one of the following two criteria, whichever comes earlier: 
  The  undisbursed  balance  in  the  loan  account  is  twice  the  amount  of  the  initial 
advance, or 
  Six months before completion date (i.e. 31 March 2022). 
The  recovery  plan  indicates,  for  each  withdrawal  application  submitted  until 
closing, the percentage that must be retained by IFAD to recover the initial advance, and 
the  percentage  that  must  be  reimbursed  to  the  Project  in  order  to  replenish  the 
designated  account.  As  the  closing  date  approaches,  certain  WAs  may  need  to  be  fully 
allocated to the recovery  of the initial  advance,  therefore  drawing no reimbursement  to 
the designated account. 
In the event that the initial advance is not fully recovered at closing date, the GoP 
must  reimburse  the  unjustified  balance  of  the  advance  to  IFAD.  Moreover,  at  closing 
date,  IFAD  cancels  the  undisbursed  balance  of  the  loan.  IFAD  closes  the  loan  account 
once the following conditions are met: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Full  recovery  of  the  initial  advances  (or  reimbursement  of  any  unjustified 
amount); 
Confirmation  by the  PMU  of the  final WA sent to  IFAD  (after verification  that 
all eligible expenditures have been claimed); and 
Submission of the completion report and the final audit report. 
52 
At closing date, the PMU is required to conduct a final inventory of Project assets, 
including  the  detailed  description,  acquisition  date  and  value,  book  value,  and  asset 
location.  This  inventory  report  is  submitted  to  the  P&DD  Balochistan,  when  the  assets 
are  transferred  to  the  GoB.  Finally,  all  Project  files  and  documents  must  be  scanned  / 
saved  and  properly  archived  in  order  to  comply  with  the  legal  covenant  to  retain  them 
for a period of 10 years after closing. 
XIX.  IFAD’s Financial Management Support 
A.  Overview of IFAD support 
IFAD’s  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  will  remain  involved  with  GLLSP  II  from 
Project inception (starting at Project design) to Financial Closure to ensure that GLLSP II 
fiduciary  requirements  are  met.  The  FMD  periodically  supervision  missions  for  this 
purpose with the aim to:  
  Assess the progress of project implementation;  
 
  Propose solutions or corrective measures for improvement. 
Identify/anticipate problems or constraints in implementation; and 
FMD’s Finance Officer will establish ongoing contact with the Project, by liaising with the 
Financial  Manager  of  PMU  and  will  be  available  to  provide  remote  support  on  financial 
management matters. In addition, FMD will visit GLLSP II during missions to the Project 
(represented  by  either  the  Finance  Officer  or  an  appointed  consultant).  Mission  types 
include  supervision  missions,  mid-term  reviews  and  implementation  support  missions. 
During  missions,  FMD  will  assess  and  monitor  the  adequacy  of  GLLSP  II  financial 
management  arrangements  such  as  accounting,  budgeting,  internal  controls,  flow  of 
funds, financial reporting and the auditing practices. 
If financial management arrangements of GLLSP II are deemed acceptable, IFAD will rely 
on  them  to  provide  assurance  that  the  financing  proceeds  are  being  used  for  the 
intended  purposes.  In  the  case  that  IFAD  identifies  weaknesses  in  the  financial 
arrangements,  it  will  require  GLLPS  II  to  take  the  appropriate  measures  to  mitigate 
those risks.  
The  key  findings  and  recommendations  of  missions  will  be  captured in  the  Aid  Memoire 
which is a document which is shared with the P&DD and includes an overview of issues 
identified  and  proposed  actions to  be undertaken  by the project/IFAD  to  address issues 
identified. 
B. 
 Roles and responsibilities related to IFAD support 
GLLSP II will be required to participate in IFAD missions as follow: 
Stage 
Before IFAD missions 
Project roles and responsibilities 
  Prepare  Appendix  1  and  submit  to  the  FO/Consultant  in 
electronic  format  (Excel  Workbook,  including  formulae) 
before  commencement  of  the  mission  –  the  FO/Consultant 
will specify the date range to be covered within Appendix 1. 
  Each  project  party  (PMU,  SPMUs  and  other  implementing 
agencies) 
the  Financial  Management 
Assessment  Questionnaire  (FMAQ)  and  submit  to  the 
FO/Consultant  in  electronic  format  (FO  to  provide  most 
recent template). 
complete 
to 
53 
Stage 
Project roles and responsibilities 
  Prepare 
other 
information 
all 
as 
requested  by 
During IFAD missions    Provide  the  FO/Consultant  with  all  information  which  was 
FO/Consultant before commencement of the mission. 
requested before the mission. 
  Arrange  meeting  with  the  auditors  (internal  and  external) 
and any other selected party requested by the mission. 
  Ensure  that  all  FM  staff  are  available  to  assist  the 
in  performing  their  duties  which  may 
FO/Consultant 
include: 
o  Review of financial reports, reconciliations 
o  Physical verification of fixed assets and inventory 
o  Meeting with the auditor 
o  Reviewing and completing the FMAQ 
  Discuss  identified  FM  weaknesses  and  risks  and  assist  the 
FO/Consultant  with  developing  appropriate  actions  for 
inclusion in the aide memoire. 
  Respond to any wrap-queries from the FO/Consultant 
  Commence with implementing all actions which are included 
in the Aide Memoire 
  Update the Action Tracker (see illustration in 21.11) with all 
actions raised during the missions. 
  Monitor and update the Action Tracker to ensure all actions 
are  implemented  in  a  timely  manner.  Liaise  with  the 
Financial Manager if required. 
  Respond  to  ad-hoc  queries  received  from  the  Financial 
Manager or other IFAD staff as it related to FM matters. 
After IFAD missions 
Ongoing 
The  PMU  is  required  to  do  proper  preparation  for  the  mission  to  make  this  more 
meaningful  since  the  mission  lasts  for  around  two  weeks.  The  PMU  should  prepare 
financial  tables  and  compliance  status  vis-à-vis  agreed  loan  covenants.  IFAD  has  also 
prescribed templates for this purpose which are attached as Annexure VII and Annexure 
VIII to this manual.  
54 
Annexure I-Annual Work Plan/Budget Format 
The AWP/B will provide details of activities under each sub-component along with requisite information for monitoring.  
55 
IFADGov.Benef12344.1  (Sub-Component 1)4.2 (Sub=Component 2)4.3 (Sub-Component 3)1.3  (Sub-Component 3) etc.Results #A:AEA5AA:UActivity #Objectives/Expected ResultsAWPB (GLLSP-II) Project Goal: Tocontribute to the reduction of poverty in Gwadar and Lasbela, by enhancing the access of the poor rural men and women to productive assets, skills, services and technologies for productivity enhancement.Purpose: For each component, a distinct objective as per the PDR should be mentioned before giving details on it. Community Mobilization1.1 (Sub=Component 1)Progress as of May 2017IndicatorsTimetable for implementationImplementation targets Project IndicatorsRIMS IndicatorsQ 1Q 2Q 3Q 4UnitAppraisal (Total)Financiers Spent (Cumulative) % Spent (Annual) %Responsible Unit/ StaffRevised (Total)Achieved (Annual)%%Planned (Annual)Original Unit Cost (PKR) Revised    Unit Cost (PKR) Achieved (Cumulative)1.2 ( Sub-Component 2)2.1  (Sub-Component 1)Fisheries C&W Works2.2 (Sub=Component 2)2.3( Sub-Component 3)3.1  (Sub-Component 1)3.2 (Sub=Component 2)3.3 (Sub-Component 3)Project Management & Policy SupportTotal 
Period:  [Insert date: dd-m-yy] to 
[Insert date: dd-m-yy] 
Actual 
AWP&B 
% 
Cumulative 
Actual 
Appraisal 
Target 
% 
Annexure-II Measuring Progress against the AWP/B 
Indicator 
Unit 
Component/Outcome 
Sub-component or Output 
Component 1 /Outcome 
 Sub-component / Output 
 Sub-component / Output 
 Sub-component / Output 
Component 2 / Outcome 
Component 3 / Outcome 
Component 4 / Outcome 
56 
Annexure-III Checklist for reviewing withdrawal applications 
FORM 100 - APPLICATION FOR WITHDRAWAL 
1. Sequential numbering of withdrawal application 
2. Withdrawal application amount tallies with sequentially numbered summary sheets 
3. Categories/subcategories charged according to schedule 2 of financing agreement 
4. Percentage of financing applicable for each category or subcategory 
5. Availability of funds in categories and the overall financing amount 
Yes or 
No 
6. Currency of payment 
7. Completeness and accuracy of banking instructions 
8. Complete name and address of correspondent bank 
9. WA is signed by Authorized Representative 
10. Expenditure summary sheet by category attached 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
1. Eligibility of expenditures claimed 
(a) Within SOE financial ceiling 
(b) Expenditures under specific category [ -------------------- ] eligibility 
2. Form 102 supported by signed Form 101 (for items over the financial ceiling) 
DESIGNATED ACCOUNT – REPLENISHMENT REQUESTS 
1. Amount within ceiling figure agreed as a reasonable limit [-- US$ or --]; or per AWP/B period 
2. Amount at least equal to 30 per cent of the advance or 3 months of expenditure; 
3. Amount agreed sufficient to cover a specific reporting period (revolving fund option) 
4. Exchange rate used 
5. Completeness of designated account banking and account details 
6. Enclosed designated account reconciliation and bank statements 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION (attached when/if required) 
1. Copy of contract 
2. Copy of invoice, certified by Project Director 
3. Copy of bank guarantee and performance guarantee (for advance payment) 
4. Copy of delivery receipt 
5. Copy of evidence of payment 
6. Completed Form 101 
7. Completed Form 102 (A or B) including reference to AWPB, name of the supplier, invoice contract number, total contract 
value, date of payment, list of supporting documentation, and payment reference (bank/ cash) 
PROCUREMENT 
1. Copy of ‘no objection(s)’ provided by IFAD (attached) 
2. Copy of Contract Payment Monitoring Form(s) -duly Signed (attached) 
3. Copy of Register of contracts with reference to the procurement plan- duly signed (attached) 
57 
COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITION(S) FOR DISBURSEMENT 
1. In accordance with terms in section E of the Financing Agreement 
2. In accordance with terms in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient 
EXPENDITURE INCURRED/COMMITTED BEFORE PROJECT COMPLETION DATE 
1. Expenditure verified as eligible: 
(a) contract signed before project completion date 
(b) goods delivered before project completion date 
(c) services completed and/or rendered before project completion date 
Notes: 
Supporting Documentation 
(i) For all cases described in (ii) through (vi) below: 
 The signed contract or confirmed purchase order – showing the specified amount that is due to be paid; 
 The bank guarantee for advance payment, as specified in the contract documents; 
 The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the contract documents; 
 Copies of communications sent by the IFAD country programme manager to the lead project agency providing the ‘no objection’ (whether 
post or prior) to the contract award; and 
 Evidence of payment. 
(ii)  For payment of goods, in addition to (i): 
 Supplier’s invoice, duly certified for payment by the project director – specifying the goods, their quantities, and prices; 
 Bills of lading or similar documents; and 
 As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of goods on delivery). 
(iii)  For payment of consultants’ services and other services, in addition to (i): 
 The supplier’s or consultant’s claim, duly certified for payment by the project director and showing sufficient detail. If such services relate to the 
importation of goods (for example, freight and insurance payments), adequate reference should be given to enable the Fund to relate each of these 
items to specific goods whose cost has been or is to be financed by the financing closing date; and 
 As appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services. If the consultant provided training it should be specified how many 
workshops/people trained together with a list of participants. If the Consultant developed a manual or a study this study should be 
attached or indicated in the certificate, etc. 
(iv) For progress and retention payments of civil works, in addition to (i): 
 The claim of the contractor, including a financial progress report, stating the work performed and the amount due; 
 A certificate – signed by the project consultants or owner’s representative, if any, or by the borrower’s chief engineering officer or resident 
supervising engineer assigned to the project, to the effect that the work performed is satisfactory and the payment claimed is due in accordance 
with the terms of the contract; and 
 A copy of the contract payment monitoring form. 
(v) For payment of credit lines/grants etc.. in addition to (i): 
 Duly certified financial reports; 
 Copies of the sub-agreements with the MFIs; 
  Approved minutes of the technical committee (if applicable); and/or 
 Payment requests from the MFI and evidence of payment. 
(vi) For payment of Trips, fuel, stationary and other expenses in addition to (i): 
 Supplier invoices; 
 Evidence of payment; 
 Back to office report; 
59 
 Travel authorization; and/or 
 Expense reports by the traveller (including invoices). 
Annexure-IV  Designated Account Reconciliation (Imprest Fund) 
60 
Annexure V- Sample Financial Statements  
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED June 30, 201X 
                                                                            Ref.Note             20XX         20XX           Cumulative 
61 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED June 30, 201X 
                         SAMPLE 
                                                                                                                  Ref.Note             20XX         20XX           Cumulative 
Government Funds 
Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment 
# 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Technical Assistance, Trainings, 
workshops and Studies 
        Support for Adaptive Research 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Support for Knowledge Management and 
         Communication 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Support for Improved Agricultural 
         Extension 
Support for Access to Key Agricultural 
        Inputs 
Salaries and Allowances 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Incremental Operating Costs
XXX 
XXX 
XXX XXX
XXX  
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
BALANCE C/F 
4 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
62 
63 
SAMPLE  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY COMPONENT) FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X   Notes  MWK MWK MWK Balance B/F 4 XXX XXX FINANCING IFAD Credit Initial Deposit XXX Replenishments to SA XXX XXX XXX IFAD Direct Payments 5 XXX XXX XXX Government Funds 6 XXX XXX XXX Other Donors 7 Other Receipts 8 TOTAL FINANCING XXX XXX XXX   PROJECT EXPENDITURES: (BY COMPONENT) IFAD Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management Adaptive Research XXX XXX XXX Knowledge Management and Communication XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX XXX Farmer Adoption of GAPs Awareness Raising and Sensitisation XXX XXX XXX Access to Key Agricultural Inputs XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX XXX Programme Management and Coordination XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX  XXX  Government Funds Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management Adaptive Research XXX XXX XXX Knowledge Management and Communication XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX XXX Farmer Adoption of GAPs Awareness Raising and Sensitisation XXX XXX XXX Access to Key Agricultural Inputs XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX XXX Programme Management and Coordination XXX XXX  XXX XXX XXX  XXX  TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES XXX XXX  XXX    BALANCE C/F 4 XXX XXX  XXX  Cumulative 201X 201X-1 to date  
64 
SAMPLE STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X  201X Budget 201X Actual  Variance   Notes MWK MWK MWK  FINANCING   
65 
SAMPLE  STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X  201X Budget 201X Actual  Variance   Notes MWK MWK MWK    Surplus/Deficit for the period XXX XXX XXX The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of 10% was due to….  
66 
SAMPLE STATEMENT OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X Account No:      Bank:  Address:     Opening Balance Notes XXX XXX  Add: IFAD Replenishments: Date WA No XXX Date WA No    XXX  XXX XXX XXX Bank Interests XXX   XXX  Total XXX XXX  Deduct: Transfers to Operating Accounts: Date XXX Date  XXX  XXX XXX XXX Bank Charges XXX XXX Exchange Rate Difference    XXX  Closing Balance as at 30/06/201X XXX  XXX (as per Bank Statement) USD MWK  
67 
SAMPLE STATEMENT OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X  Account No:                       Bank:  Address:       Notes 1 Initial Deposit XXXX XXXX 2 Less amount(s) recovered: XXXX   XXXX  3 Outstanding Amount advanced XXXX XXXX Represented by: Special Account Balance as at 4 30/6/201X XXXX XXXX  Plus amounts claimed but not yet 5 credited as at 30/6/201X: WA XXX Date WA XXX Date XXX XXXX XXXX  Plus amounts withdrawn not yet claimed, composed of:  Was Prepared not yet submitted: WA XXX WA XXX XXX  WAs not yet prepared: XXX  Total amount withdrawn not yet 6 claimed XXXX XXXX Less Interest earned and/or plus Bank charges (if included in the 7 Special Account) XXXX XXXX Total Designated Account Advance 8 as at 30/6/201X XXXX XXXX Difference between Line 3 and line 8 XXXX XXXX  Notes: a Explain any difference between lines 3 and line 8 b Indicate if amount in line 6 is eligible for financing by IFAD and provide reasons for not claiming  
SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
By Category of Expenditure  
Category 
Description 
1 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Category 
Description 
2 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Total 
In USD 
(Equivalent) 
Rejected 
from IFAD 
Net Reimbursed 
Xxx 
xxx 
xxxx 
XXX 
XXX 
XXx 
xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
Xxx 
xxxxx 
xxxx 
xxx 
xxxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
Note 
Category No. 
Withdrawal 
Application # 
Total 
W/A Pending 
Submission 
Withdrawal 
Application # 
Total 
Note: Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical exchange rate of the transfers 
to the Operating Account. Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. This statement 
should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments 
68 
69 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X   FINANCIAL REPORTING UNDER INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (IPSAS)  In accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), notes to the financial statements of an entity should:  Present any information about the basis of preparation of the financial statements and the specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant transactions and other events, and  Provide additional information which is not presented on the face of the financial statements but is necessary for a fair presentation of the entity’s cash receipts, cash payments, cash balances and other statements as statement of financial position  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  The principle accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out below: A Basis of Preparation: The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) with particular emphasis on Cash Basis Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting  B Cash Basis of Accounting: The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events only when cash is received or paid by the entity.  C. Foreign Currency Transactions: Foreign currency translation for the income and expenditure account items are converted using the actual historic exchange rate at the conversion from designated to local account. Where part of the expenditures has to be met from the proceeds of subsequent draw-downs from designated to local account, this is done on First in First out (FIFO) basis. All local expenditures paid from the local accounts/currency are translated back to the  USD at the actual rate used for the transfer from designated to local account.  Cash balances  held in foreign currency are reported using the closing rate. Gains/Losses on foreign currency transactions/balances are dealt within the Statement of Designated Account Activities  BUDGET  The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (cash basis), same classification and for the same period as the financial statements. Material variances (above XXX) have been explained as notes to the financial statements  DIRECT PAYMENTS  These payments were made directly by IFAD from the Loan/Grant account to the specified supplier/service provider in accordance with the terms and conditions of the financing Agreement  Note: Include here details of direct payments, WA, Date, currency and amount received, amount in local currency  
70 
71 
Annexure VI- Interim Reporting Format 
Expenditure 
Actual 
Planned/Budgeted (AWPB)  Variance 
Commitment
72 
YEARLY PROCUREMENTS  Include here a list of the yearly procurements including methods   ALLOCATION AND USE OF THE FUNDS OF THE LOAN/GRANTS   Incremental 2 Operating Costs XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX     XXXX   RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS DISBURSED BY IFAD AND FUNDS RECEIVED BY THE PROGRAMME  
Current 
Quarter 
Year-To 
Date 
Cumulati
ve 
To-Date 
Current 
Quarter 
Year-
To 
Date 
Cumulati
ve 
To-Date 
Current 
Quarter 
Year-
To 
Date 
Cumulati
ve 
To-Date 
s 
Entered (not 
payed) To - 
Date 
Component 
1- 
Component 1 
    Sub Component 1.1  
    Sub Component 1.2  
    Sub Component 1.3  
Component 2 
Component 3 
Component 4 
2- 
3- 
4- 
Total 
Expenditure category 
Category 1: Works 
Category 2: Goods 
Category 3: Services   
Total 
73 
Annexure-VII TORs of Internal Auditing Firm 
Internal Audit Firm 
Terms of Reference 
Organization 
Post Title 
Duty Station: 
Duration 
Starting Date 
:  ABC 
: 
Internal Auditor- Firm  
:  XYX 
: 
: 
12 months (At lease 10-12 Working days per quarter) 
1st July 2020 
Languages required 
:  Urdu & English 
Background 
The Government of Pakistan and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) have signed a Financing 
Agreement for the execution of ABCXYZ XYZ (). ABC a Six (6)year development program of Government of Baluchistan 
co-funded by IFAD. ABC has a total cost of Rs 00000 billion to boost regional economic activity through agricultural value 
chain development. The program aims at improving income, reducing poverty and malnutrition in Gwadar and Lasbella 
Districts Baluchistan.  
Reporting System:  
The objective of hiring and internal audit firm add values to operations and activities carried out by the ABCXYZ XYZ 
(ABC-GB) by independently review its all activities, operation, process and systems with regards to risk  control aspects 
and bringing a systematic and disciplined approach to the effectiveness of risk of risk management and control processes. 
The  successful  firm  will  possess  a  thorough  knowledge  of  internal  auditing  procedures,  accounting  procedures  and  have 
sound judgment on risk identification and management. 
The firm will produce a quarterly internal audit report presented to the Board of Directors of EOF.  
Internal Audit firm shall monitor the appropriate follow-up on audit findings and recommendations. All significant findings 
will remain in an open issues file until cleared. 
Independence:  
The internal audit firm reports to the Programme Steering Committee (PSC) Bo, who appoints and terminates the firm upon 
recommendation of Donors. The firm will work under the overall supervision of PSC.  
All  internal  audit  activities  shall  remain  free  of  influence  by  any  element  in  the  organization,  including  matters  of  audit 
selection,  scope,  procedures,  frequency,  timing,  or  report  content  to  permit  maintenance  of  an  independent  and  objective 
mental attitude necessary in performing the function.  
Internal Audit shall have no direct operational responsibility or authority over any of the activities it reviews. Accordingly, it 
shall not develop nor install systems or procedures, prepare records, or engage in any other activity which would normally be 
considered management or staff's responsibility.  
Authority and confidentiality:  
Authority is granted for full and unrestricted access to all ABCGB records, physical properties, and staff relevant to any area 
under review. All employees are requested to assist the internal audit in fulfilling its function.  
Documents and information obtained by the internal auditor will be handled in the same prudent and confidential manner as 
by those employees normally accountable for them. 
Duties and Responsibilities30:  
Within the framework, as described above, the internal audit firm will carry out the following tasks:  
 
Conduct a post-audit procedure, with respect to their functions and activities within ABCGB. Make recommendations 
on  possible improvements  of  the  procedures to  enhance  ABC-GB’s  control  mechanisms,  financial  performance  and 
produce quality reports for senior management and PSC, to enhance decision making, on quarterly basis. 
30 The TORs would be reviewed and customized by the Manager Internal Audit in consultation with the Project 
Director. 
75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit  all  contracts  signed  between  ABC-GB  with  service  providers,  suppliers,  and  contractors  to  verify  that  (i) 
compliance  with  terms  and  conditions  of  grant  /  loan  agreements  and  procurement  regulations  and  donor’s 
guidelines;  and  (ii)  the  contract  is  in  line  with  best  practice  with  respect  to  compliance  with  terms  of  reference, 
request for proposal, tender documents etc. 
Develop  professional  and  constructive  working  relationships  with  key  managers  and  be  able  to  challenge  when 
necessary.  
Lead development of specific innovative ways of working and new ideas for reviewing risk and control issues.  
Assess  risk  and  control  related policies  and procedures, provide input  to  updates  in  existing  procedural  documents 
with respect to controls as necessary 
Apply  internal  audit  procedures  to  audit  the  financial  statements,  accounting  records  and  other  financial  and  non-
financial registries applying accepted internal audit standards. 
Check and report on compliance with the financing agreement covenants. This includes vouching SOE replenishments, 
and that loan proceeds are not used to finance ineligible expenses. 
  Undertake  special  assignments  and  investigations  and  in  particular  undertake  more  complex  and  high  level  audit 
investigations as and when necessary under the overall guidance of PSC 
 
 
 
 
Reviewing the means of safeguarding assets and, as appropriate, verifying their existence.  
Reviewing operations or programs to ascertain whether results are consistent with established objectives and goals 
and  whether  the  operations  or  programs  are  being  carried  out  as  planned  including  verify  the  adherence  of  ABC 
AWPBs, procurement plan, policies, plans, procedures, laws, and fund regulations that are influential on Fund works 
as well as donors accounting procedures. 
Asses the efficiency, effectiveness and economy of the usage of resources and reports of any deviations in case they 
are existed.  
Reviewing  the  adequacy,  implementation  and  operation  of  donor’s  transparency  and  accountability  policies  and  of 
other anti-corruption, fraud and related misuse policies and procedures.  
1.  Audit Planning:  
 
 
Internal Audit firm shall regularly submit to the PSC up to date summary of the audit work schedule.  
The audit work schedule is developed based on a prioritization of the audit universe using a risk-based methodology. 
Any  significant  deviation  from  the  formally  approved  work  schedule  shall  be  communicated  to  the  PSC  through 
periodic activity reports. 
Qualifications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The firm must be registered with Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan (ICAP). 
The firm must be on Quality Control Rating (QCR) list of ICAP 
The firm must not be blacklisted or debarred by any government department. 
The  firm  must  have  an  aggregate  experience  of  not  less  than  ten  years  in  providing  internal  audit  services  in 
public/private sector. 
The firm must have undertaken 5 internal audit service assignments in the last five years. 
The firm must have undertaken at least one internal/external audit engagement of a project funded by IFAD, United 
Nations or the World Bank or ADB in the last 5 years.  
The  firm  shall  govern themselves by  adherence to The  Institute of Internal  Auditors'  Code  of Ethics. The  Institute's 
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing shall be adhered to by the firm.   
Competencies  
a)  Proven experience of risk management frameworks and approaches.  
b)  Experience of operational auditing & risk based approach to review. 
c)  Excellent negotiating and high level influencing skills and the ability to challenge at a senior level when necessary. 
76 
d)  Ability to work in challenging environments. 
e)  Ability to work and deliver to tight deadlines. 
f)  Logical and systematic in analytical thinking. 
g)  Facilitation and presentational skills.   
Payment terms and conditions 
a)  The payment will be made quarterly upon the delivery of satisfactory quarterly report. 
Application Process 
a) 
Interested  qualified  firms  are  encouraged  to  apply  for  the  above  mentioned  consultancy  by  sending  the  detailed  CV 
along  with  the  cover  letter  clearly  mentioning  (i)  the  position  in  the  email/letter  subject  line,  AND  (ii)  the  expected 
daily consulting fee for the year  to the following email address: 
b)  The deadline for the application is xx.xx.2019, day. 
77 
Annexure-VIII Financial Tables for the Supervision Missions 
These financial tables are required for the supervision mission and they are placed as Appendix 2 to 
the Supervision Mission Report. IFAD has prescribed the format for these tables which is given 
hereunder for the guidance of the finance team.  
Appendix 2:  Financial: Actual financial performance by financier; by 
component and disbursements by category 
Table 2A: 
Financial performance by financier 
Appraisal  (USD 
‘000) 
Disbursements 
(USD ‘000) 
cent 
Per 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
Co-financier 
Government 
Total 
Table 2B: 
Financial performance by financier by component (USD ‘000) 
Compo
nent 
IFAD loan 
Actu
al 
Apprai
sal 
IFAD grant 
Co-financier 
Government 
%  Apprai
sal 
Actu
al 
%  Apprai
sal 
Actu
al 
%  Apprai
sal 
Actu
al 
%  Apprai
Domestic 1 
Actu
al 
sal 
Total 
%  Apprai
sal 
% 
Actu
al 
Table 2C: 
IFAD loan disbursements (SDR, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
Category 
Category description 
Original  
Allocation 
Revised  
Allocation 
Disbursement 
W/A 
pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
Initial deposit 
Total 
Figure 1: 
IFAD loan/grant disbursement, comparisons between original and revised allocations and actual 
disbursement 
79 
Annexure-VIII Format for measuring compliance with legal covenants 
Supervision missions assess the extent to which a project has complied with applicable compliance requirements contained in the Financing Agreement, Letter to Borrower etc. 
The following table is part of the Supervision Mission Report as Appendix 3.  
Appendix 3:  Compliance with legal covenants: Status of implementation 
Section  
Covenant 
Target/Action Due 
Date 
Compliance 
Status/Date 
Remarks 
Section 4.02 
Section 4.02 
Section 4.03 
Section 4.04 
Section 4.05,  
section 11.10(b) 
Section 4.06  
Schedule 4,  
para 7   
Schedule 4,  
para 8(a) 
Schedule 4,  
para 16 
PCU to open and maintain a Project Account (in ...); GO? to make 
an initial deposit equivalent to USD ?????? 
GO? to replenish Project Account quarterly in advance 
Procurement of goods, works and services carried out in 
accordance with the procedures laid down in Schedule 3 
Insurance of vehicles, equipment and civil works financed from 
the loan proceeds to be consistent with sound commercial practice. 
Audit report submitted to IFAD. 
Progress reports to be submitted to IFAD on a quarterly basis. 
AWPB to be submitted to the Fund, for its review and comments 
A Mid-Term Review (MTR) to be carried out jointly by the 
Borrower and IFAD. 
Project to be exempted from all import duties, excise taxes and 
value added tax (VAT) on investment expenditures 
80 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Medium
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Medium
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
Pakistan witnessed the third consecutive successful
democratic transition in 2018. A new political party has
formed governments at federal level and in three
provinces on the promise of change and across the board
action against corruption at high level. Economic
challenges, a strong opposition and polarization due to
anti-corruption proceedings and unsettled geo-political
environment within the region has posed numerous
challenges to the central government and Balochistan
Government. The internal security situation within
Balochistan has considerably improved over the last two
years but challenges remain.
The country has been facing adverse economic conditions
since 2018 with a large current account deficit, adverse
balance of payments, large revenue collection shortfalls,
almost 25 per cent devaluation of national currency and
increasing inflation. Growth rate is predicted to decline
from 4.5 per cent to 3 per cent or less during 2019-20.
The Government has arranged around $ 10 billion in State
Bank deposits from friendly countries to shore-up
reserves, a deferred payment of oil import of US$ 3 billion
from Saudi Arabia and an IMF bailout funding of $ 7.2
billion. The IMF package calls for major reforms in
revenue collection, increased energy tariffs, additional
taxes, widening of tax base etc. If fully implemented, the
reforms could stabilize the economy over the next two
years.
Decentralization, poverty graduation, youth development
and gender are the main priorities of the current
government’s manifesto and operative policies.
Translation of policy in concrete actions has always been
a challenging area, especially in Balochistan with its
existing capacity deficits. The project would be
contributing to the development of a workable
decentralized rural development and poverty graduation
models and is fully in line with the SDG targets, Vision
2025 priorities and current government’s development
priorities. Considerable technical assistance is being
provisioned in GLLSP-II, along with collaboration with
RBA, to boost local implementation capacities and bring
about policy improvements.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Low
Low
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
Medium
The project design is informed by lessons learned and
successes in previous and on-going IFAD projects in
Pakistan and the region. The key interventions included in
the design and approach have been working very
effectively in on-going projects like SPPAP and GLLSP.
Project design has been kept simple in terms of number,
type and range of activities as well as implementation
arrangements. All community/ household related
interventions will be implemented by a SMP on a proven
model and through already established network of
COs/VOs. Continuation in the same two districts of
GLLSP-I, gives advantage to staff in terms of knowledge
of challenges and opportunities and an established
recognition of project name. Timely preparation of PC-I
and its approval at Federal level has been a problem area
in the past leading to considerable start-up delays. This
will be addressed by the engagement of technical
expertise to ensure timely preparation of the PC-I parallel
to design completion and approval of it prior to IFAD's EB
approval. By maintaining the existing PMU of GLLSP for
implementation of the new project would greatly address
the issue of timely recruitment of PMU staff.
Balochistan remains with some institutional capacity
issues. The risk is addressed through the establishment of
a capacitated PMU, provision of back-up technical
assistance, partnership with FAO and WFP, capacity
building of staff and engagement of capable SMP,
responsible for the delivery of a large part of the project
budget. The existing experienced PMU of GLLSP will be
retained to implement the new project. The capacity of
Fisheries Department as well as relevant service
providers for jetty designs and execution had many
shortcomings in the previous phase. A comprehensive
technical assistance package has been designed to build
department capacity and assist in programme
implementation through a professional team based in
PMU with all key procurements done in the PMU. In
addition, considerable design and implementation capacity
for jetties and support infrastructure has been built by
private sector over the last few years and is now available
for more efficient implementation of infrastructure
component.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
7. Procurement
Medium
Medium
8. Stakeholders
Low
Low
Finding capable and qualified financial management staff
from within province has been difficult and bringing staff
from outside has been challenging due to remoteness of
the province and non-family status of most locations. The
risk is addressed through retention of existing GLLSP
financial management staff and offer of incentivized salary
packages. Dedicated project bank accounts for each
funding source and maintenance of accounts as per
requirements of each funding source, use of IFAD
approved accounting software, dual-signatures for every
financial transaction, statutory audit by Auditor General of
Pakistan, an internal pre-audit system and regular
supervision by IFAD Missions, will provide adequate
assurance for efficient, transparent and justified usage of
funds for intended purposes. Government is implementing
a zero-tolerance policy in public fund usage which is
being spearheaded by National Accountability Bureau and
already some high profile prosecutions in the province
have taken place.
Procurements of goods and services has historically been
a challenge in the province and has been prone to delays
and cost over-runs. Major causes have been the absence
of adequate procurement capacity within the projects,
remoteness of the province which discourages
applicants/suppliers from other provinces, and limited
availability of local suppliers of goods and services. The
risk is addressed through the provision of dedicated
procurement staff in the PMU, the adoption of community
procurement processes for all community related
infrastructure, packaging of larger infrastructure to attract
better capacity contractors and the development of the
first 18-month procurement plan during the design
process.
Primary stakeholders include the Provincial and district
governments, the social mobilization partner, rural Union
Councils/communities/households, small fishermen and
their cooperatives, fisheries private sector, implementing
agencies and funding agencies (P&D, C&W, Fisheries
Department, District Governments, IFAD, FAO, WFP).
Stakeholder risks have been addressed through: intensive
dialogue and consultation with provincial government,
potential SMP and Department’s staff to develop
consensus on the approach, targeting and interventions;
transparent criteria based selection of project interventions
and beneficiaries, and the equitable division of resources
between the two districts. A bottom-up community driven
needs assessment and delivery, with beneficiaries in
control, promises local ownership and mitigates the
possibilities of conflict.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
4/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
9. Environment and social
Medium
Medium
Exogenous: medium 
Balochistan has a very varied topography along the coast
as well as hinterland and is vulnerable to recurrent
occurrence of variety of environmental, natural and climate
induced adversities. It has suffered two extended periods
of drought over the last 25 years, a massive earthquake in
2013 in southern region, frequent dust-storms, and
increasingly erratic rain patterns causing water scarcities
as well as flash-floods. Project design, approach and
investments will emphasize adoption of climate smart
designs and investments for agriculture as well as
infrastructure. Water security and protection against flash
floods etc. is prioritized under the community
infrastructure. Climate mitigation measures have been
built in all key investments in infrastructure. 
Project Investments: low 
The Project’s agriculture sector and socio-economic
infrastructure investments are of the nature and scale that
will not have any adverse environmental or social impacts.
Rather they would positively contribute to social cohesion
and social development and most of the community
infrastructure like water, sanitation, irrigation, solar energy
and roads will result in environmental improvements. 
It may be argued that investments in the fisheries value
chain may provide resources and incentives to fisherfolk
to indulge in over fishing and thereby threaten the
sustainability of resources. The risk is addressed by
investing in the government’s policy, strategy and
management capacity for sustainable management of
fisheries resources. In addition, the project’s main focus is
on reducing the high post-harvest losses, improving the
quality of the catch for better prices resulting in higher
incomes and less need for excessive fishing.
Overall
Medium
Medium as per above details
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
Several elements have been built within the programmes design and approach to 
lead  to  an  organized  exit.  The  first  key  element  is  using  the  existing  structures  and 
arrangements  as  far  as  possible  and  not  creating  any  new  project  specific  structures 
except  where  necessary  e.g.  the  PMU.  All  community  development  interventions  under 
Component  1  use  existing  social  capital  in  the  target  villages  in  the  form  of 
COs/VOs/LSOs  which  have  been  in  existence  for  over  20 years  and have  a mentor  RSP 
that will continue to operate and support these institutions beyond the project life. These 
community  organizations  have  well  developed  systems  and  processes  for  the 
management of the revolving credit funds and operation and maintenance of community 
physical infrastructure. The capacity of the Local Support Organizations would be further 
strengthened during the programme period, for them to become effective articulators of 
community  needs  at  Union  Council  and  District  level,  be  effective  implementation 
partners  for  project  and  non-project  interventions  as  well  as  a  grassroots  oversight 
mechanism. In order to secure assured access to development resources for COs/Vos in 
the  future,  the  project  would  assist  the  provincial  government  to  establish  an 
institutionalized  mechanism  and  supportive  laws  and  rules  for  the  New  Local 
Government  Act  which  calls  for  the  transfer  of  development  funds  to  the  villages  and 
Union councils. As  per the  new  Act, 30  per  cent  of the  annual  development  budget  will 
be transferred to village institutions.  
The household level interventions  for  productive  assets,  vocational  and  technical 
2. 
training,  women  enterprises,  nutrition  interventions  will  derive  their  sustainability  from 
(i)  concurrent  training  and  capacity  building  of  the  beneficiaries;  (ii)  longer  term 
handholding  from  the  social  mobilization  partner  that  would  stay  in  the  project  area 
beyond  project  implementation;  and,  (iii)  a  dynamic  poverty  graduation  approach  that 
links the  beneficiaries  to  other  sources  of  pro-poor  support  framework  (‘EHSAS”,  Prime 
Minister’s  Programme  for  interest  free  loans  for  the  Youth,  free  TVET  trainings  by 
NAVTEC and BTEVTA, CPEC supported interventions etc.) so as to help them continue on 
the path of development to reach PSC 40 and beyond. The promotion of enterprises for 
youth  and  women  would  be  based  on  detailed  local  job  market  analysis  to  identify  the 
skills, services and commodities in demand and youth and women will be linked to these 
opportunities  as  per  their  individual  potential  and  per  demand  in  their  vicinity.  Close 
handholding  support  by  SMP  staff  during  the  initial  six  months  of  enterprise  operation 
would be ensured to address any unforeseen risks.  
The  exit  strategy  and  sustainability  for  Fisheries  Development,  relies  on  the 
3. 
establishment and the promotion of a sound market-based approach between sellers and 
buyers  on  one  hand  and  the  service  providers  (finance  providers)  on  the  other  during 
project life; a set-up which should afterwards become self-sustained by covering the fish 
production  as  well  as  the  support  infrastructure.  This  is  underpinned  by  the  fishermen 
being  organized  into  business  cooperatives  that  have  contractual  relationships  with  the 
private  sector  (buyers  and  service  providers)  and  a  collaborative  relationship  with  the 
Fisheries  Department  for  the  sustainable  and  financially  self-reliant  operation  of  jetties 
and support infrastructure.  
The  promotion  and  development  of  Fishermen  Cooperatives  at  all  landing  sites, 
4. 
starting with the three landing sites financed by the project, would be a key element in 
the sustainability of the fisheries value chain beyond project life. These cooperatives will 
gradually assume all those roles that are currently played by middle-men and processors 
including that of providing finance, access to market, sorting and storage (including the 
ice),  and  these  cooperatives  would  become  a  collective  bargaining  agent  for  their 
fishermen  members  to  enable  them  to  produce  better  and  earn  more.  These 
cooperatives  will receive  strong technical  support  for  the  development  of their  business 
plans,  to  set  up  strong  and  accountable  management  structures  and  be  effective 
providers of services to the members.  
The  capacity  building  of  the  Fisheries,  Agriculture  and  Cooperative  Department 
5. 
would allow for the enforcement of laws and regulations for the sustainable management 
of fisheries resource, would reduce wastage, improve the catch quality and pricing, and 
would  ensure  the  fishermen's  access  to  sustainable  fish  resources.  The  Department 
would be enabled to regularly gather and publish statistics on fisheries that would allow 
the private sector to plan their investments and further develop their support services in 
the  region.  The  statistics  would  also  allow the Fisheries  Department  of the Government 
of  Balochistan  to establish limits  for each  of the  different varieties  of fish to  ensure  the 
sustainability  of  the  available  fish  stock.  Additionally,  the  establishment  of  contract 
farming  and  -fishing  would  allow  for  the  private  sector  companies  to  engage  more  and 
more  with  the  producer  cooperatives  in  Balochistan,  which  has  niche  market  products 
most suited to contract farming. 
6. 
Community  Physical  Infrastructure  (CPIs)  are  small  village  level  schemes 
consisting of water supply systems (water pumping and overhead tanks, Solar powered 
RO  plants,  water  storage  tanks,  sanitation,  household  solar  energy  systems,  flood 
protection  works,  inter-village  roads  etc.).  CPI  prioritization,  implementation  and  post 
completion  maintenance  is  guided  by  a  very  well  developed  process  that  has  been 
implemented  for  over  three  decades  now  and  works  quite  satisfactorily.  The  CPI 
agreement  with  the  communities  also  includes  an  agreement  on  the  post  completion 
operation  and  maintenance  modality  and  community  nominated  person(s)  undergo 
required training during scheme implementation. A system of user-fees is developed and 
agreed  upfront  for  schemes  requiring  regular  expenditure  for  maintenance.  Following 
completion, the SMP staff regularly monitors the operation of O&M system to ensure that 
terms of related agreements are followed by the beneficiary community and the scheme 
is  being  properly  run  and  maintained.  Ad-hoc  assessments  and  supervision  missions 
have all observed satisfactory O&M arrangements for schemes completed under GLLSP-I. 
The  continuation  of  the  same  principles  and  processes  would  ensure  longer  term  CPI 
sustainability under GLLSP-II as well.  
7. 
Rural  roads  component  would  be  implemented  by  the  mandated  department  of 
the  Government  of  Balochistan  i.e.  Communications  and  Works  Department.  Post-
completion  O&M  of  all  schemes  undertaken  by  C&W  becomes  the  Department’s 
responsibility.  The  department  gets  annual  budget  for  provincial  roads  maintenance. 
Management  and  maintenance  of  roads funded  by GLLSP-II  will  be  the responsibility  of 
C&W.  
GLLSP-II  will  make  a  number  of  investments  for  the  capacity  building  of  the 
8. 
various  entities  and  implementing  partners.  The  capacity  building  will  be  for  the 
level 
formulation  of  policies  and 
technical  assistance  at 
implementation 
for 
(institutionalization  of  provincial  funding  for  community  driven  rural  development, 
fisheries  management  policy,  fishermen’s  cooperatives  policy,  co-management  of 
fisheries  landing  sites  and  support  infrastructure  etc.).  Other  investments  will  be  for 
vehicles  and  equipment  for  some  implementing  partners  and  PMUs.  The  policies  and 
regulations  developed  with  TA  support  will  be  operationalized  by  the  concerned 
government  departments.  The  equipment  and  vehicles  provided  to  the  implementing 
partners  will  be  formally  transferred  to  them  after  project  completion,  as  per  the 
established  policy  for  foreign  funded  projects,  and  would  be  operated/maintained 
through regular departmental budgets. The equipment and vehicles provided to the PMU 
would remain the property of the P&D Department and reallocated to another project or 
office as per need at that time.    
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex: Gllsp Ii Climate Change Working Paper
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II 
(GLLSP-II) 
Detailed Design Report 
Climate Change Working Paper 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
ii 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
CO 
CPI 
IFAD 
LSO 
M&E 
MIPs 
NRSP 
O&M 
PMU 
TOPs 
UCs 
UCDP 
VO 
VDP 
Community Organization 
Community Physical Infrastructure 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
Local Support Organization 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
Micro Investment Plans 
National Rural Support Program 
Operation and Maintenance 
Project Management Unit 
Terms of Partnership 
Union Councils 
Union Council Development Plan 
Village Organization 
Village Development Plan 
iv 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
2.  CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
1 Fowler HJ, Blenkinsop S, Tebaldi C. 2007. Linking climate change modeling to impacts studies: recent advances in 
downscaling techniques for hydrological modeling. International Journal of Climatology 27: 1547–1578, DOI: 10.1002/Joc.1556. 
2 Immerzeel, W. W., F. Pellicciotti & M. F. P. Bierkens, 2013. Rising river flows throughout the twenty-first century in two 
Himalayan glacierized watersheds. Nature Geosci 6(9):742-745 
doi:10.1038/ngeo1896.http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v6/n9/abs/ngeo1896.html#supplementary-information. 
3 IPCC, 2013. Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of  Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. 
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley]. ambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 
4 Immerzeel, W. W., F. Pellicciotti & M. F. P. Bierkens, 2013. Rising river flows throughout the twenty-first century in two 
Himalayan glacierized watersheds. Nature Geosci 6(9):742-745 
doi:10.1038/ngeo1896.http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v6/n9/abs/ngeo1896.html#supplementary-information. 
5 Lutz, A. F., W. W. Immerzeel, A. B. Shrestha & M. F. P. Bierkens, 2014a. Consistent increase in High Asia's runoff due to 
increasing glacier melt and precipitation. Nature Clim Change advance online publication doi:10.1038/nclimate2237. 
http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/vaop/ncurrent/abs/nclimate2237.html#supplementary-information 
6 Ridley, J., A. Wiltshire & C. Mathison, 2013. More frequent occurrence of westerly disturbances in Karakoram up to 2100. 
Science of The Total Environment 468–469, Supplement(0):S31-S35 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.03.074. 
1 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 1: Problem Tree of Climate Change Potential Impacts in Pakistan and Balochistan  
3.  Climate Change Projections 
3.1.  Modelling Facility 
7 Wiltshire, A. J., 2013. Climate change implications for the glaciers of the Hindu-Kush, Karakoram and Himalayan region. The 
Cryosphere Discuss 7(4):3717-3748 doi:10.5194/tcd-7-3717-2013. 
8 ADB, 2017. Climate Change Profile of Pakistan 
2 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
  Future Projections for Pakistan by dynamical downscaling of general circulations 
3.3.  Future Projections for Pakistan by statistical downscaling of general circulation 
models 
9 Roeckner E, Ba¨uml G, Bonaventura L, Brokopf R, Esch M, Giorgetta M, Hagemann S, Kirchner I, Kornblueh L, Manzini E, 
Rhodin A, Schlese U, Schulzweida U, Tompkins A (2003) The atmospheric general circulation model ECHAM5. Part I: model 
description, vol 349. Max Planck Institute for Meteorology Report, p 127 
10 Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer, and G. A. Meehl, 2012. An overview of CMIP5 and the experiment design. Bull. Am. Meteorol. 
Soc., 93, 485–498. 
11 Moss RH, Edmonds JA, Hibbard KA, Manning MR, Rose SK, van Vuuren DP, Carter TR, Emori S, Kainuma M, Kram T et al 
(2010) The next generation of scenarios for climate change research and assessment. Nature 463:747–756. 
12 Burhan A, Waheed I, Syed AAB, Rasul G, Shreshtha AB, et al. (2015) Generation of High–Resolution Gridded Climate Fields 
for the Upper Indus River Basin by Downscaling Cmip5 Outputs. J Earth Sci Clim Change 6: 254. doi:10.4172/2157-
7617.1000254 
3 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
3.4.  Selection of Models and Scenarios for Balochistan 
  Table 1: Four best available GCMs for Pakistan 
Model 
Resolution 
Institution 
Reference 
National Center for Atmospheric Research  Gent et al., 2011 
1.25 x 
0.942408377 
2.5 x 2.011 
1.875x1.25 
CCSM4 
GFDL-
ESM2M 
HadGEM2-
ES 
CanESM2 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 
Laboratory 
Met Office Hadley Centre 
Dunne et al., 
2012 
Collins et al., 
2011 
Chylek et al., 
2011 
2.8125x 2.8125 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and 
Analysis 
3.5.  Downscaling methodology, data and uncertainties  
13 Taylor, K. E., 2001. Summarizing multiple aspects of model performance in a single diagram.  JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL 
RESEARCH, Volume 106, pp. 7183-7192. 
4 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
 
 
correlation is greater than 0.8;  
the ratio of the RCM SD to the observed SD should be close to 1, and minimum RMSE.  
3.6.  Highlighting uncertainties of climate scenarios 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
The Modelling uncertainty arises from our incomplete understanding of the climate system, 
and the climate models also failed to perfectly represent  the real system. Use of different 
global climate models includes the structural uncertainty.  
Natural climate variability Climate varies naturally due to internal dynamical and physical 
processes in the climate system and this can potentially modify some of its characteristics.  
Emissions uncertainty: This arises from uncertainty in the future man-made emissions of 
greenhouse gases and aerosols. 
  Contributions to uncertainty from downscaling. The downscaling process accounts for 
the inclusion of local effects of features such as coastline and mountains in the downscaling 
process also enhance the uncertainty in climate projections, but it is generally modest. 
4.  CLIMATE CHANGE PROJECTIONS IN BALOCHISTAN AND THE PROJECT AREA 
4.1.  Precipitation variation (RCP 4.5) 
4.2.  Precipitation variation (RCP 8.5) 
5 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
4.3.  Temperature variation 
Maximum Temperature variation (2011-2040) 
Maximum Temperature variation (2041-2070) 
Maximum Temperature variation (2071-2100) 
Minimum Temperature variation (2011-2040) 
Minimum Temperature variation (2041-2070) 
Minimum Temperature variation (2071-2100) 
6 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 2 : Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5 scenario. 
7 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 3: Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5 scenario.
8 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 4: Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5 scenario.
9 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 5: Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5 scenario. 
10 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 6: Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5 scenario. 
11 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 7: Annual precipitation variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5 scenario. 
12 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 8 : Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
13 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 9 : Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
14 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 10 : Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
15 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 11 : Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
16 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 12: Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
17 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 13 : Annual average Maximum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
18 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 14: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
19 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 15: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2011-2040 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
20 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 16: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
21 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 17: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2041-2070 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
22 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 18: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 4.5. 
23 
Pakistan 
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project- Phase-II (GLLSP-II) 
Final Project Design Report – Climate Change Working Paper 
Figure 19: Annual average Minimum Temperature variation in Balochistan during 2071-2100 compared to 1970-2005 under RCP 8.5. 
24 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
4.4 Climate Change Multi-Model Impact Assessment  
Figure 20: Annual average Temperature variation in Gwadar during 1981-2100 under RCP 4.5 
and RCP 8.5. 
25 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
Figure 21: Annual average Temperature variation in Lasbella during 1981-2100 under RCP 4.5 
and RCP 8.5. 
Figure 22: Annual Precipitation variation in Gwadar during 1981-2100 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 
8.5. 
26 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
Figure 23: Annual Precipitation variation in Lasbella during 1981-2100 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 
8.5. 
4.5 Climate Change Extreme Indices Assessment 
Table Error! No text of specified style in document.: Core Climate Indices 
INDEX 
FD 
INDEX LONG NAME 
Number of frost days 
INDEX DETAIL 
Annual count of days when TN (daily minimum temperature) < 0°C 
UNITS 
Days 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
WSDI 
CSDI 
DTR 
10 
SDII 
11 
R10 
12 
R20 
13 
R25 
SU 
Number of summer 
days 
Annual count of days when TX (daily maximum temperature) > 
25°C  
TN10p 
Cool nights 
Percentage of days when TN < 10th percentile  
TX10p 
Cool days 
Percentage of days when TX < 10th percentile 
TN90p 
Warm nights 
Percentage of days when TN > 90th percentile  
TX90p 
Warm days 
Percentage of days when TX > 90th percentile  
Warm spell duration 
indicator 
Annual count of days with at least six consecutive days when TX > 
90th percentile 
Cold spell duration 
indicator 
Annual count of days with at least six consecutive days when TN < 
10th percentile 
Monthly mean difference between TX and TN 
Diurnal temperature 
range 
Simple precipitation 
intensity index 
Number of heavy 
precipitation days 
Number of very heavy 
precipitation days 
Number of very heavy 
precipitation days 
Annual total precipitation divided by the number of wet days 
(defined as PRCP>=1.0mm) in the year 
mm/ day 
Annual count of days when PRCP>=10mm 
Annual count of days when PRCP>=20mm 
Annual count of days when PRCP>=25mm 
14 
CDD 
Consecutive dry days 
Maximum number of consecutive days with RR<1mm 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
°C 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
27 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
INDEX 
CWD 
INDEX LONG NAME 
Consecutive wet days 
15 
INDEX DETAIL 
Maximum number of consecutive days with RR>=1mm 
UNITS 
Days 
16 
R95p 
Very wet days 
Annual total PRCP when RR>95th percentile 
17 
R99p 
Extremely wet days 
Annual total PRCP when RR>99th percentile 
18  PRCPT
OT 
Annual total wet-day 
precipitation 
Annual total PRCP in wet days (RR>=1mm) 
mm 
mm 
mm 
4.6 Climate change impact assessment (summary)  
  Precipitation increase together with rise in temperature is projected in the HKH region during the 
21st century. This may result in more floods and sediment transport to the sea, resulting in sea level 
rise. 
  Gwadar  and  Lasbela  may  experience  decline  in  precipitation  during  2011-2040  and  2071-2100 
(ranging between 5% to 33%), whereas rise in precipitation during 2041-2070 under both RCP 4.5 
and 8.5.  
  Both  maximum  and  minimum  temperature  rise  is  expected  in  near,  mid  and  far  future  (ranging 
between 0.1oC to about 6oC) under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5.  
  Sea-level  rise  has  been  reported  as  1.1mm  per  year  during  the  last  century,  and  expected  to 
continue similar rise during the 21st century. 
  High temperature, heat-waves and extreme precipitation events have been reported during the last 
four to five decades, and expected to continue in the 21st century. 
  Droughts and floods have been reported during the last few decades, while rise in temperature and 
decline/rise in precipitation are likely to result in adverse droughts and floods in the project area.  
  Water scarcity, rise in soil degradation, sea-water temperature rise, increase in sediment transport, 
groundwater  depletion,  water  quality  deterioration  and  rise  in  agriculture  water  demand  are 
expected in the near to far future. 
  The current study is based on results of CMIP-5 data, therefore it is also recommended to carryout 
comprehensive  hydro-climate  modelling  based  on  the  latest  CMIP-6  data  as  well  as  fine 
resolution/downscaled data, all to ensure climate resilient infrastructure development. 
5.  Climate Potential Impacts, Adaptation and mitigation measures 
14 Tank et al.2006. Changes in daily temperature and precipitation extremes in central and south Asia. JOURNAL OF 
GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 111, D16105, doi:10.1029/2005JD006316 
15 Zahid and Rasul., 2011. FREQUENCY OF EXTREME TEMPERATURE & PRECIPITATION EVENTS IN PAKISTAN 1965-
2009. Science International. 23(4),313-319 
16 Ali et al., 2019. Assessment of climate extremes in future projections downscaled by multiple statistical downscaling methods 
over Pakistan. Atmospheric Research 222. 114–133 
28 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Rise in temperature may result in rapid melting of snowfall. Rainfall, together with an expedition 
in snow-melt, may increase river flows and flash floods; 
Rise in early snow-melt may result in changes in river flow patterns and peak flow occurrence, 
and may affect water availability of perennial streams; 
Rise in the snow and glacier-melt may increase sediment transport in river flows; 
Rise in temperature may result in a decline in snowfall and an increase in rainfall, which may 
result in rainfall-runoff increase; 
Increase in temperature may result in a rise in water losses, particularly evapotranspiration; 
Increase in evapotranspiration losses could rise stress on crop water demand; 
Increase in temperature may result in changes in selection of crops and cropping patterns; 
Variability in precipitation may result in changes in selection of crops and cropping patterns; 
Floods may adversely affect flood protection works; 
Floods are likely to affect roads drainage and sewerage; 
Floods may affect bridge pier scour; 
Heat-waves are likely affect human, crops and livestock heath; 
Changes related to climate change may affect crops’ health; 
Changes in climate may adversely affect irrigation practices and working environment in the 
fields; 
Rise in temperature is likely to affect human health and ecosystem; 
Rise in temperature will increase energy consumption;  
Rise in temperature will increase water consumption and groundwater depletion; 
Rise in temperature will increase risks of viral diseases;  
Rise in temperature will have adverse impacts on bridge expansion joints, selection of different 
types of asphalt;  
Expected change in climate is likely to affect eco-system and erosion/land-degradation; 
Sea-level rise and cyclones are likely to adversely affect coastal degradation and infrastructure 
together with eco-system; 
Sea-water temperature rise is likely to affect eco-system;   
The  prevailing  climate  change  is  favorable  for  various  types  of  weed  growth,  particularly 
Parthenium. 
Implementation  of  National  Climate  Change  Policy  (2013)  followed  by  Climate  Change  Act 
(2017)  
Implementation of Water Policy: Pakistan approved Water Policy in April 2018. Besides, Punjab 
has  a  provincial  water  policy.  The  government’s  approval  and  implementation  of  the  draft 
Punjab Water Policy (April 2017) aiming at providing clear policy directions on the sustained 
management and development of water for all sub-sectors through equitable water allocations, 
management  and  development,  including  adaptation  to  climate  change,  and  adoption  of 
integrated water resources management. 
Implementation of Agriculture Policies: Pakistan agriculture policies, which provide guidelines 
related to an increase in agriculture production as well as the use of different cropping patterns 
in  various  parts  of  the  country  and  province.  Also,  selection  and  use  of  climate  resilient 
crops/agriculture and cropping patterns together with water-efficient irrigation systems are need 
of the time. 
Use of future projected datasets in hydrological modelling as well as considering latest CMIP 
scenarios data together with socio-economic scenarios; 
Revision of infrastructure designs (such as bridge piers, buildings plinth levels, buildings HVAC, 
roads)  based  on  climate  change  assessment  and  climate  change  inclusive  hydrological 
modeling; 
29 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
Adequate health facilities provision; 
Adequate water availability and cooling facilities; 
Encouraging urban and rural forestation; 
Adequate control and measures against viral diseases; 
Adaptation of best agriculture practices and use of climate resilient crops; 
Use of least water-intensive crops and water efficient irrigation systems such as sprinkler and 
drip irrigation, particularly where rice and sugar cane is grown,   
Adaptation of best water management practice, such as lining of watercourses and land leveling 
together with demand-based supplies using soil moisture sensors; 
Covering of water pond surface with insolated material, such as floating balls. 
Launching  of  farmers’  awareness  schemes  to  educate  them  about  climate  change  risks, 
efficient irrigation systems, use of best available seeds variety, changes in cropping patterns; 
xv.  Growing of more trees to control temperature and to reduce water losses together with adverse 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xii. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
climate change impacts;  
Changes in cropping patterns to increase food production and to cope up with the rise in food 
demand and water losses; 
Parthenium and other such types of weeds should be treated through biological treatment and 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM), 
Replacement of diesel pumps with ram-pumps, which are more climate-friendly;  
Use of sink-in fields, wherever floods threats exist;  
Improvement of groundwater recharge and discouraging groundwater abstractions; 
Public awareness schemes, and capacity building of line departments’ staff to educate people 
about climate change risks and adaptation measures; 
xxii.  Well managed operation and maintenance to avoid water losses; 
xxiii. 
Installation of flow and climate stations to monitor climate change impacts and frame adaptation 
strategies. 
Table 3: Climate change impacts together with adaptation and mitigation measures. 
Main themes 
Main challenges under Future 
Climate Change Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at the 
design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
Jetties and 
allied 
infrastructure 
  Sea Level Rise 
  Seawater temperature 
 
rise  
  Rise in sediment 
transport 
  Expected rise in high-
winds and cyclones 
  Rise in floods and tides 
  GHG emissions from 
boats’ engines 
  Variation in fish 
species and quantum 
  Construction of cold 
storages (insolation 
needs) 
Inclusion of climate change 
assessment together with 
hydrological modelling during 
infrastructure design. 
  Use of well-maintained boats 
(guidelines and monitoring 
framework to be developed by 
fishery department) 
  Climate resilient design of Jetties 
and allied infrastructure considering 
changes in sea-level rise, high-
winds, potential cyclones, and 
changes in tides 
  Dredging estimates may consider 
changes in sediment transport  
  Adverse effect on eco-
  Demarcation of low, medium and 
system 
  Seawater intrusion to 
rivers and aquifers  
high tide levels to protect fishermen 
from hazards 
  Awareness raising of the fishermen 
and line departments (through 
trainings and seminars) on climate 
change and its impacts on sea-level 
rise, storms etc 
  Adequate clear heights and 
insolation need to be considered in 
cold storages and cold chain 
  Construction and curing of concrete 
need adequate care and 
consideration due to expected rise 
in temperature 
  Sheds and first aid should be made 
available at sites for labours (to 
USD1.2 million 
budgeted for climate 
smart agriculture, 
livestock and policy/TA 
support for sustainable 
fisheries management 
and USD200,000 for  
dredging services to 
be strengthened in the 
project areas through 
PPP model or through 
cooperatives.  
30 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
Main themes 
Main challenges under Future 
Climate Change Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at the 
design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
Rural Roads 
  Embankment erosion 
  Floods due to extreme 
precipitation events 
  Scouring at bridge 
Piers 
 
protect them from heat-waves and 
hot weather)   
Inclusion of climate change 
assessment during infrastructure 
design. 
  Adequate compaction of road 
embankments 
  Expansion Joints 
  Provision of adequate drainage 
damages 
arrangement 
  Road deterioration due 
  Estimation of future scour 
to use of inadequate 
asphalt grade 
Low visibility during 
dust-storms 
 
Water Ponds 
  Availability of water 
resources and their 
precise estimates 
  Excessive evaporation 
from stored water 
  Embankments erosion 
Irrigation 
Channels 
  Rise in cropwater 
requirement 
  Rise in sediment 
 
transport 
Increase in scouring at 
aqueducts etc 
  Rise in evaporation 
losses 
Check dams 
  Water scarcity/floods 
Drinking water 
supply systems 
  Water 
availability/scarcity 
  Groundwater depletion 
considering climate change 
scenarios 
  Design and provision appropriate 
expansion joints considering future 
rise in temperature 
  Selection of recommended grades 
of asphalt considering future rise in 
temperature 
  Applying adequate road marking 
and design of lights together with 
safety arrangements 
  Estimation of adequate budget for 
O&M due to potential increase in 
dust storms  
  Road side plantation together with 
design of small ponds to cater for 
water needs of the plants/trees 
  Awareness raising (through 
trainings and seminars) on climate 
change 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential locations 
for infrastructure development 
during their design 
  Covering surface of stored water by 
floating balls (this may reduce 
evaporation by about 30%) 
  Adequate liquid limits assessment 
of the construction material and 
compaction design 
  Plantation on the embankments 
 
and in the vicinity 
Design of irrigation channels to 
accommodate future enhanced 
irrigation requirements and 
sediment load (based on climate 
change scenarios) 
  Design consideration related to 
increase in floods and subsequent 
scouring 
  Provision of concrete slab or pipe 
systems for irrigation systems to 
reduce losses 
  Plantation along irrigation 
systems/watercourses 
  Adaptation of latest water efficient 
and climate change resilient 
practices, particularly in 
irrigation/agriculture field 
  Awareness raising 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential locations 
for infrastructure development 
  Provision of adequate height and 
apron arrangement 
  Awareness raising 
  Tree plantation in the vicinity 
  Detailed assessment to map the 
existing facilities and gaps in water 
USD 400,000 to be 
invested on plantation 
on road side (Ponds 
will store rainwater for 
plants growth, while 
nano-clay technology 
and such other 
technologies will be 
used in areas where 
soils are sandy) 
USD25,000 budgeted 
for plantation linked to 
CPIs 
1-2%  of  the  tentative 
cost estimate 
3-5%  of  the  tentative 
cost estimate 
31 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN – GWADAR-LASBELA LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROJECT 
DESIGN COMPLETION REPORT – CLIMATE CHANGE WORKING PAPER 
Main themes 
Main challenges under Future 
Climate Change Scenarios 
Adaptation/Mitigation Measures at the 
design stage 
Tentative Cost 
Estimate  
supply schemes and identification 
of new water resources schemes 
  Additional drilling (10-20 ft) will be 
needed and carried out in areas, 
where precipitation is likely to 
decline, whereas in areas where 
precipitation is predicted to 
increase may need flood protection 
(such as raising of well side levels 
by 1-2 ft above natural ground 
level) and water quality assurance 
through enhancing RO plants 
capacity.  
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential locations 
for infrastructure development 
  Plantation near to the well and or 
water Tanks 
  Boreholes to be discouraged in 
groundwater stressed areas. 
  Rain water harvesting and its 
awareness among communities 
should be improved to harness the 
depleting water table 
  Comprehensive hydro-climate 
assessment to provide details 
about critical and potential locations 
for infrastructure development 
  Climate resilient flood protection 
works, 
  Detailed assessment to map the 
existing facilities and gaps in water 
supply schemes and identification 
of new water resources schemes  
  Boreholes to be discouraged in 
groundwater stressed areas. 
  Drinking water quality should be 
monitored 
  Rusted and old water supply lines 
 
should be replaced 
Identification of ground water 
recharges potential sites and 
measures together with recharge 
wells. 
  Rain water harvesting 
implementation and knowledge 
among communities should be 
improved to harness the depleting 
water table 
Up to 5% of the 
tentative cost estimate 
2-3%  of  the  tentative 
cost estimate 
Flood Protection 
Schemes 
  Variation in floods  
  Variation in sediment 
size and load 
RO Plants 
  Access to clean 
drinking water 
  Significant ground 
 
water depletion 
In-adequate water 
supply lines and 
storage capacities 
  Availability of funds for 
more surface 
reservoirs construction  
6.  Lessons Learnt from GLLSP-I 
  Based on the lesson learned from its first phase, GLLSP-II considers climate change as one 
of the main critical parameter in the assessment of the sub-project appraisal, design and 
implementation. 
  GLLSP-I involved community for plantation in water related CPIs. In the current project 
(GLLSP-II) plantation is considered in most of the CPIs together with specific allocation of 
funds having been ensured.  
32 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex: Esmp Table 1
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Table 1. Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Factors and Mitigating Measures 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
Community 
Development 
(such as 
participatory 
planning, 
poverty 
graduation, 
climate 
resilient 
farming, 
nutrition 
initiatives) 
And  
Fish value 
chain 
development 
Social: 
Social: 
  Mechanism for community 
 
 
 
participatory planning is not 
institutionalized/ defined  
Low awareness of the community 
about the designed trainings/facilities  
Limited scope for gender based 
community development 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
 
  Overlap of community organization 
with local government system 
Inadequate livestock husbandry 
services may adversely affect 
livelihood 
Inadequate agriculture extension 
services may adversely affect 
livelihood   
 
  Well-defined community development mechanism 
will be ensured  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Community organizations will ensure coordination 
with local government department 
  Access to various community development facilities 
will be made clear to the community through 
consultations, meetings and seminars 
  Adequate training/s on climate resilient livestock 
husbandry 
  Adequate training/s on climate resilient farming 
  Technical and business support will be provided to 
cooperatives including business plan development  
  No accessibility of fishermen to 
fishery cooperatives  
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate solid waste disposal  
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
system 
 
 
  Expected rise in high-winds and 
cyclones/extreme events 
  Rise in floods and tides 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
 
Inappropriate livestock husbandry 
practices may lead to livestock 
diseases, decreased productivity and 
mortality 
Inappropriate farming practices may 
lead to crops failure, yield reduction, 
increased agro-chemical use, water 
over-consumption and water stress 
 
  Availability of inadequate cold 
storages, cold chain facility lead to 
increased solid waste  
  Awareness raising about environment and climate 
resilience 
  Appropriate sign boards to be placed along the 
routes and venues 
  Activities 
those 
involve  operation  of  vehicles, 
machinery  and  equipment  must  not  be  conducted 
during  the  hours  when  their  movements  interfere 
seriously with life and livelihoods of the community 
members or wildlife. 
  Selection of well-equipped training centres, 
particularly with adequate sewerage and drainage 
system  
  Adequate disposal of solid waste material to be 
ensured 
  Afforestation and other plantation, such as kitchen 
gardening  
  Community development will be carried out at 
places, where extreme events risks are low-
medium or adequate arrangements are carried out 
  Selected Training centres are to be well-equipped 
with adequate cooling facilities and first aid (to 
protect trainees from heat-waves and hot weather) 
  Capacity building on climate resilient livestock 
husbandry 
  Capacity building on climate resilient farming 
  Promotion of adequate cold storages lead to 
reduce solid waste  
  Provision of adequate solid waste management 
facilities 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
Establishment 
and Operation 
of PMU and 
PIUs  
Social: 
Social: 
  Community access to PMU/PIUs is 
not available or limited 
  Unavailability of Community 
 
complaint mechanism at PMU/PIUs 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
  Well-defined community access to PMU/PIUs will 
be ensured, through consultations, advertisements, 
meetings and seminars together with web-based 
access   
  Participatory planning and design to be considered 
a pre-requisite (particularly participation of women 
will be ensured) 
  Adequate complaint 
registration/mechanism/redress to be 
operationalized 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Noise pollution (particularly due to 
  Well-maintained generators will be used in the 
operation of generators) 
  Air pollution 
  Offices establishment may adversely 
affect plants and shrubs 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds 
  GHG emissions from vehicles  
 
 
Inadequate solid waste disposal  
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
system 
  Expected rise in high-winds and 
cyclones/extreme events 
  Rise in floods due to expected 
increase in extreme events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Water stress and groundwater 
depletion 
project 
  Offices establishment (and operation) will be 
ensured  to have no adverse environmental effects 
  Activities those involve operation of vehicles, 
machinery and equipment must not be conducted 
during the hours when their movements interfere 
seriously with life and livelihoods of the community 
members or wildlife 
  All vehicles in use must be well maintained and in 
good working condition. 
  All vehicles must be operated with designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Adequate disposal of solid waste material will be 
ensured 
  Adequate sewerage and drainage will be ensured 
  PMU/PIUs will be established and operated at 
places, where extreme events risks are low-
medium or adequate arrangements are carried out 
  PMU/PIUs will be equipped with adequate cooling 
facilities and first aid (to protect trainees from heat-
waves and hot weather) 
  Rainwater harvesting will be encouraged at 
PMU/PIUs 
  Groundwater exploitation will be discouraged 
 
Installation of climate and environment friendly air 
conditioners 
Social: 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect livelihood of the people during 
construction period 
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
Maintenance are Weakly (or not) 
defined 
 
  Mechanism for fishermen access to 
various finances and facilities is not 
defined  
Low awareness of fishermen to the 
designed facilities  
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
 
  Adequate project construction planning and 
scheduling will ensure no adverse impacts people 
livelihood 
  Access to alternate routes are to be ensured during 
construction period    
  Participatory planning and design to be ensured 
(particularly participation of women to be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
  Access to various facilities and finances will be 
made clear to fishermen through consultations, 
meetings and seminars 
  Mechanism for fishermen to access finances will be 
well-designed, clearly defined and communicated 
Jetties and 
allied 
infrastructure 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate waste disposal during 
construction 
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
system 
Inadequate waste/excavated material 
disposal 
 
 
 
  Adverse impacts on migratory birds 
movement 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity (such as over-catch of 
fish eggs and new-born after 
construction of the infrastructure) 
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal   
  Sea Level Rise due to changing 
climate 
  Seawater temperature rise  
  Rise in sediment transport 
  Expected rise in high-winds and 
cyclones 
  Rise in floods and tides 
  GHG emissions from boats’ engines 
as well as construction vehicles 
  Variation in fish species and quantum 
  Construction of cold storages 
(insolation needs) 
  Seawater intrusion to rivers and 
aquifers  
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
life  and 
movements 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Adequate planning of labour camps, sewerage and 
drainage system will be ensured 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Fisheries law enforcement will be ensured (by the 
fisheries department) to avoid adverse impacts on 
newly-born fish and fish eggs 
  Fishing will be allowed in pre-defined locations, 
water depth, and season using 
adequate/permissible mesh/net size  
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
Inclusion of climate change assessment together 
with hydrological modelling during infrastructure 
design. 
 
  Use of well-maintained boats (guidelines and 
monitoring framework to be developed by fishery 
department) 
  Climate resilient design of Jetties and allied 
infrastructure considering changes in sea-level rise, 
high-winds, potential cyclones, and changes in 
tides 
  Dredging estimates may consider changes in 
sediment transport  
  Demarcation of low, medium and high tide levels to 
protect fishermen from hazards 
  Awareness raising of the fishermen and line 
departments (through trainings and seminars) on 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
climate change and its impacts on sea-level rise, 
storms etc 
  Adequate clear heights and insolation need to be 
considered in cold storages and cold chain 
  Construction and curing of concrete need adequate 
care and consideration due to expected rise in 
temperature 
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)   
Rural Roads 
Social: 
Social: 
(Farm to 
market roads 
and Fish 
market roads) 
 
Infrastructure development can affect 
livelihood of the people (during 
construction)  
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate waste disposal during 
construction 
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
system 
 
 
  Adverse impacts on migratory birds 
movement 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Embankment erosion 
  Floods due to extreme precipitation 
events 
  Scouring at bridge Piers 
  Expansion Joints damages 
  Road deterioration due to use of 
inadequate asphalt grade 
 
Low visibility during dust-storms 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
 
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
Inadequate labour camps  
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
from labour camps  
Inadequate handling and disposal of 
chemicals 
 
 
 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
life  and 
movements 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate planning of labour camps, sewerage and 
drainage system will be ensured 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Construction and curing of concrete need adequate 
care and consideration due to expected rise in 
temperature 
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Construction will be ensured to avoid adverse 
impacts on eco-system and bio-diversity  
Inclusion of climate change assessment during 
infrastructure design. 
 
  Adequate compaction of road embankments 
  Provision of adequate drainage arrangement 
  Estimation of future scour considering climate 
change scenarios 
  Design and provision appropriate expansion joints 
considering future rise in temperature 
  Selection of recommended grades of asphalt 
considering future rise in temperature 
  Applying adequate road marking and design of 
lights together with safety arrangements 
  Estimation of adequate budget for O&M due to 
potential increase in dust storms  
  Road side plantation together with design of small 
ponds to cater for water needs of the plants/trees 
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
Water Ponds 
Social: 
on climate change 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development can affect 
livelihood of the people (during 
construction)  
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate waste disposal during 
construction 
 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Embankment erosion 
  Floods due to extreme precipitation 
events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
 
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
Inadequate handling and disposal of 
chemicals 
 
  Decline in water availability  
  Excessive evaporation from stored 
water 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
movements 
life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
on climate change 
  Covering surface of stored water by floating balls 
(this may reduce evaporation by about 30%) 
  Adequate liquid limits assessment of the 
construction material and compaction design 
  Plantation on the embankments and in the vicinity 
Irrigation 
Systems/ 
Channels 
Social: 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development can affect 
livelihood of the people (during 
construction)  
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate waste disposal during 
construction 
 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Embankment erosion 
  Floods due to extreme precipitation 
events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
 
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
Inadequate handling and disposal of 
chemicals  
 
  Excessive use of agro-chemicals 
  Rise in cropwater requirement 
  Rise in sediment transport 
 
  Rise in evaporation losses 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
Increase in scouring at aqueducts etc 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
movements 
life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
on climate change 
  Design of irrigation channels to accommodate 
future enhanced irrigation requirements and 
sediment load (based on climate change scenarios 
  Design consideration related to increase in floods 
and subsequent scouring 
  Provision of concrete slab or pipe systems for 
irrigation systems to reduce losses 
  Plantation along irrigation systems/watercourses 
  Adaptation of latest water efficient and climate 
change resilient practices, particularly in 
irrigation/agriculture field 
  Adoption of Integrated Pest Management while 
discouraging excessive use of agro-chemicals 
Check dams 
Social: 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect livelihood of the people (during 
construction)  
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate waste disposal during 
construction 
 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Erosion may increase  
  Floods are likely to increase due to 
extreme precipitation events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
 
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
movements 
life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
on climate change 
  Design consideration related to increase in floods 
and subsequent scouring 
  Provision of adequate height and apron 
arrangement 
  Tree plantation in the vicinity 
Social: 
Drinking water 
supply systems 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect livelihood of the people (due to 
groundwater depletion in the vicinity)  
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
Inadequate labour camps  
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
from labour camps  
 
 
 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Floods are likely to increase due to 
extreme precipitation events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Water availability/scarcity 
  Groundwater depletion 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
movements 
life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
on climate change 
  Design consideration related to increase in floods 
and subsequent scouring 
  Provision of adequate height and apron 
arrangement 
  Tree plantation in the vicinity 
  Detailed assessment to map the existing facilities 
and gaps in water supply schemes and 
identification of new water resources schemes 
  Additional drilling (10-20 ft) will be needed and 
carried out in areas, where precipitation is likely to 
decline, whereas in areas where precipitation is 
predicted to increase may need flood protection 
(such as raising of well side levels by 1-2 ft above 
natural ground level) and water quality assurance 
through enhancing RO plants capacity.  
  Plantation near to the well and or water Tanks 
  Boreholes to be discouraged in groundwater 
stressed areas. 
  Rain water harvesting and its awareness among 
communities should be improved to harness the 
depleting water table 
Flood 
Protection 
Schemes 
Social: 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect livelihood of the people (during 
construction) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate disposal of 
excavated/waste materials 
Inadequate labour camps  
Inadequate sewerage and drainage 
from labour camps  
 
 
 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  Adverse effects on eco-system and 
biodiversity  
 
Inadequate chemicals disposal 
  GHG emissions from construction 
vehicles/machinery 
  Floods are likely to increase due to 
extreme precipitation events 
  Rise in temperature and heat-waves 
  Rise in floods due to extreme events 
  Variation in sediment size and load 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Construction  work  and  other  activities  that  involve 
operation  of  vehicles,  machinery  and  equipment 
must not be conducted during the hours when their 
movements 
life  and 
livelihoods of the community members or wildlife. 
interfere  seriously  with 
  Adequate disposal of waste/excavated material will 
be ensured 
  Construction planning and scheduling will ensure to 
avoid disturbance to migratory birds, eco-system 
and bio-diversity  
  Sheds and first aid should be made available at 
sites for labours (to protect them from heat-waves 
and hot weather)  
  Awareness raising (through trainings and seminars) 
on climate change 
  Design consideration related to increase in floods 
and subsequent scouring 
  Provision of adequate height and apron 
arrangement (Climate resilient flood protection 
works) 
RO Plants 
Social: 
Social: 
 
Infrastructure development may 
affect livelihood of the people (during 
construction) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and 
 
Maintenance are not clearly defined 
Lack of mechanisms for participative 
planning (particularly involvement of 
women) 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Air pollution may raise 
  Noise pollution may raise 
  Vehicle movement may adversely 
affect movement of pedestrians, 
animals, and birds  
Inadequate disposal of waste 
materials 
Inadequate handling and disposal of 
chemicals 
 
 
  Significant ground water depletion 
  Adequate construction planning and scheduling will 
ensure no adverse impacts on people livelihoods  
  Participatory planning and design will be ensured 
(particularly participation of women will be ensured) 
  Responsibilities for Operation and Maintenance will 
be well-defined, and spread through workshops 
and meetings 
Environmental and Climate: 
  Awareness raising and training on hazardous 
substances should be conducted for stakeholders. 
  Training on maintenance, operation and storage of 
chemicals, machinery and vehicles is necessary for 
the operating personnel. 
  The personnel involved in civil works and 
machinery installation and use need to be trained 
on occupational hazards and equipped with 
appropriate protection gear-masks, safety googles, 
earmuffs, hazmat suits, etc.and trained on proper 
use of the gear. 
Main themes 
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk 
Factors 
Mitigation Measures at the design stage 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. If stored 
without use for a prolonged period, they must be 
regularly checked for possible leak of chemicals. 
  All hazardous chemicals, including fuel, must be 
properly stowed and away from water source, 
locations subject to natural or man-made hazards 
  Materials and chemicals that consist of small 
particles or pieces must be stored in a container 
with a watertight cover, or if non-reactive with 
water, may be sprinkled with water for dust control. 
  All machinery and vehicles in use must be well 
maintained and in good working condition. 
  All machinery and vehicles must be operated with 
designated fuel. 
  Appropriate sign boards will be placed along the 
routes 
  Adequate disposal of waste material will be 
ensured 
  Boreholes to be discouraged in groundwater 
stressed areas. 
  Drinking water quality should be monitored 
  Rusted and old water supply lines should be 
 
replaced 
Identification of ground water recharges potential 
sites and measures together with recharge wells. 
  Rain water harvesting implementation and 
knowledge among communities should be 
improved to harness the depleting water table 
Pakistan
Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project II
Project Design Report
Annex: Esmp Matrix 2
Document Date:
25/10/2019
Project No.
2000002331
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Attachment 2: Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements  
Actions 
Indicator  
Responsibility 
Time Frame  
Cost/ 
Budget 
Source 
Environment  
Project (and sub-
projects) 
environmental 
requirements and 
responsibilities need to 
be clearly defined. 
Detailed plans and 
designs for sub-
projects developed. 
Plans to be endorsed 
by communities and 
approved by the 
project 
management/social 
mobilization partners. 
Preparation of 
environmental guidelines 
for sub-projects. 
Environmental guidelines 
including screening, 
approvals, mitigation 
measures and well 
defined responsibilities. 
Design consultants in 
coordination with 
PMU/PIUs, and 
concerned line 
departments (EPA), if 
required 
2019-2025 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
2019 
project 
and 
implementation period (2020-
2025). 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
Detailed Plans and 
Designs for sub-Projects. 
Community and 
stakeholders 
Endorsement/consultation 
undertaken of plans 
Design consultants in 
coordination with  
PMU/PIUs , and 
concerned line 
departments, if 
required 
Approval of plans by PIU 
and Concerned line 
department (EPA), if 
required. 
Design consultant to 
prepare detailed plans 
and designs for sub-
projects. 
Plans to include details of 
infrastructure 
development together with 
financing details including 
O&M responsibilities. 
Plans to include detailed 
social, environmental and 
climate change 
assessments. 
Plans including O&M 
responsibilities and exit 
strategies developed in a 
participatory manner 
Environmental  
mitigation actions, 
such as soil erosion 
control, solid waste 
management, water, 
air and noise quality, 
eco-system, agro-
chemicals, and other 
hazardous chemicals   
Implementation of the 
Environmental and 
Social 
Management 
(ESMP) 
Plan 
Climate Change 
Indepth analysis of 
Climate change 
impacts assessment, 
and 
adaptation/mitigation 
measures need to be 
understood. 
Plans to be approved by 
the project team and 
relevant line departments. 
Guidelines prepared for 
reducing environmental, 
impacts for various sub-
projects of GLLSP-II. 
Training and awareness 
of stakeholders groups 
Investment in 
environmental mitigation 
measures including safe 
disposal of waste, 
chemicals reduction, 
adoption of IPM, rainwater 
harvesting   
and plastic substitution 
etc. 
Implementation 
responsibilities to be 
defined, allocated and 
costed. 
Bid Documents and ToRs 
for the various 
components need to 
incorporate the 
ESMP requirements 
Preparation of 
indepth/detailed climate 
change analysis and 
adaptation/mitigation 
guidelines for projects. 
Training for the 
community and 
government officials to 
understand climate 
change impacts together 
with adaptation and 
2019 
project 
and 
implementation period (2020-
2025). 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
Guidelines prepared 
Increased awareness and 
capacity of 
stakeholders groups 
Consultants  
PMU/PIUs ,  
Sub-project cost includes 
investment in 
environmental  
Mitigation Measures 
and concerned line 
department (EPA), if 
required   
Bid documents include 
requirements 
for the environment 
safety 
measures. 
and  mitigation 
Contractors  and 
implementation 
departments/SMP 
2019 
project 
and 
implementation period (2020-
2025). 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
Indepth/Detailed Climate 
Change Analysis and 
Adaptation Guidelines 
PMU/PIUs 
and specialized 
climate change 
consultants. 
2019 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II  
Climate change 
adaptation initiatives are 
being implemented. 
Consultants and 
PMU/PIUs 
2020-2025 
mitigation measures 
(awareness granted). 
Responsibilities and 
financing for climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation is 
agreed. 
Preparation of guidance 
notes for project design 
standards including 
reference to existing 
standards of the 
concerned departments 
(such as FAO, Fisheries, 
SMP, and C&W 
department). 
Participative and 
sustainable climate 
change 
adaptation/mitigation 
program is implemented.. 
Climate resilient 
infrastructure design 
(such as protection 
from floods and 
heatwaves) 
Potential Climate 
Change Risks are 
reduced. 
Social 
A well-defined and 
strong social 
mobilization process to 
facilitate the delivery of 
programme activities 
in an inclusive and 
effective manner 
Detailed technical 
proposal of the social 
mobilisattion partner 
elaborate mobilization 
strategy 
Implementation of the 
social mobilisation 
/poverty graduation 
strategy 
Project design standards 
agreed and incorporate 
climate change 
requirements. 
Consultants in 
coordinaton with 
PMU/PIUs 
2019-2025 
Monitoring of climate 
adaptation/mitigation 
programs and climate 
damage. 
PMU/PIUs 
2020-2025 
Approved social 
mobilisation 
plan/strategy/poverty 
graduation strategy 
Consultants in 
coordination with 
PMU/PIUs  
2019-2020 
2020-2025 
About $ 0.48 
million is 
allocated for 
plantation 
activities and 
embedded 
cost/ GLLSP-
II 
About $ 0.48 
million is 
allocated for 
plantation 
activities and 
embedded 
cost/ GLLSP-
II 
$5.0 million/ 
GLLSP-II 
Stakeholders 
participatory planning, 
design and 
Detailed information and 
engagement with 
stakeholders including 
Guidelines for 
stakeholder engagement 
in design of sub projects. 
PMU/PIUs, 
Consultants and   
Community 
2019 
$0.39 million/ 
GLLSP-II 
implementation of the 
sub-projects 
farmers, disadvantaged 
groups, women and youth 
Stakeholders 
Final plan and design to 
be endorsed by 
representative 
stakeholders. 
Gender equitablity is 
adhered in 
selection/targetting 
criteria. 
Training and 
implementation of the 
Community Led 
Empowerment 
Documentation of 
stakeholder engagement 
and endorsement. 
2020-2025 
Gender equitability plan 
prepared. 
PMU/PIUs, 
Consultants 
2019 
$4.7 million/ 
GLLSP-II 
2020-2025 
Requirements to be 
defined in compliance to 
EPA and IFAD 
requirements. 
Public 
consultation/disclosure 
effectively documented. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
requirements would be 
defined; including physical 
and financial progress and 
reporting  
Quarterly and annual 
reports. 
Approved plan for 
monitoring and evaluation 
include social, 
environmental and 
climate change mitigation 
indicators.  
Monitoring and evaluation 
reports. 
ESMP Reports as 
required 
PMU/PIUs, and 
Consultants 
2019-2025 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
PMU/PIUs, and 
Consultants 
2019 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
2020-2025 
PMU/PIUs, and 
Consultants 
2020 to 2025 
Embedded/ 
GLLSP-II 
Gender equitable 
approaches are 
developed for 
improving income, 
food, nutrition and 
asset tranfer. 
Monitoring 
Effective consultation 
and public disclosure 
of social, 
environmental and 
climate change 
documentation 
Overall monitoring and 
evaluation needs to be 
coordinated and 
effective to meet 
project evaluation 
requirements. 
Routine monitoring of 
social, environmental 
and climate change 
risks activities 
especially progress of 
ESMP. 
