Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  27-Jul 2017 
2000000899-PG 
Project No.: 
4533-PG 
Report No.: 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
B.  Organisational framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
E.  Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
B.  Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
vii 
viii 
1 
1 
5 
7 
7 
9 
9 
19 
21 
21 
22 
25 
26 
28 
29 
30 
30 
31 
31 
32 
i 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Country and rural context background ........................................................................ 35 
Appendix 1: 
Poverty, targeting and gender ..................................................................................... 45 
Appendix 2: 
Country performance and lessons learned ................................................................. 59 
Appendix 3: 
Detailed description ..................................................................................................... 63 
Appendix 4: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements ........................................... 103 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management ...................................... 133 
Appendix 7:       Financial management and disbursement arrangements……………………………  139 
Procurement .............................................................................................................. 151 
Appendix 8: 
Project cost and financing ......................................................................................... 161 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix10:  Economic and financial analysis………………………………………………………. .. 181 
Appendix 11:  Draft Project Implementation Manual .......................................................................  187 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies .................................................................................. 189 
Appendix 13:  Content of Project Life File ........................................................................................ 191 
ii 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD1.0 
= 
= 
PGK 
PGK3.1 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
ABCD 
ACIAR 
ADB 
AGO 
AIC 
AWPB 
BDSP 
BSP 
CEFI 
CIF 
DA 
DAL 
DoF 
DoT 
DPI 
DSIP 
EIRR 
ENB 
ENBDC 
EOI 
EU 
FAM 
FBS 
FER 
FFS 
FIAU 
FPDA 
GBV 
GDP 
GESI 
GM 
HACCP 
HDI 
HIES 
ICT 
IFC 
ISM 
KM 
M&E 
MIS 
MSP 
NADP 
NAQIA 
NARI 
NGO 
NPV 
PBA 
PC 
PHAMA 
PMU 
PNG 
PPAP 
PSC 
Assets Based Community Development 
Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research 
Asian Development Bank 
Auditor General’s Office  
Agriculture Investment Corporation 
Annual Work Plans and Budget 
Business Development Service Provider 
Bank South Pacific 
Centre for Financial Inclusion 
Cost Insurance Freight 
Designated Account 
Department of Agriculture and Livestock 
Department of Finance 
Department of Treasury 
Departments of Primary Industry 
District Service Improvement Programme 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
East New Britain 
East New Britain Development Corporation 
Expression of Interest 
European Union 
Financial and Administrative Manager 
Farmer Business School 
Functional Expenditure Review 
Farmer Field Schools 
Functional Expenditure Review Implementation and Advisory Unit  
Fresh Produce Development Agency 
Gender Based Violence 
Gross Development Product 
Gender Equity and Social Inclusion 
General Manager 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point 
Human Development Index 
Household and Income Expenditure Survey 
Information and Communication Technologies 
International Finance Corporation 
Implementation Support Mission 
Knowledge Management 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Management Information System 
Multi-Stakeholders’ Platform 
National Agriculture Development Programme 
National Agriculture Quarantine and Inspection Authority 
National Agriculture Research Institute 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
Net Present Value 
Project Bank Account 
Project Coordinator 
Pacific Horticulture and Agriculture Market Access Programme 
Project Management Unit 
Papua New Guinea 
Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project 
Project Steering Committee 
iv 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
PSIP 
RFP 
SECAP 
SME 
SOE 
SP 
TA 
TAC 
UAV 
UNCDF 
VCE 
VEW 
WA 
WOP 
WP 
Province Service Improvement Programme 
Request for Payment 
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Statement of Expenditure 
Service Provider 
Technical Assistance 
Technical Appraisal Committee 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
United Nations Capital Development Fund 
Village Community Educator 
Village Extension Worker 
Withdrawal Application 
Without Project 
With Project 
v 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Map of the project area 
vi 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary 
The Market for Village Farmers – Maket Bilong Vilis Fama (MVF) aims at improving the livelihoods of 
village farming households in the target provinces, by facilitating their transition from semi-subsistence 
agriculture to market-oriented production and farming as a business. The project’s development goal 
is  to  achieve  sustainable  increased  returns  to  village  farming  households  from  increased  marketed 
production.  
The  project  will  predominately  focus  on  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector  which  involves  approximately 
94% of village farmers across PNG. In addition, the project provide limited investment to pilot activities 
focussed  on  stimulating  the  development  of  the  galip  nut  value  chain  as  this  has  potential  to  be 
become a new export cash crop for village farmers in PNG.  
The project will target six provinces of PNG. Activities related to the fresh produce sub-sector will be 
implemented  in  four  provinces  in  the  Highlands  Region  (Western  Highlands,  Jiwaka,  Simbu  and 
Eastern Highlands) and one province in the Momase Region, Morobe. Galip nut related activities will 
be  implemented  in  East  New  Britain.  MVF  targets  around  25,000  farming  households,  benefiting 
approximately 125,000 people.  
The MVF will support the development of sustainable business partnerships, where farmers will have 
secure  and  remunerative  market  options  incentivizing  them  to  invest  in  increasing  the  production  of 
better quality fresh produce, whereas buyers will obtain reliable and consistent supply of vegetables in 
line  with  the  demand  of  more  remunerative  market  segments.  The  design  builds  on  the  experience 
gained in the IFAD-World Bank-European Union Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project, which 
has developed  successful  models for supporting partnerships  between buyers  and small growers of 
coffee and cocoa. The project also aligns to IFAD’s 4Ps model.  
The MVF includes three interlinked components:  
  Component  1  -  Inclusive  Business  Partnerships  supports  all  the  activities  required  to  build  and 
implement business partnerships bringing together village farming households and buyers mainly 
in the fresh produce sub-sector. The component also includes a small set of activities to test the 
commercialization of galip nuts (for example dried galip nuts and virgin galip nut oil); 
  Component  2  –  Supportive  Value  Chain  Investment  complements  partnership  investment  with 
interventions  that  aim  at  impacting  the  whole  value  chain  by:  (i)  improving  access  to  production 
areas  through  spot  improvements  on  feeder  roads;  and  (ii)  facilitating  the  access  of  farming 
households and other players in the value chain to affordable and diversified financial services; 
  Component 3 – Collective Governance and Project Management includes all the activities aiming 
at  promoting  a  favourable  policy  and  institutional  environment  to  support  the  development  of 
inclusive fresh produce and galip nut value chains. 
MVF  will adopt  a family-based targeting approach  to increase the capacities of participating farming 
households,  and  especially  of  women  and  youth,  to  take  advantage  of  project  benefits,  through 
financial, business and nutrition education. The approach will also be used to engage the community 
to create a supportive environment for household level activities and to support broad inclusion.  
The  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  will  be  the  lead  executing  agency  and  the  Fresh 
Produce  Development  Agency  (FPDA)  will  be  the  implementing  agency  for  the  project.  A  Project 
Management Unit will be embedded within FPDA to support project implementation.  Provincial teams 
composed  of  FPDA  and  district  staff  will  support  and  monitor  partnership  development  and 
implementation.  
The total project cost amounts to USD50.26, of which IFAD would finance 50.7%, the GoPNG 5.7% 
%,  beneficiaries  2.4%,  financial  institutions  8.4%,  provinces  and  districts  25.9%.  The  project  has  a 
financing  gap  of  approximately  6.9%  which  is  expected  to  be  filled  by  IFAD  through  an  increase  in 
PBAS resources. 
vii 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Goal: Improved livelihoods of 
village farmers’ households (HH) 
in target provinces  
Development Objective: 
Increased returns to village 
farming households from 
increased marketed production  
Outcome 1: 
Village farming households have 
access to markets and services 
in the target value chains 
Outputs: 
1.1  Different  types  of  business 
partnerships involving FP/GN are 
implemented 
1.2  Farming  households 
in 
partnerships  are  trained  to  use 
improved technologies 
Outcome 2: 
Improved value chain 
environment to facilitate small 
farmers’ inclusion 
  30 % increase in HH asset ownership 
index  
  No of persons receiving services * 
  Percentage of total farmer fresh 
produce production sold to market 
increased by at least 40% 
  Percentage of total galip nut production 
per farmer sold to galip plant 
  Yield in selected fresh produce crops 
increased by 40% on average  
  Annual volume of galip nut sold to plant 
(tons) 
  Percentage of persons reporting 
increase in production * 
  23,200 farming households (23,200 
men and 23,200 women) involved in 
project-supported partnerships  
   At least 20,000 trained in production 
practices and/ or technologies * 
  At  least  18,000  people  reporting  using 
financial services * 
  At  least  10,000  farming  households 
reporting  improved  physical  access  to 
markets,  processing  and  storage 
facilities * 
0 
0 
0% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Baseline 
1 
Interim 
review 1 
0% 
Interim 
review 2 
15% 
End 
Target 
30% 
Source 
Frequency 
Project 
survey 
Interim review 
2 and project 
end 
Responsi
bility 
PMU + 
FPDA 
Partnership 
reports 
Quarterly 
reports 
Lead 
Partners 
Partnership 
reports 
Quarterly 
reports 
Lead 
Partners 
Assumptions 
(A) / Risks (R) 
Continued 
GoPNG 
commitment to 
improve returns 
to farmers in 
agriculture value 
chains 
Private investors 
interested in 
partnering with 
men and women 
village farmers 
15% 
30% 
40% 
20% 
50% 
90% 
20% 
100 
30% 
40% 
200 
500 
20% 
40% 
75% 
10,000 
22,000 
23,200 
Partnership 
reports 
Quarterly 
reports 
Lead 
Partners 
9,000 
15,000 
20,000 
9,000 
15,000 
18,000 
0 
5,000 
10,000 
Biannual 
reports 
 
CEFI 
 
 
CEFI 
reports 
PMU 
reports 
 
PMU 
1 Will be established based on the baseline study to be carried out at project start. 
viii 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Baseline 
Interim 
review 1 
Interim 
review 2 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
9 
50 
100 
6 
20 
 
 
 
 
CEFI 
reports 
PMU 
reports 
Assumptions 
(A) / Risks (R) 
Responsi
bility 
 
CEFI 
Biannual 
reports 
Biannual 
reports 
 
PMU 
Outputs: 
2.1 Financial institutions (FIs) 
with improved capacities to serve 
target value chains players 
2.2 Improved, climate resilient 
feeder roads from main 
production areas to main road 
Outcome 3: 
Organised industry players 
contribute to policy development 
and sector coordination for 
inclusive industry growth 
Outputs: 
3.1 Multi-stakeholders’ platforms 
created and trained 
3.2 Policy and regulatory 
instruments prepared 
3.3 MIS system in place at FPDA 
and FPDA staff trained 
  At  least  9  financial  service  providers 
in  delivering  outreach 
financial  products  and 
supported 
strategies, 
services to rural areas * 
  100 km of climate-resilient feeder roads 
rehabilitated * 
  Up  to  20  districts  have  maintenance 
arrangements 
to  sustain 
feeder  road  practicability  after  spot 
improvements after spot improvements 
in  place 
  Two national, at least 3 provincial and 
10 district-based multi-stakeholders’ 
platforms regularly meeting 
  At  least  three  policy  and  regulatory 
measures  proposed  to  policy  makers 
for approval, ratification or amendment 
* 
  FPDA MIS operational FPDA MIS 
operational  
  Two  national,  at  least  3  provincial  and 
10  district-based  multi-stakeholders’ 
platforms supported * 
  At 
least 
three 
knowledge products completed * 
policy 
relevant 
  MIS  in  place  and  number  of  staff 
trained 
  MIS  in  place  and  number  of  staff 
trained 
  Annual 
set 
evidence-based 
of 
knowledge  products  posted  on  FPDA 
website as of year 3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2/0/3 
2/2/6 
2/3/10 
0 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
 
PMU 
reports 
 
Biannual 
reports 
 
PMU 
2/0/3 
2/2/6 
2/3/10 
 
PMU 
reports 
 
Biannual 
reports 
 
PMU 
0 
2 
3 
1/25 
1/35 
1/35 
1 
1 
1 
ix 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
Growing,  diverse  population.  Papua  New  Guinea  is  a  relatively  young  nation  (it  became 
independent in 1975) with a territory composed of more than 600 islands of various sizes and a  total 
land  area  of  460,000  km2.  The  harsh  terrain  contributes  to  the  isolation  of  many  rural  communities, 
who live far from any road connection. Around 52% of the population is under 19 years of age, which 
reflects  a  high  annual  demographic  growth  rate  averaging  2.9%.  Due  to  significant  rural-urban 
migration,  the  urban  population  rates  are  growing  faster  (4.5%  per  annum),  contributing  to  social, 
economic and environmental stress, particularly among youth. Population density varies considerably 
between the highlands,  which constitute 16% of the territory, hold most fertile land and host 42% of 
the population, and the lowlands and islands, which hold 54% of the population over 66% of the total 
land area. 
2. 
Strong  economic  growth,  dual  economy.  PNG  is  a  lower-middle-income  economy  with  a 
GNP  per  capita  of  USD  2,381.  However,  despite  an  average  5%  growth  over  the  last  decade,  the 
country’s economy remains dominated by two sectors: a formal, largely capital-intensive sector which 
draws  on  the  country’s  rich  endowment  in  natural  resources,  particularly  in  the  mining  and  energy 
industry, and  a largely  informal agriculture sector that employs  the majority  of the active  population. 
Rapid  economic  growth  has  not  transformed  into  improved  livelihoods  or  increased  opportunities  to 
participate  in  the  monetised  economy  for  the  40%  of  the  population  that  live  under  the  poverty  line 
and  are  unable  to  meet  minimum  food  and  non-food  needs.    With  a  stagnant  0.50  Gini  coefficient, 
high  inequality  has  been  subsiding  over  the  past  four  decades  and  it  is  estimated  that  20%  of  the 
population earn 80% of the total income.  The rural/urban divide also conceals significant differences 
across different urban and rural areas: for instance, the incidence of hardship is significantly higher in 
the  highlands  and  remote  and  isolated  islands,  compared  to  other  rural  areas.  Within  each  of  the 
regions,  there  are  again  significant  variations  by  province,  and  then  again  by  district  within  most 
provinces. 
Poverty and nutrition.  Poverty is more prevalent in the rural areas where people have lower 
3. 
access  to  services,  education,  markets  and  economic  inputs.  More  than  three  quarters  of  the 
population depend on semi-subsistence agricultural production as a main livelihood strategy. A large 
share  of  household  consumption  is  self-produced,  with  cash  incomes  used  for  essential  non-food 
items  (school  fees,  kerosene,  and  garden  tools),  to  improve  diet  quality  by  allowing  consumption  of 
purchased  protein  and  energy-dense  staples,  and  to  provide  insurance  for  periods  of  agricultural 
stress. Unexpectedly, in rural areas, where access to customary land should lead to lower incidence 
of food poverty, the rate of food poverty was estimated at 28.5% of the population compared to 14.4% 
of  the  population  in  urban  areas. Broad national poverty  trends  and  symptoms  include:  (i)  an 
increasing  welfare  divide  between  households  with  access  to  formal  employment  and  households 
dependent  on  the  informal  economy;    (ii)  low  life  expectancy  (63  years);  (iii)  underweight  children 
(29%), severe to chronic undernutrition and malnutrition, with marked deficiencies in animal and plant 
proteins; (iv) 36% of the population is illiterate and poverty is strongly correlated with education levels 
of  the  household  head;  and  (v)  poor  performance  on  all  Human  Development  Indicators  (HDI). 
Further details on poverty are in Appendix 2. 
4. 
Agriculture. Agriculture employs 80% of the active population and  accounts for 27% of GDP. 
Most of the farming sector is held by about 4.3 million smallholders, or village farmers, who operate 
close to subsistence level. Diversified farming systems are dominated by food crops (tubers, banana, 
sago),  which  provide  most  of  the  food  consumed  in  the  country,  with  pigs,  poultry  and  cash  crops 
(mainly  coffee,  cocoa  and  copra)  supplementing  income.  Low  availability  and  high  cost  of  modern 
inputs  and  technologies,  lack  of  irrigation  and  low  access  to  support  services  (and  in  particular  to 
under-funded public extension) contribute to low yields. High logistical costs due to the poor transport 
network,  and  the  lack  of  market  organisation  and  of  market  information  further  discourage  small 
farmers from raising production for the market – it is estimated that only 4% of the country’s land is 
used  for  commercially-oriented  agriculture  production.  Finally,  while  high  rainfall,  long  dry  seasons 
and  excessive  cloud  cover  are  common  constraints  to  agricultural  development,  they  are  further 
aggravated by increasing climate-change related hazards.  
1 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
5. 
Gender-based discrimination. While they have a prominent role in both production and post-
harvesting,  women  have  considerably  less  access  to  services  (as  well  as  to  education  and  health) 
than  men.  They  also  have  limited  control  over  the  use  of  productive  resources  and  limited 
participation  in  decision-making.  On  virtually  every  measure  of  social  and  economic  wellbeing  and 
empowerment (from income to school enrolment, life expectancy and parliamentary representation), 
males  score  more  highly.    Gender-based  violence  is  shockingly  high  and  is  widespread  within  the 
family  and  in  public  spaces  such  as  markets  and  public  transportation,  severely  affecting  women’s 
abilities to participate in the economy, control business profits and assets and support their families, 
thereby contributing to increased poverty. PNG is ranked 158 in the 2014 Gender Inequality Index, out 
of 188 countries.  
6. 
Access  to  land.  With  97%  of  the  land  under  customary  tenure  and  considerable  social  and 
cultural  diversity,  land  tenure  systems  vary  greatly  throughout  the  country.  While  land  disputes  are 
common and intensify under the impact of high demographic rates and an increased number of large-
scale  extractive  resource  industries,  they  do  not  affect  food  crop  production  systems,  particularly  in 
the Highlands. It is assumed that the annual (and not perennial) nature of the crops, coupled with the 
relatively  low  scale  of  development  and  the  system  of  tenure  ownership  by  family  units,  may  have 
contributed  to  this  tenable  outcome.  Nevertheless,  the  commonly  used  Clan  Land  User  Agreement 
(CLUA)  should  be  used  to  give  assurance  to  interested  parties  on  the  tenure  security  of  land  used. 
CLUA is a standard land use agreement signed between the land developer and several clan leaders, 
which can be used by clan members in the absence of legal land titles for bank collaterals. 
7. 
New business models.  New business models offer potential  to curb some of the constraints 
affecting the rural sector and to improve the access of small producers’ to markets and services. New 
models include: service-oriented cooperatives; limited liability companies and nucleus farms providing 
access  to  inputs,  technical  assistance,  transport,  storage  and  markets;  partnerships  between 
smallholders and agribusiness (exporters, processing companies, supermarkets and hotels) sourcing 
from  small  farmers  and  advertising  local  origin;  and  outgrowers’  schemes  supplying  services  to 
smallholders.  Private  service  providers  become  available  to  provide  technical  and  management 
services to farmers’ organisations.  
8. 
Fresh  produce  sector.  Population  growth  at  an  estimated  2.3%  per  year,  combined  with 
internal migration to urban and peri-urban areas, generate increased demand for food products, which 
is further intensified by  a growing middle class and the expatriate community in  the mining and gas 
industry.  It  is  estimated  that  the  total  market  demand  for  fresh  produce  is  1.32  million  tonnes  per 
annum,  of  which  about  60%  is  covered  by  local  production.  Conversely,  about  60  %  of  the  modern 
market  segments  (supermarkets,  catering  companies,  hotels,  public  institutions)  are  yet  to  be 
captured  by  PNG  producers.  While  the  ban  placed  on  importing  fruits  and  vegetables  had  been 
relaxed because of shortages and rising prices, the GoPNG announced that it was now reinstating it 
for fourteen fruits and vegetables. 
9. 
Fresh produce is farmed by 94% of village-based families throughout the country. The majority 
grow  small  vegetable  gardens  for  family  consumption  and  sell  tiny  surpluses  on  local  markets 
whenever  they  need  cash.  As  urban  demand  is  growing,  increasing  numbers  of  highland  farmers 
attempt  to  switch  from  semi-subsistence  production  to  market-oriented  farming.  Smallholders’ 
capacity  to  deliver  larger  volumes  of  good  quality  produce  is  however  affected  by  low  access  to 
inputs,  lack  of  support  services  and  lack  of  simple  irrigation  technologies  to  mitigate  the  effects  of 
more  recurrent  droughts  and  to  sustain  consistent  production  over  longer  periods  of  time.  Low 
outreach  of  financial  institutions  in  the  rural  areas,  combined  with  a  lack  of  financial  education, 
constrains  farmers’  ability  to  turn  to  credit  for  the  financing  of  farm  improvements.  Market  access  is 
hampered  by  the  lack  of  collaboration  between  smallholders,  inadequate  post-harvest  management 
and long travel distances to urban markets.  
10.  The growing demand for fresh produce has also expanded the range of players along the value 
chain. However, largely informal and unstructured trading relationships result in high price variability, 
surpluses  and  shortages,  as  well  as  high  wastage  levels.  Poor  buyer-seller  relationships  are 
compounded  by  the  lack  of  postharvest  handling  systems,  limited  postharvest  infrastructure,  lack  of 
in 
cool  chain  management, 
transportation to market, due to damaged roads and changing shipping and airfreight schedules. The 
lack  of  access  to  finance  eventually  affects  farmers’  incentive  to  sell,  as  buyers  are  unable  to  pay 
them  on  delivery.  However,  the  demand  for  PNG  produced  produce  in  domestic  markets  is 
transport  equipment,  and 
lack  of  specialised 
frequent  delays 
2 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
strengthening,  especially  in  regards  to  import  replacement.  This  is  reflected  in  the  development  of 
enhanced  buyer-seller  relationships,  evidenced  by  emerging  examples  of  improved  communication 
between end markets and fresh produce suppliers, new business relationships and a greater whole of 
chain awareness of limitations in value chain infrastructure, equipment and distribution systems.  
11.  Galip nut. Canarium indicum is an indigenous tree known as galip which grows in the wild in 
low land areas. Aside from producing edible nuts, which are part of local diets, it is an excellent shade 
tree  for  cocoa.  Efforts  to  domesticate  the  crop  and  develop  manual  processing  technologies  have 
been  led  by  the  National  Agriculture  Research  Institute  (NARI)  since  the  early  2000s,  with  support 
from  the  Australian  Centre  for  International  Agriculture  Research  (ACIAR)  and  the  European  Union 
(EU). Adding to the current stock of wild trees, several public and private initiatives are promoting the 
planting of galip trees, mostly for intercropping with cocoa (see Appendix 1 for details). It is expected 
that the volume of nuts available for processing will reach 50-70,000 tonnes of nuts in shell by 2030, 
and  yield  some  7,000  to  10,000  tonnes  of  saleable  products  (dried  nuts  and  high  quality  virgin  oil). 
The  inclusion  of  galip  as  a  priority  export  crop  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  Fresh  Produce  Industry 
Working  Group  (a  public-private  multi-stakeholder  platform)  is  one  more  indication  of  this  growing 
interest. 
12.  Global tree nut production has increased by 56% compared with 2004/2005, with higher rates 
achieved  by  costlier  types  of  nuts  catering  for  top-end  markets  such  as  pine  nuts,  pecans  and 
macadamia, which have achieved respectively 87%, 60% and 55% growth in the last ten years. Over 
the same period, total consumption  of tree nuts has grown by 53%.  With a strong global market for 
nuts of all types, particularly those with a favourable health profile like galip, galip nuts could become 
a profitable smallholder export crop, provided processing and marketing pathways can be developed. 
Several  investors  active  in  the  cocoa  or  fruit  tree  sector  are  interested  in  scaling  up.  The  National 
Agriculture  Research  Institute  (NARI),  with  support  from  the  Australian  Centre  for  International 
Agriculture  Research  (ACIAR)  is  developing  a  small,  mechanised  pilot  processing  unit  line,  which  
started  purchasing  nuts  from  farmers,  as  well  as  tests  on  the  domestic  market.  The  NARI/ACIAR 
project is expected to build private sector confidence and facilitate their later investment in a privately 
owned  commercial  plant.  Indeed,  this  set  of  initiatives  has  stirred  growing  interest  on  behalf  of 
farmers,  planters  and  other  players  down  the  value  chain,  who  are  looking  at  galip  as  a  new  cash 
crop  with commercial potential.  However, a number of gaps  are  yet to be  addressed to  achieve the 
demonstration of a profitable business model. These include: a resource assessment to estimate the 
stock of trees as well as their age and condition; an understanding of how to efficiently organise the 
supply  chain  from  trees  to  plant  and  of  related  costs;  market  development  beyond  the  relatively 
narrow domestic market; a model for commercially operating the pilot plant (in lieu of its operation by 
a  research  station);  agronomic  practices;  tree  selection  and  propagation;  and  a  clear  roadmap  for 
developing  the  industry.  In  addition,  a  public-private  strategy  is  needed  to  build  on  current 
achievements and nurture the development of a nascent industry. 
13.  Policies. Papua New Guinea Vision 2050 outlines the long-term strategy for the country. The 
main objective is to shift the economy currently dominated by the mining and energy sectors to broad-
based growth in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, eco-tourism and manufacturing, with a view to expand 
household income, enhance socio-economic performance and improve overall HDI ranking. The PNG 
Strategic Development Plan (2010-2030) aims at transforming PNG into a prosperous middle-income 
country  by  2030,  by  promoting  broad-based  growth.  Objectives  for  the  agriculture  sector  are  a  five-
fold  increase  in  agricultural  production,  mostly  through  improved  land  use  and  productivity.  Public-
private partnerships are to become a cornerstone of the sector development. The National Agriculture 
Development Programme (NADP) (2007-2016) aims at stimulating economic growth in the agriculture 
sector by increasing income earning opportunities, focusing on increased private sector participation 
and  on  three  priority  sub-sectors,  which  include  food  and  horticultural  crops.  Another  key  NADP 
objective  is  to  improve  the  recognition  of  women’s  contributions  to  rural  industries  and  to  increase 
opportunities  for  women’s  decision  making  in  agriculture.  Key  priorities  of  NADP  are:  agriculture 
research  and  extension;  food  and  horticultural  crops;  tree  and  industrial  crops;  livestock,  apiculture 
and  aquaculture  development;  spice  and  minor  crops;  gender,  social  and  HIV/AIDS  related  issues; 
and regulatory and technical services. 
In  the  face  of  the  low  implementation  rate  of  NADP  and  reported  abuse,  a  Functional 
14. 
Expenditure  Review  (FER)  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  and  seven 
commodity  boards  and  agencies  was  carried  out  in  2014.  The  review  noted  that  agriculture  public 
3 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
departments had weak capacities and limited resources, which contributed to a lack of visible impact 
on  the  agriculture  sector.  FER  called  for  a  reorganisation  of  the  agriculture  institutional  framework, 
with:  (i)  DAL  refocusing  on  policy  development  and  on  the  coordination  and  monitoring  of  policy 
implementation  by  commodity  boards  and  provincial  agencies;  (ii)  the  creation  of  an  Agriculture 
Investment Corporation to provide a funding and governance structure for the commodity boards and 
agencies; and (iii) the reorganisation of the commodity boards, to become responsible for regulation, 
farmer-driven research, business facilitation and the promotion of farmer-based SMEs. This includes 
the creation of a Food and Grains Board to be established through the merger of the Fresh Produce 
Development  Agency  (FPDA)  with  NARI,  which  would  become  the  lead  agency  for  the  food  and 
grains sector, including fresh produce as well as alternative crops (which could cover galip nut). The 
reform implementation is progressing slowly and is expected to further slow down with the closing of 
the  FER  Implementation  and  Advisory  Unit  (FIAU)  and  further  uncertainty  linked  to  upcoming 
elections.  
Institutions.  The  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  is  responsible  for  the 
15. 
agriculture  sector.  The  Fresh  Produce  Development  Agency  (FPDA),  based  in  Goroka  (Eastern 
Highlands) provides technical and market information to smallholder farmers and other key players in 
the horticulture value chain. FPDA has been in the forefront of providing market driven extension and 
of  supporting  farmers  throughout  the  country  to  grow  fresh  produce  for  the  formal  and  informal 
markets. Farmers have been trained using innovative extension methods based on model farms and 
village extension workers (VEWs). However, the resources available to FPDA mean that only a small 
percentage  of  farmers  participate  in  these  schemes  at  any  one  time.  The  National  Agriculture 
Research  Institute  (NARI)  is  a  publicly  funded  research  organisation  mandated  to  undertake 
agriculture  research  and  development  on  food  crops,  alternate  crops  and  livestock  breeding  and 
management. The Centre of Excellence for Financial Inclusion (CEFI) was created with the support of 
ADB-financed Microfinance Expansion Project (MEP  – see  below)  and is responsible for driving  the 
implementation  of  the  National  Strategy  on  Financial  Inclusion  and  for  coordinating  all  related 
initiatives.  Provinces  and  Districts  are  responsible  for  local  development  planning  and  service 
delivery,  but  have  limited  resources  and  capacities.  The  Provincial,  District  and  Local  Level 
Government Service Improvement Programme (PSIP  and DSIP) has opened  new  perspectives  with 
additional resources accruing to local governments.  
16.  Development projects. Few donors remain in the agriculture sector in PNG. Key projects, also 
of interest to MVF, include: 
  PPAP:  the  Productive  Partnerships  in  Agriculture  Project  (PPAP),  is  co-financed  by  IFAD,  the 
World  Bank,  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the  GoPNG.  The  project  aims  at  improving  the 
livelihoods  of  smallholder  coffee  and  cocoa  producers,  by  promoting  partnership  agreements 
between  farmers  and  agribusiness  for  the  provision  of  technologies  and  services,  through  a 
package  of  incentives  directly  benefitting  farmers.  The  success  of  the  partnership  model  has 
prompted GoPNG, IFAD, the World Bank and the EU to approve additional financing to scale up 
PPAP nationally; 
  Lead  Firm  Programme:  New  Zealand  Aid  has  been  funding  institutional  support  to  FPDA  for 
many  years.  The  ongoing  Lead  Firm  Programme  aims  at  supporting  the  growth  of  three  fresh 
produce  sub-sector  leaders  that  source  from  smallholders.  New  Zealand  Aid  has  indicated 
interest  in  participating  in  MVF,  which  has  strong  potential  for  synergies  with  the  Lead  Firm 
Programme; 
  PHAMA:  the  Pacific  Horticultural  and  Agricultural  Market  Access  (PHAMA)  Program  is  co-
financed  by  Australia  and  New  Zealand  and  aims  at  helping  Pacific island  countries,  including 
PNG, to improve their exports of primary products. While there are few opportunities for export in 
the  fresh  produce  sector  (the  main  market  is  domestic  and  the  main  scope  is  to  substitute 
imports), PHAMA is supporting the creation of a Fresh Produce Industry Working Group gathering 
key sector players. PHAMA is ending in 2017, but a second phase is being prepared; 
  TADEP:  the  Transformative  Agriculture  and  Enterprise  Development  in  Papua  New  Guinea 
(TADEP)  is  co-financed  by  Australia  and  ACIAR  and  brings  together  five  research-for-
development  initiatives  aiming  at  increasing  food  security  and  rural  income.  Of  particular 
relevance  to  MVF  are:  (i)  Improving  opportunities  for  economic  development  for  women 
smallholders in rural PNG, which has developed the Family Team approach that will be up-scaled 
4 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
in MVF; (ii) Supporting commercial sweet potato production and marketing in the PNG highlands; 
and (iii) Enhancing private sector-led development of the canarium industry, which will undertake 
a  range  of  technical,  marketing  and  economic  studies  upon  which  MVF  will  build  to  support  the 
creation of a commercial plant for galip nut processing under Component 1.2; 
  MEP:  the  Microfinance  Expansion  Project  (MEP)  is  financed  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank 
(ADB).  It  aims  at  promoting  financial  inclusion  through  capacity  building  provided  to  financial 
institutions, financial education and the operation of a risk-management facility. MEP has assisted 
in  creating  the  Centre  for  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI),  which  is  a  public  institution  responsible  for 
coordinating and guiding financial inclusion initiatives. 
B.  Rationale 
17.  National policy framework. Further to the Agricultural Functional Expenditure Review (FER), 
GoPNG has embarked on a major overhaul of the agriculture sector, with a view to achieving higher 
economic  growth,  providing  rural  men  and  women  with  better  opportunities  to  participate  in  market-
oriented agriculture, and increasing private sector investment in the sector. The key orientation of the 
new approach supported by DAL, as well as by FPDA, is to focus on the promotion of public-private 
partnerships to support smallholder access to markets and support services.  
18. 
Innovative business models. PPAP has opened the way to developing business partnerships 
in  the  two  major  export  value  chains.  Successful  business  models  associating  farmers  and 
agribusiness are emerging in other value chains, including fresh produce. Yet these initiatives remain 
scattered  because  of  the  risks  involved  both  for  private  investors  and  for  smallholders  and  of  the 
current inability of the public sector to provide the incentives that would be needed to offset risks and 
promote innovative partnerships.  
19.  Target  value  chains.  MVF  aims  at  adapting  PPAP’s  approach  to  two  value  chains  in  which 
production mostly originates from smallholders and which are part of NADP priority sub-sectors. The 
two  target  value  chains  were  selected  jointly  with  DAL.  Fresh  produce  sub-sector  will  be  allocated 
more  than  90%  of  project  resources,  because  it  is  grown  by  village  male  and  female  farmers 
throughout  the  country  and  because  domestic  fresh  produce  markets  are  expanding.  While  not  as 
important, galip nut holds potential to develop into a new export cash crop in cocoa producing areas, 
therefore benefitting thousands of cocoa growers. Main reasons further justifying the selection of the 
target value chains are as follows:  
  Adaptation to village farmers: more than 90% of village farmers already grow vegetables. Fresh 
produce  therefore  already  plays  a  role  in  the  livelihood,  food  security  and  risk  management 
strategies  of  village  farmers  and  offers  an  opportunity  for  generating  income  with  relatively  low 
risk.  The  existence  of  different  market  channels  and  market  segments  leaves  the  possibility  to 
adapt  partnership  content  and  project  support  to  participating  households,  depending  on  their 
absorptive and organisational capacity.  As for galip, it is being planted extensively in association 
with  cocoa,  which  is  the  main  cash  crop  for  village  farmers  in  East  New  Britain  (the  target 
province for galip);  
  Adaptation  to  women:  women  undertake  most  of  the  tasks  associated  with  the  cultivation  of 
fresh produce and play an active role in selling fresh produce in informal markets throughout the 
country. As smallholders venture more into farming crops for cash income, tasks associated with 
consolidation  of  fresh  produce  –  re-sorting  and  re-packing,  transportation,  cool  storage,  and 
freighting to distant markets – are shared between men and women. Women conduct the majority 
of galip nut growing and trading activities. However, women simply sell the raw nuts in village and 
roadside markets as there are no reliable commercial markets for value-added products; 
  Potential  for  production  growth:  the  adoption  of  seeds,  inputs  and  practices  allowing  year-
round production is expected to significantly boost vegetable production (increased yields by up to 
an estimate 40%). With regard to galip, there is already volume of production, without the need for 
the  project  or  for  smallholders  to  put  any  additional  investment.  By  the  time  the  project  is 
expected to start (2018), the 250,000 galip trees planted with EU financing will have entered into 
production and the 600,000 planned for planting by PPAP will progressively start bearing fruits;  
5 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Market potential: only a small fraction of vegetable production is currently marketed, because of 
the low quality and volumes, inconsistency of production, lack of access to financing at all steps in 
the value chain and lack of market linkages. The demand for vegetables is expanding, because of 
the  rising  population  and  income  growth  in  the  cities,  changing  diet  patterns  and  consumption 
habits,  as  well  as  mining  operations  catering  needs.  While  close  to  two  thirds  of  the  modern 
market segments  are currently largely supplied by imports, there  is a growing interest from final 
market buyers (notably supermarket chains, catering companies, mining operations and hotels) to 
source from smallholders. New opportunities will also develop with the import ban on vegetables 
and  fruits.  Developing  domestic  vegetable  production  however  requires  major  investments  in 
better  extension and financial services, better  access to inputs,  better farmers’ organisation and 
better  market  linkages.  As  for  galip,  the  steadily  growing  global  market  for  tree  nuts  offers  big 
potential  for  transforming  it  from  a  fresh  product  essentially  suppling  local  wet  markets  into  an 
export crop. By diversifying cocoa farmers’ revenues, the commercialisation of galip would offer a 
way to mitigate the adverse impact of cocoa price fluctuation on farmers’ income. It would thereby 
contribute to the sustainability of cocoa production (and of PPAP’s investments in that sector), by 
offering  farmers  an  alternative  to  the  traditional  behaviour  of  uprooting  cocoa  trees  for  planting 
other crops when cocoa prices go down 
  Higher farmers’ share over the final added value: while the market is largely for fresh produce, 
there  is  scope  for  farmers  retaining  a  larger  portion  of  the  final  value  added  when  selling  to 
modern  market  segments,  under  the  form  of  grading,  some  conservation  (for  example  drying 
onions) or adequate packing – the latter is completely neglected at the moment and is one of the 
main causes for up to 40% post-harvest management losses. And although certification is not a 
priority, there might be some scope, likely at a later stage, for organic certification or for branding 
local origin. As for galip nut, farmers will be able to retain value added in two ways: by performing 
primary processing (de-pulping and drying) to enable easy storage and transport of nuts in shell; 
and by holding part of the share capital of the processing plant, thereby earning dividends on the 
company’s profit. 
20.  Business  partnerships.  In  line  with  IFAD’s  PPPP2  approach,  MVF  will  build  on  the  PPAP 
approach (see lessons learnt in section II D) to promote collaborative arrangements, whereby farmers 
will have secure and remunerative market outlets incentivizing that they invest in increased production 
of better quality vegetables, whereas buyers will obtain reliable and consistent supply of vegetables in 
line  with  the  demand  of  more  remunerative  market  segments.  As  with  PPAP,  partnerships  will: 
originate  in  a  competitive  selection  process,  to  ensure  transparency  and  meeting  project  objectives; 
cover  a  demand-driven  package  of  activities  to  secure  farmers’  access  to  inputs  and  technical 
services  in  accordance  with  the  specificities  of  every  partnership;  and  be  matched  by  technical 
assistance  to  strengthen  industry  organisation  and  knowledge  management.  However,  the  PPAP 
approach  will  be  adapted  to  the  specificities  of  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector,  where  buyers  are 
smaller, source from smaller groups of farmers, and are less familiarised with business management 
and markets than in the cocoa and coffee sectors. 
21.  FPDA.  In  the  fresh  produce  sector,  MVF  will  also  take  stock  of  the  considerable  experience 
gained  by  FPDA  in  promoting  market-oriented  farming  through  the  ‘model  farm  approach’,  which 
builds  farmers’  capacities  with  regard  to  agricultural  practices,  post-harvest  management,  market 
linkages and farming as a business, along a gradual and participatory approach. The model farm also 
has  potential  for  becoming  a  starting  point  for  the  development  of  farmers’  organisations  offering 
access  to  a  diversified  range  of  services  such  as  input  delivery,  collection  or  primary  processing. 
Finally,  the  project  will  scout  innovative  business  arrangements  promoted  by  public  and  private 
stakeholders (such as a farmer-owned buying company and public-private partnerships sponsored by 
provincial  and  district  governments  encountered  during  the  inception  mission)  and  seek  to  upgrade 
and scale-up most promising models within the partnership framework. 
22.  Galip.  In  the  galip  sector,  the  project  will  build  on  NARI/ACIAR  project  to  demonstrate  a 
profitable  business  model  for  the  commercial,  mechanised  processing  of  galip  nuts.  If  the 
demonstration  is  successful,  the  project  will  then  provide  further  support  to  facilitate  private  sector 
investment into a full-fledged private-sector owned, commercial plant, along modalities to be defined 
based on a feasibility study. The set of interventions on galip nut is expected to cost less than 5% of 
the total project cost and would be concentrated on one single province, East New Britain. However, 
2 Public-Private-Producer Partnerships. 
6 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
this  limited  intervention  will  open  a  new  source  of  income  for  thousands  of  smallholders  in  the 
lowlands,  by  leveraging  project  resources  to  unleash  private  investment  in  commercial  galip  nut 
processing.  
23.  Potential  for  scaling  up.  The  Government  of  Papua  New  Guinea  has  requested  that  IFAD 
pursue  programmatic  investments  in  the  country.  The  MVF  has  potential  to  be  scaled  up 
geographically  within  the  two  current  value  chains  or  also  to  target  other  agricultural  commodities 
relevant to village farmers. Due to the importance of fresh produce and galip nut in terms of volumes, 
the  two  target  value  chains  hold  significant  scope  for  scaling  up  MVF  innovative  approaches.  The 
combination  of  knowledge  management;  close  partnership  with  FPDA,  provinces  and  district 
governments;  industry  structuring;  and  participation  of  financial  institutions  will  pave  the  way  for  the 
replication and scaling up of the partnership model. In East New Britain, the stock of galip trees grown 
in  cocoa  will  reach  850,000  trees  in  the  next  few  years,  and  there  is  scope  to  expand  galip  tree 
plantation  in  all of the cocoa growing  areas,  which  would come in addition to  indigenous galip trees 
growing in the lowlands. Scaling up is built into the approach for the galip nut component, which will 
facilitate private investors crowding in for increasing the processing plant share capital. 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
24.  Target area. Five target provinces were selected by the GoPNG for the main intervention in the 
fresh  produce  sector:  four  provinces  in  the  Highland  region  (Western  Highlands,  Jiwaka,  Simbu, 
Eastern  Highlands)  and  one  province  in  the  Momase  Region  (Morobe).  The  five  provinces 
encompass a continuous geographic area going from Mount Hagen, the main hub for fresh produce 
trade in the Highlands, down to Lae, the second largest city and urban market in PNG and the major 
port supplying Port Moresby, the capital city. The highlands provide excellent growing conditions for a 
wide  range  of  temperate  fruits  and  vegetables  year-round.  The  project  has  scope  for  expansion  to 
other  regions,  as  the  intention  is  to  develop  innovative  business  models  for  further  replication  and 
upscaling. Furthermore, the main cocoa producing province, East New Britain, is targeted for a small 
intervention  in  the  galip  sector,  which  has  potential  to  impact  the  livelihoods  of  farmers  across  the 
lowlands.  Project  target  areas  within  a  province  will  coincide  with  those  areas  where  the  target 
commodities  are  produced,  stored,  processed  and  marketed,  rather  than  with  a  strict  administrative 
delimitation. 
25.  The target provinces are among the most densely populated in the country and with the highest 
rates  of  deprivation  by  almost  every  measure  occur  in  rural  parts  of  the  Highlands  and 
Momase regions. The Highland provinces have the highest estimate numbers of poor in the country, 
as well as the highest stunting rate at 58%.  
26.  Target groups. It is expected that MVF will directly benefit approximately  23,500 households, 
of  which  around  22,000  in  the  fresh  product  value  chain  and  1,5000  in  the  galip  sector.  This  would 
represent  46,000  primary  beneficiaries  in  application  of  the  family-based  approach  that  will  be  used 
throughout the project (similar to IFAD’s household-based methodologies, see Component 1). Around 
117,500  people  would  directly  benefit  from  project  activities  based  on  a  household  of  five.  Primary 
beneficiaries  will  mostly  be  semi-subsistence  households  (low  input-low  output  farmers  mostly 
growing  food  crops  and  limited  cash  crops)  but  may  also  include  market-oriented  small  farmers 
involved  or  with  potential  to  get  involved  in  the  target  value  chains.  Women  village  farmers  will 
constitute a specific target  group,  because of their  disempowerment, lack of access to services and 
markets  as  well  as  elevated  gender-based  violence,  which  altogether  negatively  affect  household 
revenues and well-being. The project will also benefit youth, by  creating new economic opportunities 
in the production and trading of fresh produce, facilitating access to innovation and new technologies 
and services (including through digital  applications) and supporting small business growth. Inclusive 
business  partnerships  offer  a  solid  opportunity  for  young  people,  both  as  smallholders  and  as 
business partners, to capture value from the fresh produce sub-sector, building on available assets. 
27.  Primary beneficiaries also include different categories of fresh produce buyers that source from 
village  farmers,  have  scope  for  expanding  their  operations  and  can  become  a  conduit  to  provide 
village  farmers  with  access  to  markets  and  services.  They  range  from  micro  (wet  market-based 
7 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
intermediaries supplying larger traders) and smaller buyers (such as farmers with an entrepreneurial 
mind  collecting  and  marketing  produce  from  neighbours,  or  district-based  middlemen)  to  medium 
traders that consolidate and commercialise fresh produce to supply modern market buyers and large 
chain leaders trading vegetables for major end market clients.  
28. 
 Building  on  FPDA  experience,  it  is  expected  that  for  every  farmer  directly  benefitting  from 
support services, another four are indirectly benefitting,  which  would  bring  gains to another  185,600 
farmers.  Financial  institutions  are  also  part  of  the  secondary  beneficiaries,  as  they  will  get  project 
support to expand their rural outreach and build their capacities to better meet financing needs in the 
fresh produce sub-sector. Improved access to credit will not be restricted to partnership members, but 
as financial institutions’ service offer expands, it will benefit a much larger universe of clients. Finally, 
consumers  will  benefit  from  increased  and  more  consistent  supplies  of  higher  quality  fresh  produce 
and reduced reliance on high cost imports. 
29. 
Inclusive strategy. The target value chains respond to a range of self-targeting features. Fresh 
produce is grown by village farmers on very tiny surfaces (0.1 ha in average) and plays an important 
role  in  the  livelihood,  food  security  and  risk  management  strategies  of  the  poor.  Galip  is  grown  by 
small  cocoa  producers  whose  income  is  exposed  to  the  fluctuations  of  cocoa  international  prices. 
However, the self-targeting aspects of the project need to be supplemented by operational measures 
to ensure that inclusion and gender equity are mainstreamed in all aspects of project implementation. 
In  PNG  the  challenge  is  not  only  to  deliver  benefits  but  also  to  ensure  that  communities  and 
into  sustainable  household  welfare 
these  benefits 
households  are  able 
improvements. Measures  to  address  social  divides  and  build  social,  financial,  technical  and 
organisational capacity for livelihood planning in the context of the fresh produce and galip nut value 
chains is therefore central to the design and an integral part of project activities.   
translate 
to 
30.  Family-based approach. The main strategy for empowerment, capacity building and targeting 
of appropriate interventions will be  a family-based approach,  building on the Family Team approach 
developed by an ACIAR-FPDA project3 and the Family Business Management Training developed by 
CARE.  It addresses the fact that households are not cohesive units with shared needs and resources 
and  that  different  members  pursue  different  goals  and  are  responsible  for  different  production  and 
consumption activities. The family-based approach helps families to look at the work done by women, 
men and youth to work towards a more equitable distribution of agricultural and household work and 
to  create a  joint  vision  and  an  action  plan  for  working  towards  this  vision. It  has  been  successful 
because it works through traditional leadership structures and explicitly includes men, seeking to build 
a  consensus  and  demonstrate  that  social  inclusion  and  gender  empowerment  will  bring  social  and 
economic benefits to the entire family.  
31.  The family-based  approach  will  form  the  foundation  based  on  which  MVF  will  support 
partnership development and promote support services such as financial literacy, business education 
and  extension.  Key  elements  of  the  FT  approach  (detailed  in  Appendix  2)  include:  (i)  a  community 
mobilisation  process  aiming  at  gaining  community  and  social  structures’  participation  in  the  family-
based  approach and  support to business partnerships; (ii)  the creation  of a basic plan for achieving 
family  long-term  objectives  by  working  together  as  a  family;  and  (iii)  capacity  building  provided  to 
households  in  financial  education,  sustainable  livelihoods  and  nutrition.  The  family-based  approach 
will  be  adapted  to  the  specific  features  of  the  project,  particularly  with  regard  to:  (i)  land  tenure 
security:  community  structures  will  be  sensitised  to  facilitate  sustainable  land  tenure  arrangements 
between  landowners  and  vegetable  growers;  (ii)  extension:  different  extension  approaches  may  be 
chosen  in  the  various  partnerships,  but  they  will  all  have  to  be  harmonised  with  the  family-based 
approach; (iii) social inclusion: the family-based approach will also be used to identify more vulnerable 
households  and  to  facilitate  their  participation  in  the  partnership.  (iv)  nutrition:  module  3  of  the 
approach  (“feeding  your  family  team”)  enables  participants  to  consider  the  food  and  nutritional 
security of the whole family, including in terms of drought and food shortage.  Specific topics include 
planning  a  balanced  daily  diet,  eating  locally  grown  foods  replacing  store-bought  foods,  setting  up 
home gardens, and organizing cooking classes for both men and women, etc.4 
32.  The  approach  will  be  implemented  in  communities  pre-selected  through  partnerships.  A 
consortium  composed  of  CEFI  and  of  an  international  NGO  with  experience  in  household-based 
3 Examining women’s business acumen in Papua New Guinea: working with women smallholders in horticulture. 
4 http://aciar.gov.au/files/mn_194_family_teams-web-updated_4-10-2016.pdf 
8 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
methodologies  in  the  PNG  context  will  manage  the  implementation  of  the  family-based  approach.  It 
will build the capacities of FPDA and the PMU technical staff, including Provincial teams, as well as of 
the  Business  Development  Service  Providers  that  will  assist  in  developing  partnership  plans  and 
agreements, so that they are conversant with the approach and that it is mainstreamed throughout all 
project  activities.  The  consortium  set-up  will  ensure  that  the  family-based  approach  and  financial 
education  component  will  be  perfectly  harmonised  into  a  seamless  gender-inclusive  programme 
aiming at raising household capacities to take the best advantage of project services to improve their 
livelihoods.  
33.  Other  key  measures  (detailed  in  Appendix  2)  designed 
implementation include: 
to  support  inclusive  project 
  GESI strategy and action plan: a GESI strategy and action plan will be developed at project onset, 
with  support  from  a  GESI  consultant,  in  close  coordination  with  the  consortium.  Practical 
guidelines and procedures will also be developed and incorporated in the Project Implementation 
Manual  (PIM).  Key  measures  will  include:  the  establishment  of  quotas  for  women’s  and  youth 
access  to  services  (women  minimum  50%  of  serviced  clients,  youth  30%)  and  women’s/youth 
participation  in  decision-making  bodies;  and  GESI  training  in  connection  with  the  family-based 
approach training, for project staff and implementing agents; 
  Project  management:  to  support  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  project  inclusive 
strategy,  the  PMU  will include a GESI Officer, who  will be responsible for ensuring that  GESI is 
mainstreamed throughout project activities.  
  Knowledge  management  and  institutional  support:  the  project  M&E/KM  system  will  include  the 
monitoring  of  inclusion  and  gender  aspects,  and  lessons  learnt  will  be  made  available  to  multi-
stakeholders’  platforms  and  project  implementers  to  support  regular  analysis,  improved 
performance and annual programming of related activities. Building on lessons learnt from project 
achievements, the GESI Officer will also support the mainstreaming of gender and inclusion into 
FPDA’s analytical and operational systems, including trainings and the development of guidelines 
and toolkits as appropriate.  
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
34.  The proposed project goal is to improve the livelihoods of village farming households in target 
provinces,  by  facilitating  their  transition  from  semi-subsistence  agriculture  to  market-oriented 
production and farming as a business. The development objective is to achieve sustainable increased 
returns  to  village  farming  households  from  increased  marketed  production.  Main  indicators  are: 
increase in household asset ownership index; percentage of farmer production of fresh produce sold 
to  market  increased  by  at  least  40%;  and  percentage  of  farmer  production  of  galip  nuts  sold  to 
processing plant increased from 0 to 90%. 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
35.  MVF comprises three components, which are summarised in Figure 1 below:  
  Component  1  -    Inclusive  Business  Partnerships  supports  all  the  activities  required  to  build  and 
implement business partnerships bringing together village farming households and buyers in the 
two target value chains: (i) fresh produce and (ii) galip nut; 
  Component  2  –  Supportive  Value  Chain  Investment  complements  partnership  investment  with 
interventions  that  aim  at  impacting  the  whole  value  chain  by:  (i)  improving  access  to  production 
areas  through  spot  improvements  on  feeder  roads;  and  (ii)  facilitating  the  access  of  farming 
households and other players in the value chain to affordable and diversified financial services; 
  Component 3 – Collective Governance and Project Management includes all the activities aiming 
at  promoting  a  favourable  policy  and  institutional  environment  to  support  the  development  of 
inclusive fresh produce and galip nut value chains. 
9 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Figure 1 – Project components 
Component 1 – Inclusive Business Partnerships 
36.  Objective  and  approach.    Component  1  aims  at  building  inclusive  partnerships  between 
village  farmers  and  buyers,  whereby:  (i)  farmers  will  gain  improved  access  to  markets  and  support 
services;  and  (ii)  buyers  will  source  from  farmers  to  supply  remunerative  markets.  The  component 
design responds to five major thrusts: 
  Building  on  the  existing:  the  component  builds  on  a  series  of  initiatives  and  development 
projects, which include: (i) the PPAP approach, which is adapted to the specificities of the target 
value chains (see Lessons learnt in II 6); (ii) FPDA’s ‘model farm approach’, which builds farmers’ 
capacities  with  regard  to  agricultural  practices,  post-harvest  management,  market  linkages  and 
farming  as  a  business,  along  a  gradual  and  participatory  approach;  (iii)  household-based 
methodologies developed in ACIAR-financed ‘Improving opportunities for economic development 
for women smallholders in  rural PNG’  project, in partnership  with FPDA,  as well  as  by CARE  in 
the  Family  Business  Management  Training  Programme;  (iv)  the  set  of  studies  and  tests  paving 
the  way  to the creation of a commercial plant for galip nut processing  developed under  ACIAR-
financed  Enhancing  private  sector-led  development  of  the  canarium  industry’  project,  in 
partnership with NARI. This will enable strong project ownership on behalf of PNG stakeholders 
and facilitate the adoption of scaled up innovations; 
  Supporting  the  development  of  business  partnerships:  MVF  will  promote  collaborative 
arrangements  whereby  farmers  will  have  secure  and  remunerative  market  outlets  justifying  that 
they  invest  in  increased  production  of  better  quality  fresh  produce,  whereas  buyers  will  obtain 
reliable and consistent supply in line with the demand of more remunerative market segments. To 
this effect, the project will provide technical and brokering services to ensure sound agreements 
spelling out a clear distribution of responsibilities  and  a balanced share of risks and  benefits. In 
the  fresh  produce  sub-sector,  partnerships  will  be  market  responsive  and  non-prescriptive.  The 
project  will  not  target  specific  crops,  but  will  rather  support  partnerships  that  are  potentially 
profitable and sustainable once project support will be over. Where there are promising innovative 
business  arrangements  already,  it  will  seek  to  upgrade  and  scale  up  within  the  partnership 
framework.  In  the  galip  nut  sector,  the  project  will  contribute  to  demonstrating  the  profitability  of 
commercial,  mechanised  processing,  and  pave  the  way  for  scaling  up  through  further  private 
sector  capital  investment.  IFAD  support  will  build  on  the  pilot  plant  currently  operated  by  NARI, 
which will be leased to a private operator who will run partnerships with farmers; 
  Offering support to both farmers and buyers: the project will make available support services 
to  both  farmers  and  buyers,  within  the  partnership  framework  or  through  the  provision  of 
additional  technical  assistance.  Farmers  will  be  supported  to  gain  the  skills  required  to  meet 
market demand, but also to improve their organisation to have sustained access to services and 
markets  once  partnerships  are  over.  Buyers  will  access  business  development  services  so  that 
10 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
they can consolidate and expand their businesses and sustainably source from larger number of 
village farmers; 
  Adapting the content of partnership to specific partners’ needs: partnership will be demand-
driven and tailor-made to  meet the specific characteristics and  needs of the partners and  of the 
market  they  decide  to  target  together.  Each  partnership  will  cover  investments  that  respond  to 
such specific features, building on a list of eligible investments described in Appendix 4; 
  Combining  different  sources  of  financing:  partnerships  will  be  financed  through  a  mix  of 
partners’  contribution,  credit,  and  incentive  grants  aimed  at  decreasing  partners’  risk  and 
facilitating  their  engagement  into  innovative  agriculture  practices  and  marketing  arrangements. 
Access to credit  is aimed at strengthening the sustainability of business partnership by ensuring 
continued access to financial services. It will be facilitated under Component 2; 
  Engaging  communities:  community-based  activities  will  be  implemented  in  the  partnership 
target areas, with the objective of ensuring broad community support to partnership development 
and  of  engaging  the  participation  of  farming  households  as  a  family  team.  The  family-based 
approach will empower women so that they access project benefits alongside with men, within the 
family unit. Furthermore, it will facilitate the channelling of capacity building services in areas such 
as financial education and nutrition, where the private sector partners would have no comparative 
advantage; 
  Using  a  value  chain  approach:  the  cornerstone  of  MVF  approach  is  the  partnership  linking  a 
buyer and a group of farmers. This mode will however be developed within a more global value 
chain  approach,  whereby  partnerships  will  be  driven  by  market  signals,  will  be  geared  towards 
developing  steady  relationships  with  end  buyers,  and  will  receive  support  to  improve  production 
but also marketing, handling and transport down to final markets. 
37.  Expected outcome. The expected outcome is that village farming households have access to 
markets, technologies and services in the target value chains. The main outputs from Component 1 
will  be:  (i)  different  types  of  business  partnerships  linking  fresh  produce  and  galip  nut  producing 
households  to  buyers;  (ii)  at  least  20,000  farming  households  (20,000  men  and  20,000  women) 
trained in and using good agricultural and post-harvest practices for fresh produce; (iii) around 23,000 
farming households trained for family engagement in decision-making on production and marketing. 
38.  Sub-component  1.1  –  Fresh  Produce  Partnerships.  Investments  in  this  sub-component  will 
cover: 
  Risk  analysis  and  mitigation  plan.  A  substantial  risk  analysis  and  mitigation  plan  of  the 
Partnership  Agreement (PA)  will  be  prepared prior to the scoping study and  while  implementing 
the first PAs. This will cover four levels of risk: fiduciary risk, risk of doing harm, effectiveness risk, 
and reputational risk, following QA recommendation.  
  Scoping study and climate risk assessment:  a participatory scoping study will be carried out 
in  the  target  provinces  at  project  inception  in  order  to:  (i)  map  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector, 
identify  crops  with  stronger  comparative  advantages  and  business  opportunities,  as  well  as 
potential partners; (ii) evaluate the availability of relevant service providers able to provide support 
services in each target province, including their respective capabilities, capacities and interest in 
delivering  services  within  the  project;  (iii)  provide  orientations  to  support  the  project  GESI 
strategy; and (iv) provide orientations to address possible tenure challenges that might affect the 
project target group. In parallel to the scoping study, MVF will finance a climate risk assessment 
to  identify  areas  with  climate  change  risks,  establish  baseline  data  and  identify  a  suite  of 
appropriate  short,  medium  and  longer  term  agricultural  risk  management  strategies  and  best 
practices to feed into partnership  business  plans and  in the  provision of  extension and advisory 
services to growers;  
11 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Pre-investment activities:  the PMU will carry out the following sequence of activities, which will 
be repeated in years 1, 2 and 3, to develop partnerships and prepare partnership agreements: 
o 
Information  campaign,  to  disseminate  information  about  the  project  and  opportunities 
offered to farmers and buyers; 
o  Calls  for  expressions  of  interest,  to  identify  interested  in  developing  partnerships  with 
village  farmers  to  supply  identified  markets.  Expressions  of  interests  (EOI)  will  be  short 
proposals presenting the partners, identified markets, partnership objectives and proposed 
investments,  expected  benefits  in  particular  for  farmers,  cost  estimate  and  financing 
sources. The calls will specify eligibility criteria  for: (i) partners, e.g. farmers and buyers of 
different sizes; and (ii) investments, such as nurseries, farmers’ booster kits, extension and 
advisory services for farmers, small-scale irrigation and farmer-based water management; 
machinery  and  equipment  for  improved  production,  processing,  storing  and  transporting; 
business  development  services;  and  partnership  management  costs 
for  bigger 
partnerships; 
o  Screening,  to  determine  which 
proposals  will 
further 
developed  into  full  partnership 
agreements,  based  on  pre-
established selection criteria; 
be 
BOX 1 - Pre-investment activities  
Step  1:  Annual  information  campaigns  to  disseminate 
information  about  the  project  and  opportunities  offered  to 
buyers and farmers 
Step 2: Calls for expression of interest, issued annually 
by  the  PMU  to  identify  market  players  interested  in 
partnerships with village farmers. 
Step 3: Screening of EOIs to determine proposals that will 
be developed into partnership agreements 
Step  4:  Family-based  approach  adopted  to  carry  out 
preparatory community-based activities  
Step  5:  Preparation  of  partnership  proposals  by 
applicants  with  assistance  from  a  business  development 
service provider, including a business plan 
Step  6  -  Approval  and  signature  of  partnership 
agreements. 
o  Family-based approach, to build 
household  capacities 
to  take 
advantage  of  project  services, 
the 
empower  women  within 
family  business  and  extending 
financial,  business  and  nutrition 
education.  Land  tenure  issues 
will  be addressed as part of the 
family-based  approach  that  will 
be  developed  as  part  of  the 
partnership design process, to empower women as part of a family team, but also to gain 
community  buy-in  and  sign  Clan  Land  Use  Agreements 
to  guarantee  smooth 
implementation of project-supported activities in the community. Community support will be 
sought 
to  support 
households’ participation  in the development of partnerships and to facilitate the  inclusion 
of more vulnerable households in the partnerships. Community structures will also have an 
important  role  in  securing  sustainable  tenure  arrangements  between  landowners  and 
vegetable growers; 
family-based  approach, 
implementation  of  the 
to  facilitate  the 
o  Preparation  of  partnership  proposals:  applicants  approved  at  EOI  stage  will  be  provided 
with  assistance  from  a  business  development  service  provider  to  prepare  full  partnership 
proposals,  including:  (i)  a  partnership  agreement  detailing  the  contractual  arrangements 
between  the  buyer  and  the  farmers,  their  respective  obligations,  including  modalities  for 
equitably sharing benefits and risks; (ii) a 3-year business plan describing how the partners 
will  achieve  contractual  objectives,  including  partnership  investments  and  modalities  of 
implementation; and (iii) a  3-year financing plan detailing the total cost of the partnership, 
how each partner will contribute to the costs, the amount sought from financial institutions 
and  the  amount  of  incentive  grant.    Preference  will  be  given  to  partnerships  that:  (i)  offer 
equitable opportunities for participation by men, women and youth; (ii) incorporate specific 
measures  to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  and  vulnerable  groups;  and  (iii) 
address the need for smallholders to adapt to climate change. 
o  Approval and signature of partnership agreements: partnership proposals will be reviewed 
by  the  PMU,  then  submitted  to  an  independent  Technical  Appraisal  Committee  (TAC)  for 
endorsement,  and  then  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  for  final  approval.  Partnership 
agreements will be signed by partners, FPDA and the PMU. 
12 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Partnership  financing:  partnerships  will  be  supported  for  a  maximum  duration  of  three  years. 
Investments will be financed by three financing sources: (i) partners’ contribution, to be provided 
both  by  lead  partners  and  by  farmers;  (ii)  credit,  which  will  be  made  accessible  by  participating 
financial institutions; and (iii) a project-financed incentive grant. While the partners will be free to 
include  any  type  of  investment  and  activity  in  the  partnership,  project  financing  will  be  capped, 
based on pre-established rules that will be advertised in the call for EOI; 
  Resource  centres:  PPAP  experience  suggests  that  village-based  resource  centres  (covered 
area  with  cement  slab)  used  as  training  and  storage  facilities  greatly  contribute  to  strengthen 
farmers’  groups  and  collaboration  between  groups.  Furthermore,  they  could  support  the 
development  of  farmer  hubs  extending  services  to  farmers.  Resource  centres,  their  use  and 
operation  modalities  will  be  programmed  jointly  by  partners  and  Provincial  Teams  during 
partnership implementation; 
  M&E and overseeing: Lead partners (in collaboration with Village Extension Workers (VEWs) or 
lead farmers) will submit brief progress reports to support their disbursement requests. Provincial 
teams headed by FPDA and composed of district staff will oversee partnership implementation, in 
line with the specifications of the partnership agreement. Every year, a partnership meeting will be 
convened  to  review  implementation  results  and  challenges  and  address  any  issues  affecting 
smooth  implementation.  In  the  context  of  fiduciary  oversight  of  the  contracts,  their  conformity  to 
financial and institutional rules  will be monitored by  FPDA  and  PMU. The project will also make 
sure  that  the  contracts  are  mutually-beneficial,  to  both  buyers  and  sellers.  The  various 
beneficiary/outcome  or  impact  assessment  surveys  will  also  assess  these  aspects  to  ensure 
maximum accountability and adjustments over implementation if need be. 
39.  Sub-component  1.2  –  Galip  Nut  Supply  Chain.  IFAD  will  organise  its  interventions  in  two 
phases. In the first phase, which will be implemented over the first two project years, it will finance a 
set  of  activities  aimed  at  complementing  ACIAR/NARI  efforts  to  demonstrate  a  profitable  business 
model for a commercial galip production and processing. Key activities envisaged (partnerships and 
commercial operation of a pilot plant) will provide direct benefits to farmers, while the remaining ones 
will help in setting up an enabling environment for further scaling up. 
40.  At  the  end  of  the  first  phase  (coinciding  with  a  first  interim  review),  IFAD  will  commission  an 
independent  study  to  assess  whether  there  is  justification  for  private  sector  investment.  If  is  the 
results  are  positive,  the  project  will  consider  providing  additional  support  to  facilitate  private  sector 
investment  based  on  a  feasibility  study.  If  there  is  no  clear  business  case  for  investment,  then  the 
balance  of  resources  allocated  to  Sub-component  1.2  will  be  reallocated,  based  on  proposals  to  be 
made by the interim review.  
41. 
Investments in the first phase will cover: 
  Galip  nut  resource  assessment  study:  the  study  will  aim  at  identifying  the  stock  of  wild  and 
planted trees, their age and condition, as well as farmers’ willingness to harvest nuts for selling. It 
will also explore possible modalities for nut collection and transport in the different target areas. It 
will  be  conducted  by  NARI  and  will  combine  geospatial  methods  and  physical  surveying,  in 
partnership with field staff from cocoa buying companies; 
  Commercial operation of NARI’s plant: with assistance from a specialised consultant, the PMU 
will set up a management  operating system whereby  NARI  will lease the pilot plant to  a private 
manager  selected  through  competitive  bidding,  who  will  agree  to  manage  the  plant  and  its 
operations over a minimum of two seasons. This will enable the commercial management of the 
plant  with  adequate  resources  and  skills,  for  increased  buying  capacity  from  farmers,  higher 
efficiency  and  generation  of  knowledge  in  view  of  a  possible  scaling  up.  The  management 
agreement will specify the modalities of partnering with the current ACIAR project so that the pilot 
plant can benefit from technical assistance and operate as a pilot, i.e. trial different scenarios for 
sourcing, processing and  marketing and ensure close monitoring  and  detailed  documentation of 
achievements; 
  Organisation  of  supply  chain:  building  on  the  resource  assessment,  the  plant  manager,  with 
support  from  the  PMU  Galip  Nut  Manager  and  the  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems 
Manager, will organise the supply of galip nuts, with a view to ensure that the plant can be used at 
its  maximum  capacity.  To  best  serve  the  purpose  of  the  trial,  different  channels,  with  different 
13 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
modalities  for  collection  and  transport,  will  be  used  from  different  locations.  These  will  include 
agreements with two major trading companies that have confirmed their interest in investing in a 
future commercial plant, Agmark and East New Britain Development Corporation (ENBDC). IFAD 
will  finance  the  working  capital  for  purchasing  the  nuts,  as  well  as  the  cost  of  an  information 
campaign  every  year,  in  areas  selected  based  on  their  availability  of  resource  (building  on  the 
resource assessment); 
  Market  development:  an  international  market  study  will  be  undertaken  by  the  University  of 
Adelaide  (which  is  co-implementing  the  ACIAR  project)  in  partnership  with  PHAMA,  building  on 
preliminary work carried out for Vanuatu. It will target Australia and New Zealand potential buyers, 
with a view to assess market potential and position galip nut products on the Australia and New 
Zealand  markets.  Furthermore,  PHAMA  will  conduct  a  market  access  study  to  identify  market 
access requirements prevailing on the domestic and on the target export markets; 
  Study  tour  to  the  Philippines:    a  study  tour  to  the  Philippines  will  be  organised  to  earn 
knowledge about the canarium (pili) industry and explore transfers of knowledge and technology; 
 
 
Industry roadmap: the project will build on the Reference Group set up by ACIAR/NARI project, 
with a view to upgrade it into a public-private multi-stakeholder platform and develop a roadmap 
for  the  development  of  a  galip  nut  industry  in  PNG.  This  activity  will  be  implemented  under 
Component 3.1; 
Independent  assessment  study:  the  independent  study  will  aim  at  assessing  whether  the 
conjunction of ACIAR/NARI project achievements  (terminating in June 2018) and  IFAD-financed 
activities  provide  sufficient  assurance  that  there  is  a  case  for  private  sector  investment  in  a 
profitable  commercial  processing  plant  that  could  serve  domestic  and  export  markets.  The 
assessment  will  cover  all  the  steps  in  the  tree-to-market  chain,  including  nut  production,  supply 
chain organisation, processing and marketing, and will analyse costs and revenues at the various 
steps; 
  Monitoring  and  Evaluation:  the  plant  manager  partnership  will  be  required  to  submit  brief 
quarterly  progress  reports,  in  line  with  the  Management  Agreement.  The  PMU  will  device  a 
template  for  the  progress  report,  which  will  be  attached  to  the  Management  Agreement.  At  the 
end  of  every  season,  a  meeting  of  the  Multi-Stakeholder  Platform  will  be  convened  to  share 
results (see Component 3). 
If the independent assessment is successful, it will also include recommendations as to how to 
42. 
promote  private  sector  investment  into  a  new,  private-sector  owned  commercial  plant.  A  budget 
allocation has been set aside for providing further IFAD support to the scaling up. It is expected that it 
could  cover  the  following  pre-investment  activities:  (i)  full  feasibility  study;  (ii)  call  for  expression  of 
interest  from  potential  investors  and  due  diligence;  (iii)  business  plan  preparation;  (iv)  support  to 
investment;  (v)  partnerships  with  farmers  along  the  model  used  in  Sub-component  1.1;  (vi)  family-
based approach training and financial education to farmers.  
43.  Further investment from IFAD in the galip sector will however also be contingent on the GoPNG 
securing a new phase to the ACIAR/NARI project, so that private sector investment can be matched 
by  public  investment  into  further  research  needed  to  increase  nut  productivity  (good  agronomic 
practices and tree selection), production (propagation) and marketing (market development studies). 
The lease agreement with the manager of NARI-owned pilot plant will be extended for a third season, 
to bridge the gap with the entry in operation of the new commercial plant. ACIAR/DFAT have already 
indicated their interest in further promoting research in support of the nascent galip nut industry and of 
IFAD investment.   
Implementation  modalities  for  Component  1.  FPDA  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems 
44. 
Manager  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  Sub-component  1.1,  in  collaboration  with  the       
Component  1  Officer.  In  every  target  province,  a  Provincial  Team  headed  by  an  FPDA  middle 
manager  and  staffed  with  two-three  district  extension  staff  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  the 
sub-component  activities.  An 
to  provide 
methodological  support  and  technical  guidance  in  the  first  three  years.  Incentive  grants  will  be 
managed by CEFI, based on milestones to be defined in the partnership agreements and verified by 
the PMU (through the Provincial Teams). The implementation of Sub-component 1.2 will be supported 
technical  assistant  will  be  assigned 
international 
14 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
by a Galip Nut Manager that will be assigned at FPDA provincial office in Kokopo. The independent 
assessment will be carried out by two short-term consultants hired by IFAD.  
Component 2 – Supportive Value Chain Investment  
45.  Objective  and  approach.    Component  2  has  two  main  objectives.  Firstly,  it  will  facilitate 
farmers’  access  to  markets  by  unlocking  production  areas  through  road  spot  improvements. 
Secondly, it will also support the access of farming households and other value chain stakeholders to 
responsive  and  suitable  financial  services,  provided  at  an  affordable  cost  by  sustainable  financial 
institutions. Three main strategic thrusts guided the design of the component: 
  Linking  road  improvement  to  partnerships:    to  ensure  that  partnerships  have  the  maximum 
impact  on  target  farming  households,  the  selection  of  feeder  roads  that  will  benefit  from  road 
improvements will be based on proposals made by the partnerships in every province, which will 
be  ranked  based  on  cost  benefit  analysis.  Investments  will  be  co-financed  by  the  project  and 
province  and  districts  contributions,  drawing  from  resources  of  the  Province/District  Services 
Improvement  Programmes  (PSIP/DSIP).  They  will  only  be  implemented  once  sustainable, 
resourced  commitments  for  their  long-term  maintenance  are  secured.  MVF  will  finance  spot 
improvements rather than rehabilitate full stretches of roads, to benefit larger number of farmers; 
 
Improving the outreach of financial institutions to the rural areas through alternative solutions 
to  the  construction  of  brick-and-mortar  branches  that  are  better  adapted  to  remote  areas  and 
scattered  settlements  such  as  in  the  Highlands.  The  project  will  primarily  strengthen  existing 
branchless  systems  (networks  of  agents  and  points  of  service)  and  develop  new  mobile  money 
applications, to ensure that farming households in the partnership areas have access to financial 
services;  
  Developing innovative financial instruments to meet the needs of farming households and 
value chain stakeholders, and enable them to ease the cash constraints preventing them from 
expanding their businesses. Based on demand new products may be promoted by the project will 
offer  alternative  solutions  to  classic  loan  financing,  by  using  the  contracts  materialised  by  the 
partnership to obtain debt financing. Risk mitigating financial instruments and particularly adapted 
savings products will also be developed. 
46.  Expected  outcomes.  The  expected  outcomes  are  that  at  least  15,000  farming  households 
have  easier  access  to  main  roads  to  market  their  production,  and  that  at  least  18,000  farming 
households  have  access  to  credit.  The  main  outputs  will  be:  (i)  100  km  of  climate-resilient  feeder 
roads to key production areas in the five Highland target provinces are practicable and maintained; (ii) 
up to 20 districts have maintenance arrangements in place to sustain feeder road practicability after 
spot  improvements;  and  (iii)  9  financial  institutions  with  increased  outreach  and  capacities  extend 
adapted financial products to farming households and value chain stakeholders.  
47.  Sub-component  2.1  –  Spot  improvements  of  feeder  roads.  The  purpose  of  this  sub-
component is to provide targeted spot improvements to the tertiary network to restore priority roads to 
all-weather  access,  and  to  establish  sustainable  arrangements  for maintaining  the  completed  works 
beyond  the  life  of  the  project.  This  sub-component  will  only  be  implemented  in  the  five  target 
provinces in the Highlands. Investments will cover the following: 
  Selection of spot  improvement programmes: the  selection  of investments  will  be undertaken 
within the scope of the partnerships supported under Component 1, to maximise the provision of 
complementary benefits through the reduction of constraints on geographical target areas. Most 
investments  will  consist  in  spot  improvements  on  district  access  and  feeder  roads  to  remove 
‘pinch points’, thereby providing all-weather access. However other type of low-cost infrastructure 
that  could  facilitate  the  transport  of  fresh  produce  (such  as  walking  tracks  and  footbridges, 
ropeways  or  ‘flying  fox’  aerial  transportation)  or  facilitate  storage  at  critical  locations  will  be 
considered.      Partnerships  will  be  invited  to  nominate  candidate  sub-projects  for  prioritisation 
assessment,  which  will  determine  the  location  of  the  sub-projects.  The  preparation  of  individual 
sub-projects  will  involve consultation  with, and the active participation of stakeholders (partners, 
communities,  customary  landowners  and  districts)  to  obtain  their  agreement  to  the  scope  and 
nature  of  the  investment.  A  key  selection  criterion  will  be  the  commitment  of  the  district 
15 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
government  to  share  the  financing  of  climate-proof  road  improvements.  A  Memorandum  of 
Understanding will be negotiated between the parties and facilitated by the PMU, setting out the 
roles and responsibilities of the parties during implementation as well as for maintenance;  
  Studies  and  construction:  MVF  will  finance  the  preliminary  technical  and  financial  studies,  as 
well  as  the  cost  of  supervision  and  final  design  of  works.  A  specialised  firm  will  be  selected 
through  a  competitive  bidding  organised  by  the  PMU  to  undertake  studies  and  supervision,  in 
close coordination with local authorities. Works will be co-financed by the project and the relevant 
districts, by a constructing firm similarly selected through competitive bidding; 
  Maintenance: MVF  will support  partnership entities (Lead  Partner and farmers) on the one part 
and  the  district  and  provincial  administrations  on  the  other  to  set  up  and  manage  a  sustainable 
framework for long-term maintenance. This will involve the signing of an MoU whereby the parties 
will  agree  on  the  distribution  of  responsibilities,  the  provision  of  training  in  simple  but  effective 
maintenance methods, and the development and distribution of technical manuals;   
  Climate resilience:  spot improvements will incorporate measures to increase climate resilience 
of the improved assets. All drainage conduits will be designed for a longer flood return period (e.g. 
20 years instead of 10 years) and will be capable of passing heavier floods generated by climate 
change-induced increased rainfall intensity and frequency. 
48.  Sub-Component 2.2: Financial inclusion.  To ensure coverage of all of the target provinces5 
and  promote  competition  in  the  financial  sector,  the  project  will  work  with  up  to  nine  financial 
institutions  (including  commercial  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  savings  and  loans 
societies). They will be selected based on a call for expression of interest to be launched by the PMU, 
followed  by  a  due  diligence  exercise  by  a  specialised  service  provider.  The  final  selection  will  be 
made  by  a  selection  committee  that  will  be  set  up  by  the  PMU  with  CEFI’s  assistance.  Considering 
the  important  differences  in  the  status  of  development  among  the  three  different  types  of  financial 
institutions, the project will adopt a demand driven support approach. The same service provider will 
design  a  tailor-made  programme  of  support  for  each  of  the  participating  institutions,  based  on  their 
interest and needs. Project support will cover the following: 
  Outreach: this could include the development of: (i) networks of agents for commercial banks and 
non-bank  financial  institutions,  which  could  build  on  Village  Extension  Workers;  (ii)  points  of 
services  specifically  adapted  to  people  with  a  low  degree  of  literacy,    based  on  a  similar 
experience in an IFAD-financed project in Swaziland  6, which could either be operated by a part-
time bank staff or agent (including at project-supported ‘model farms’) or consist in an automated 
teller machine; and (iii) new mobile money applications, such as transfers from any mobile phone, 
interconnectivity  with  agents  and  points  of  services,  loan  application  submission,  payments  to 
third parties; 
  New  products  and  services:  the  project  will  provide  support  to  each  participating  financial 
institution  to  design,  implement,  and  test  and/or  scale  up  the  specific  products  that  would  be 
adapted to their current level of development and to the needs of their clientele, with special focus 
on the areas covered by the partnerships. This could include:  
o 
financial instruments to reduce the time gap  between  flow  of goods  and cash flow, enabling 
banks  to  advance  funds  to  traders  on  the  basis  of  invoices  (receivable  financing)  or  bills  of 
delivery  signed  by  the  two  parties  (non-invoice  financing),  until  end  buyers  have  effectively 
processed their payment;  
o 
o 
innovative  savings  products  for  education,  health  or  productive  investments  -  it  is  expected 
that  around  80%  of  the  farming  households  supported  under  Component  1  would  have 
opened a bank account and a savings account by the end of the project;  
financial  instruments  offering  an  alternative  to  simple  loan  products  such  as  tri-partite 
financing (whereby a bank transfers directly to a buyer the proceeds of bank loans extended 
5 Only in the five target Highland provinces in the two first years, extend to East New Britain if the independent assessment in 
Sub-component 1.2 is successful and activities are scaled up. 
6 Rural Finance and Enterprise Development Programme, 
http://operations.ifad.org/web/ifad/operations/country/project/tags/swaziland/1373/project_overview.   
16 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
to  farmers  for  the  purchase  of  inputs  to  be  delivered  in  kind  to  farmers)  or  supplier  credit 
(goods or services received on deferred payment terms - also called supplier financing).  
Furthermore,  the  project  will  finance  a  temporary  risk-sharing  mechanism  where  innovative 
products would not be covered by existing guarantee funds, which will consist of a cash deposit at 
the  level  of  each  participating  financial  institution  to  cover  possible  losses.  Cash  deposits  on 
interest-bearing  accounts  will  be  managed  by  CEFI  and  will  provide  the  opportunity  to  financial 
institutions to implement and test innovative financial products without bearing all the risk.  
  Capacity building: the project will build the capacity of financial institutions through the provision 
of  various  training  courses  focusing  on  financing  rural  and  agriculture-related  activities,  risk  and 
project  assessment  and  management,  project  monitoring  and  control,  based  on  prior  capacity 
building  need assessment. Training  will  be  provided jointly by CEFI and  by financial institutions’ 
in-house trainers, along a three-year training plan based on prior capacity assessment.  
49. 
Implementation  modalities  for  Component  2.  Activities  under  Sub-component  2.1  will  be 
implemented by service providers contracted by the PMU based on competitive bidding. The PMU will 
include a Component 2 Officer – Road Engineer to plan, facilitate and oversee implementation. Sub-
component 2.2 will be implemented by CEFI, which will be contracted for the whole project duration. 
MVF will finance related costs, including additional staff, participation in training courses, specialised 
technical assistance and a share of CEFI’s overheads.  
Component 3 – Collective Governance and Project Management  
50.  Objective  and  approach.  Component  3  aims  at  promoting  a  favourable  policy  and 
institutional environment to support the development of inclusive fresh produce and galip nut value 
chains. Main strategic thrusts orienting the component are as follows: 
  Organising value chain governance: the fresh produce sub-sector is currently very fragmented, 
with  limited  linkages  among  players.  Building  on  the  positive  outcomes  of  the  first  National 
Horticulture Conference organised by FPDA in 2014, MVF will support value chain structuring and 
coordination, with a view to facilitate access to information and knowledge and to enable  public-
private dialogue to address bottlenecks affecting the whole value chain. To this end it will facilitate 
the  creation  and  operation  of  multi-stakeholders’  platforms  (MSPs)  from  the  district  to  national 
level.  The  project  will  also  strengthen  FPDA  capacities  to  promote  the  inclusive  and  viable 
development of the fresh produce sub-sector. In the galip nut sector, while there is no value chain 
yet,  the  project  will  lay  the  foundations  for  multi-stakeholder  dialogue  to  support  coordinated 
sector growth; 
  Building and sharing knowledge: access to technical and market information is key to upgrade 
village  farmers’  capacities  and  enable  them  to  enter  the  value  chain.  Moreover,  project 
implementation will lead to the development of a set of innovative business models, with different 
types  of  partnership  arrangements  and  business  linkages  between  value  chain  players,  with 
potential  for  scaling  up  through  public-private  partnerships,  especially  considering  the  new 
institutional  framework  coming  up  in  the  agricultural  sector.  MVF  will  organise  access  to 
information and knowledge sharing through a Management Information System (MIS) that will be 
developed  based  on  interaction  with  users  and  will  be  complemented  by  multi-channel 
communication  (including  through  ICT)  and  by  a  strong  project  monitoring  and  knowledge 
management system. 
51.  Expected  outcome.  The  expected  outcome  is  that  organised  industry  players  contribute  to 
policy  development  and  sector  coordination  for  inclusive  industry  growth.  The  main  outputs  from 
Component  3  will  be:  (i)  two  national,  at  least  3  provincial  and  10  district-based  multi-stakeholders’ 
platforms (MSPs) created and trained; (ii) at least three policy and regulatory measures adopted and 
implemented building on MVF knowledge products; (iii) operational Management Information System 
(MIS)  established  at  FPDA;  and  (iv)  annual  set  of  evidence-based  knowledge  products  posted  on 
FPDA  website  as  of  year  3.  Component  3  is  organised  in  two  sub-components:  (i)  Collective 
Governance; and (ii) Project Management. 
52.  Sub-component  1:  Collective  Governance.  The  project  will  finance  activities  in  five  main 
areas:  
17 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Value chain organisation: MVF will provide tailor-made support to the Industry Working Group 
for  Fresh  Produce,  so  that  it  can  develop  its  membership,  expand  its  network  at  the  local  level 
and develop its capacities  to represent member’s interests.  To further support industry  dialogue 
and  to  ensure  that  the  Industry  Working  Group  takes  on  board  the  views  of  larger  panels  of 
industry stakeholders, the project will support the creation of multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs) 
at  the  provincial  level  and  in  districts  that  have  significant  concentration  of  production  areas. 
MSPs will offer a venue to collectively address constraints affecting the industry, build knowledge 
on  successful  experiences,  promote  understanding  and  trust  among  value  chain  players,  and 
support advocacy and public-private policy dialogue. In addition, provincial MSPs will have a role 
in  identifying  priority  areas  for  policy  studies  to  be  financed  by  MVF  (see  below).  A  similar  but 
simpler  approach  will  be  adopted  in  the  galip  nut  sector,  building  on  the  Galip  Nut  Reference 
Group set up by the ACIAR/NARI project. The project will assist in upgrading the group to a multi-
stakeholder Industry Working Group and help  it in designing a  long-term (10-15  years) strategic 
plan providing a roadmap for development of the galip nut industry that could be used to attract 
private sector, government and donor funding support;  
 
Institutional  strengthening:  the  project  will  strengthen  FPDA  institutional  capacities,  so  that  it 
can:  (i)  implement  the  project  in  an  accountable  and  transparent  manner  and  deliver  project 
outcomes and outputs according to plans; (ii) track achievements and capitalise on good results 
to  improve  sector  performance  and  inform  policy  dialogue;  and  (iii)  promote  inclusive  and 
economically viable development of the fresh produce industry. Capacity building will be provided 
on the basis of annual participatory capacity assessments and capacity development plans; 
  Policy development: MVF will contribute to enhancing the policy and regulatory environment in 
the  target  value  chains,  building  on  the  recommendations  of  MSPs  -  areas  pre-identified  during 
the  design  mission  include:  quality  standards  and  certification  for  domestic  and  export  markets; 
fair  contracting  standards  to  bring  transparency  to  contractual  arrangements  between  village 
farmers and buyers and support a fair distribution both of the final value added and of risks; and 
the regulation of imports to ensure access to quality farm inputs; 
  Research: applied research activities  in support to the development of the fresh produce sector 
will  be  identified  in  annual  programmes  to  be  developed  jointly  by  FPDA  (with  support  from  the 
PMU/international technical assistance) and NARI, building on recommendations from the Multi-
Stakeholder  Platforms.  Research  outcomes  will  be  made  available  to  programme  stakeholders, 
through the  value chain  platforms, the MIS and specifically  designed training programmes to be 
delivered  by  service  providers  supporting  the  partnerships.  A  first  key  area  for  research  jointly 
identified with FPDA is in the field of post-harvest management;  
 
Information and communication: the project  will strengthen  information management systems 
with  a  view  to  support  policy  development  and  stakeholders’  decisions  in  the  fresh  produce 
industry and to improve transparency in the sector. To this effect, it will: (i) set up an effective MIS 
within FPDA to ensure stakeholders’ access to technical and market information; (ii) support ICT-
based  solutions  for  facilitating  farmers’  access  to  information;  (iii)  set  up  a  project-based 
knowledge management system, which will track good practices, document successful business 
models  and  innovative  schemes  for  facilitating  farmers’  access  to  inputs  and  markets  and  the 
cost-effective  organisation  of  village  farmers-based  supply  chains;  and  (iv)  organise  targeted 
communication campaigns around key policy and farming practice changes. Similar activities will 
be  organised  to  support  galip  nut  industry  development,  with  lesser  intensity  given  the  incipient 
stage. Knowledge management and sharing are however considered to be key to support sector 
development. 
53. 
Implementation  arrangements.  The  implementation  of  the  sub-component  will  be  the 
responsibility of FPDA Research, Policy and Communication Manager, in collaboration with the Policy 
Development  Manager,  the  MIS  Development  and  Content  Manager,  the  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer, 
FPDA Value Chain Programme Manager and the Production and Value Chain Systems Manager.  
54.  Sub-component  2:  Project  management.  The  strategy  and  activities  related  to  project 
management are described in Section III.  
18 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
55.  Lessons learnt. PPAP has opened the way in PNG two major export value chains, coffee and 
cocoa, by introducing an innovative approach that leverages public and private investment to support 
business  arrangements  between  agribusiness  and  smallholder  farmers.  Five  years  of  PPAP 
implementation point to a number of key lessons learned, which are reflected in the project design7: 
  Farmers’  demand:  there  is  a  strong  demand  from  smallholders,  their  organisations,  and 
cocoa/coffee  buyers  for  engaging  in  demand-driven  partnerships.  Accessible  markets  and 
remunerative prices constitute a powerful incentive for small farmers to increase production; 
  Partnerships: partnerships with agribusiness are efficient to channel services enabling farmers to 
increase  volumes  and  quality  of  produce  in  line  with  market  requirements  and  at  a  scale  that 
cannot be matched by underfinanced public extension services. While sourcing from smallholders 
entails  significant  risks,  the  demand-driven  package  of  incentives  financed  by  PPAP  enables 
agribusiness  to  engage  with  smallholders  and  assists  in  developing  new,  stable  partnerships  in 
their early stages;  
  Farmers’  engagement:  the  strengthening  of  farmers’  organisations  is  key  to  facilitate  the 
channelling of services and produce aggregation, to retain part of the value added, and to enable 
farmers  becoming  less  dependent  of  buying  companies  by  taking  over  some  services  or  by 
negotiating  better  terms  and  conditions.  Partnerships  should  not  only  aim  at  helping  farmers  to 
gain the skills required to produce and market improved volumes and quality, but also ensure that 
adequate  structures  and  capacities  are  in  place  so  that  they  can  have  sustained  access  to 
services and markets once partnerships are over;  
  Lead  partners’  engagement:  project  design  overestimated  lead  partner’s  abilities  to  provide 
quality  support  to  partnerships  in  key  areas  such  as  agricultural  extension,  community 
development  and  farmers’  organisations.  Lead  partners  require  technical  support  and  guidance 
from  the  project  and  must  involve  co-partners  for  the  delivery  of  some  services  in  areas  where 
they do not have a comparative advantage;  
  Community engagement: switching from semi-subsistence farming providing cash as needed to 
farming as a business requires a thorough change of mind-set, which better succeeds when the 
community is involved and has a sense of ownership. However,  the private sector and demand-
driven  nature  of  the  partnerships  may  limit  the  extent  to  which  these  can  address  more  social-
oriented  needs,  including  the  promotion  of  gender  equitable  and  socially  inclusive  approaches. 
Therefore, lead partners require technical support from the project and must involve co-partners 
for the delivery of some services in areas that are not part of their core business; 
  Sustainability: PPAP funding model, whereby from 80 to 90% of partnership costs are borne by 
the project, may be justified by the innovative approach but it is costly, and hard to sustain for the 
GoPNG;  
  Local  government  engagement:  there  is  an  untapped  potential  for  synergies  with  local  and 
provincial  governments  and  for  leveraging  additional  financial  support,  in  particular  for 
infrastructure development and maintenance; 
  Road rehabilitation: while investments are selected on a competitive basis, careful consideration 
needs to be given as to whether there should be some threshold to the competition – e.g. allowing 
each  applying  partnership  at  least  one  investment,  so  as  to  spread  the  benefits  as  widely  as 
possible.  At  all  stages  the  PMU  has  to  work  hard  not  to  raise  expectations  of  farmer  groups  or 
unrealistically,  which  implies  that  the  preparation  process  needs  to  build  in  a  consistent 
consultation  process  and  that  selection  needs  to  be  very  transparent  and  defensible. 
Furthermore, establishing adequate maintenance arrangements needs to be the responsibility of 
a specialist, since it requires considerable input and dedication to identify the future maintenance 
needs,  carry  out  awareness  with  the  respective  parties,  negotiate  the  terms  of  the  MoU,  and 
undertake training of the parties once the works are complete. 
56.  Replication.  MVF  design  has adapted PPAP’s approach to  the specific features of the target 
value  chains,  and  particularly  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector,  where  buyers  are  smaller,  source  from 
7  A  more  extensive  description  of  lessons  learnt  derived  from  the  2001  Country  Programme  Evaluation  and  past  IFAD 
engagement in PNG is in Appendix 3. 
19 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
smaller groups of farmers, and are less familiar with business management and markets than in the 
cocoa and coffee sectors. As in  PPAP, partnerships  will be financed  by  an incentive grant aimed at 
decreasing  partners’  risk  and  facilitating  their  engagement  into  innovative  agricultural  practices  and 
marketing  arrangements.  However,  the  portion  of  partnership  costs  that  will  be  covered  by  the 
incentive grant will be reduced and the project will facilitate partners’ access to credit, with a view to 
enhance sustainability and to benefit larger number of farmers.  Other adaptations include: providing 
technical  and  management  support  to  buyers  as  part  of  the  partnership  activities,  so  that  they  can 
consolidate  and  expand  their  businesses;  providing  technical  and  brokering  services  for  the 
preparation  of  partnerships,  to  ensure  sound  agreements  spelling  out  a  clear  distribution  of 
responsibilities and a balanced share of risks and benefits; supporting gender equitable and socially 
inclusive approaches at community level through the -family-based approach to achieve more impact. 
57.  Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). Table 1 summarises 
potential  project’s  social  and  environmental  impacts,  as  well  as  mitigation  measures  reflected  in 
project design. 
Table 1 - Potential Project Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
Potential impacts 
Social 
Land 
degradation 
Water 
resources 
Road 
construction 
fully 
generated 
participate 
.  Difficulty  of  women  and  youth 
to 
in 
partnerships 
not 
Income 
. 
equitably  shared  among  family 
members.  
.  Deforestation 
expansion of cropping areas. 
fertility 
.  Soil  erosion  and 
depletion  caused  by  cultivation 
of steeply sloping land. 
caused  by 
flows 
.  Use  of  stream 
for 
irrigation may threaten domestic 
water supplies. 
.  Contamination 
supplies by agrochemicals 
of  water 
Temporary 
. Disturbance to the ground and 
vegetation cover. 
. 
construction 
impacts  such  as  dust,  noise, 
waste and wastewater. 
. 
and  disruption 
activities. 
Increased  erosion  potential 
farming 
to 
Mitigation measures 
.  Assessment  of  EOIs  and  applications  for  partnership 
funding  will  include  evaluation  criteria  related  to  social 
inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. 
. Family-based approach. 
to  soil  erosion,  minimum/zero 
. The project will not support agricultural activities involving 
clearance of primary forest. 
.  Model  farms  and  FFS  will  demonstrate  sustainable  land 
terracing,  vegetative 
management  practices  such  as 
barriers 
tillage,  cover 
cropping and mulching. 
. Any irrigation development will be on a very small scale. 
. Hydrological assessments as part of the design of small 
scale  irrigation  systems  to  ensure  that  domestic  water 
supplies and environmental flows are not compromised. 
Farmers  will  be  trained  in  integrated  pest  and  disease 
management and correct use of pesticides and fertiliser  
.  There  will  be  full  community  consultation  in  the  process 
of  identifying  and  designing  feeder  roads  to  ensure  that 
social  and  environmental  concerns  are  recognised  and 
addressed. 
.  Qualified  and  experienced  engineers  will  be  engaged  in 
the  design  and  construction  supervision  of  all  roads  to 
ensure that environmental impacts are minimised. 
58.  The  SECAP  study  carried  out  as  part  of  project  design  determined  that  MVF  pertains  to 
environmental and social category B on the ground that there may be some adverse environmental 
and/or social impacts but the impacts are expected to be moderate in magnitude, site-specific and not 
irreversible in nature; and can be readily remedied by preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. 
The  climate  risk  classification  is  considered  moderate  given  that  the  project  interventions  will  be 
diversified and non-prescriptive. Farming households will be able to choose from a range of different 
crops and farming systems based on their  own experiences about the climate resilience  of different 
options, and will be trained about climate smart agriculture through model farms/FFS. 
59.  Project  design  is  also  in  compliance  with  main  IFAD  policies  and  strategies,  including  with 
regard  to  targeting  and  gender  mainstreaming,  public-private-producer  partnerships  (PPPPs), 
inclusive rural finance, private sector and indigenous people. 
20 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
60.  The  proposed  project  implementation  structure  rests  on  the  current  organisation  of  the 
agriculture  sector,  with  DAL  as  the  project  executing  agency,  delegating  implementation  to  FPDA. 
Key  FER  recommendations/provisions  of  the  draft  Agriculture  Administration  Adjustment  Act  are 
already reflected in project design, including the linkages between commodity boards, provincial and 
district  governments  and  the  development  of  farmer-oriented,  market-driven,  pluralistic  extension 
services.  Another  key  feature  of  the  implementation  framework  is  that  it  is  based  on  public-private 
partnerships:  while  the  government  retains  overall  implementation  responsibility,  private  sector 
players (fresh produce and galip nut buyers, but also financial institutions and business development 
service providers) will have a key role in providing village farmers with support services and access to 
markets. FPDA is already  working closely with market players along the value chain as well as  with 
private  service  providers,  with  a  view  to  reach  out  to  larger  numbers  of  farmers.  MVF  will  enable 
FPDA to leverage its good relations with leading buyers, by supporting partnerships between village 
farmers  and  a  wider  range  of  buyers  of  different  sizes  and  capacities  and  by  connecting  them  with 
financial institutions. 
61.  Service  providers  will  be  hired  to  implement  specific  packages  of  activities  that  go  beyond 
FPDA  competences  or  capacities.  CEFI  has  already  been  pre-identified  and  will  be  responsible  for 
implementing  project  activities  related  to  financial  inclusion  under  Component  2.  Implementation 
responsibilities  will  be  detailed  in  a  MoU,  which  will  be  signed  between  the  PMU,  CEFI  and  DAL. 
CEFI  will  also  lead  the  consortium  that  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  the  family-based 
approach  and  financial  education,  which  it  will  form  together  with  an  international  NGO  with 
experience in household-based methodologies in the PNG context.  
62.  Finally,  the  implementation  set-up  aims  at  strengthening  the  capacities  of  FPDA  to  steer  the 
inclusive  development  of  the  fresh  produce  sector  and  to  provide  technical  advisory  and  market 
support  services  in  line  with  its  mandate.  Therefore,  the  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  is  not 
configured  as  a  self-standing  organisation  but  is  embedded  into  FPDA  and  geared  to  work  closely 
with FPDA divisions. The PMU will collaborate with the three divisions of FPDA, the Corporate Affairs 
Division  which  covers  finance  and  procurement  and  human  resource,  the  Planning  Research  and 
Communication Division and the Production and Value Chain Innovation Division.   
63.  Phasing.  The  project  is  expected  to  start  mid-2017  and  will  be  implemented  over  six  years. 
Phasing will be as follows: 
  Year  1:  the  first  project  year  will  be  devoted  to:  (i)  setting  up  the  organisational  structure  as 
described  below,  including  MoUs  with  CEFI  and  the  consortium  that  will  implement  the  family-
based approach and financial education and the hiring of the International Technical Assistance;                     
(ii)  carrying  out  the  scoping  study  (Component  1);  (iii)  selecting  Business  Development  Service 
Providers and participating financial institutions  (Component 2); (iii) developing the targeting and 
gender  strategy  and  setting  up  the  M&E/KM  system;  (iv)  launching  the  first  call  of  EOIs, 
implementing the family-based approach and starting developing partnerships;  (v) setting up the 
leasing  and  management  agreement  at  NARI’s  pilot  plant  and  launching  other  activities;  and            
(vi) initiating other activities in Components 2 and 3;  
  Year 2: a second call for EOIs will be launched in 2019 and a new batch of partnerships will be 
developed.    The  project  is  designed  in  such  a  way  that  all  partnerships  can  be  supported  for  a 
maximum  of  three  years.  The  first  call  for  proposals  of  infrastructure  sub-projects  will  be 
launched,  followed  by  the  selection  process.  At  the  latest  at  the  end  of  the  second  year,  the 
independent  assessment  of  the  demonstration  of  a  viable  business  model  at  the  galip  nut  pilot 
plant  will  take  place.  The  first  Interim  Review  will  be  carried  out  concomitantly  or  right  after,  to 
review  achievements,  orient  further  development  and  decide  on  whether  to  go  ahead  with  the 
financing of a commercial galip nut processing plant or to reallocate resources; 
  Year  3:  the  third  call  for  EOIs  will  be  launched  in  2020  and  a  last  batch  of  partnerships  will  be 
developed. The second call for proposals of infrastructure sub-projects will be launched  and the 
implementation of the first call sub-projects will start. The feasibility study of the commercial galip 
processing plant will start in case of a successful assessment;  
21 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Year  4:  the  third  and  last  call  for  proposals  of  infrastructure  sub-projects  will  be  launched.  The 
second  Interim  Review  will  be  conducted  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  year.  It  will  make 
recommendations  with  regard  to  key  measures  required  to  secure  the  sustainability  of  project 
achievements, based on which the PMU will prepare a detailed exit strategy; 
  Year 5 - Year 6: activities will proceed and progressively come to an end. The PMU main concern 
will be to ensure sustainability  and the  implementation of the  exit strategy  in close collaboration 
with FPDA. 
B.  Organisational framework 
64.  Against this background, the main features of MVF implementation setting are as follows:  
  DAL  is  the  project  executing  agency  that  is  responsible  for  overall  accountability,  oversight  and 
coordination.  A  Project  Coordination  Unit  will  be  established  within  DAL  to  ensure  strong 
coordination and oversight, and to act as a Secretariat for the Project Steering Committee; 
  FPDA  is  the  project  implementing  agent  with  overall  responsibility  for  project  implementation.  A 
Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  embedded  in  FPDA  will  assist  in  carrying  out  project 
implementation responsibilities; 
  Provincial  teams  led  by  FPDA  current  staff  and  staffed  with  seconded  district  extension  officers 
will be responsible for field implementation of project activities in each of the target provinces; 
  Provincial  governments  will  facilitate  project  implementation  at  the  provincial  level,  through  the 
appointment of fully dedicated Focal Points;  
  District governments will have a similar role at district level and will co-finance road works; 
  A Project Steering Committee gathering the representatives of main stakeholders involved in MVF 
implementation will provide overall guidance and oversight;  
  An  independent  Technical  Appraisal  Committee  will  be  responsible  for  assessing  partnership 
proposals and bring transparency and objectivity in the selection process; 
  Fresh  Produce/Galip  Nut  Multi-Stakeholder  Platforms  will  be  established  at 
the 
national/provincial/district  levels,  and  will  provide  a  venue  to  discuss  sector  challenges  and 
constraints. Multi-stakeholders’ platforms will also be involved in the preparation of Annual Work 
Plans and Budgets (AWPB), as well as in the identification of policy studies; 
  A  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  embedded  in  FPDA  will  assist  in  carrying  out  project 
implementation responsibilities; 
  CEFI  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  activities  related  to  financial  inclusion,  by  virtue  of  a 
MoU signed with the PMU. 
65.  Figure 2 represents the project institutional set-up. 
22 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Figure 2 – Project implementation set-up  
66.  DAL.  As  the  project  executing  agency,  DAL  will  be  responsible  for  overall  accountability, 
oversight  and  coordination  of  the  project,  under  the  direct  authority  of  DAL  Secretary.  This  would 
notably  include  the  chairing  of  the  Project  Steering  Committee;  the  approval  of  Annual  Work  Plans 
and  Budgets (AWPB) and  Annual Procurement Plans (APP); the  approval  of  technical and financial 
reports;  the  endorsement  of  Withdrawal  Applications  (WA)  and  Statements  of  Expenditure  (SOE), 
prepared  by  PMU  and  submitted  by  FPDA’s  General  Manager,  for  subsequent  approval  of  the 
Department of Treasury; project technical and financial reports prepared by FPDA with PMU support; 
the facilitation of policy dialogue; and the coordination between MVF and other relevant initiatives in 
the  agriculture  sector.  A  small  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  will  be  established  within  DAL  to 
support DAL executing its functions. The PCU will consist of a Project Coordinator, an M&E Officer, 
and an IFAD Liaison officer. 
67.  FPDA.  As  MVF  implementing  agency,  FPDA  will  be  responsible  for  project  management  and 
coordination of government and non-government agencies participating in the project. FPDA will also 
be  responsible  for  day  to  day  financial  management  activities,  including  accounting,  reporting  and 
coordinating audit processes. The FPDA General Manager will have overall responsibility for project 
implementation. However, line responsibility for day-to-day project implementation will be delegated to 
the  PMU  Coordinator.  The  PMU  will  be  organised  within  FPDA  so  that  it  works  closely  with  FPDA 
divisions and sections (see FPDA organisational chart in Attachment 1), with adequate distribution of 
responsibilities to ensure smooth delivery of project investments.  
68.  Provincial  Teams.  Provincial  Teams  in  each  of  the  target  provinces  will  be  responsible  for 
implementing Component 1 in their respective provinces. Each Provincial Team will be headed by an 
FPDA  middle  manager  and  staffed  with  two  seconded  district  extension  staff.  To  expand  district 
exposure  to  project  activities  and  increase  the  number  of  district  officers  that  could  get  practical 
experience, consideration will be given to renewing the team of seconded district officers after three 
years. Provincial Teams will be under the direct supervision of the PMU Coordinator with regard to the 
implementation of project activities, and overall supervision of the FPDA General Manager. FPDA will 
open  provincial  offices  in  Simbu  and  Jiwaka  to  accommodate  the  Provincial  Teams,  for  which  MVF 
includes a small provision for setting up and refurbishment of office. In East New Britain, activities will 
be  reduced  and  there  will  therefore  be  only  one  Galip  Nut  Manager,  who  will  be  placed  under  the 
direct authority of the PMU. Provincial Teams will in particular be responsible for the following in their 
respective.  provinces:  promote  the  calls  for  expression  of  interest;  facilitate  the  preparation  of  full 
partnership proposals, with support from a Business Development Service Provider (BDSP); facilitate 
the  implementation  of  the  family-based  approach  and  the  implementation  of  MVF  GESI  strategy,  in 
collaboration with the GESI Officer; monitor partnership implementation and provide M&E training to 
Lead  partners  and  VEWs;  support  the  organisation  of  annual  partnership  reviews;  prepare  and 
23 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
facilitate  the  meetings  of  the  district/provincial  MSPs;  and  ensure  the  M&E  of  all  project  activities  in 
the province, in collaboration with partnerships.    
69.  Province and district governments will co-finance project activities with resources from their 
regular  budgets  or  PSIP/DSIP  resources  earmarked  for  economic  activities,  or  by  seconding  district 
staff  and  paying 
their  salary.  Focal  Points  will  be  designated  by  every  participating 
province/district. 
for 
70.  Project  Steering  Committee.  A  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  be  set  up  at  the 
national level to provide overall guidance and oversight, to ensure that MVF programming is aligned 
on  national  sector  priorities,  to  offer  a  venue  for  sharing  MVF  good  practices  and  for  channelling 
policy issues to the appropriate policy making bodies. The PSC will also approve annual AWPBs and 
annual  progress  and  financial  reports,  prepared  by  FPDA/PMU  and  endorsed  by  DAL.  It  will  be 
chaired by DAL Secretary and will include representatives from major public and private stakeholders 
(see Appendix 5). The PMU Liaison Officer based in DAL  (see below)  will provide the Secretariat to 
the PSC. 
71.  Technical  Appraisal  Committee.  An  independent  Technical  Appraisal  Committee  (TAC)  will 
be  set  up  to  appraise  partnership  proposals  submitted  by  the  PMU,  rank  them  and  provide  a 
recommendation for their financing, prior to their approval by FPDA Board. All TAC members will be 
individuals with an established reputation for their knowledge of the sector and their integrity. 
72.  Project Coordination Unit. A small Project Coordination Unit will be established within DAL to 
strengthen  project  coordination  and  oversight.  The  PMU  established  in  FPDA  headquarters  would 
focus on managing the implementation of three components of the project in the target provinces and 
provide oversight over the Galip nut project in East New Britain.  The PMU will continue to perform its 
financial  reporting  and  submission  of  financial  statements  and  withdrawal  applications  through  the 
PCU  for  on-forwarding  to  Treasury  to  sign  off  and  submit  to  IFAD  for  approval  or  no  objection.  The 
PCU will consist of a Project Coordinator, an M&E Officer, and the IFAD Liaison Officer. 
73.  Project Management Unit. The PMU, which will be imbedded within FPDA, will be responsible 
for carrying out MVF implementation responsibilities and will be fully accountable for the performance 
of  project  implementation  and  the  use  of  funds.  It  will  be  responsible  for:  (i)  providing  strategic 
guidance  to  ensure  that  all  project  implementation  partners  develop  activities  along  a  common, 
coherent approach in line with the Project Design Report; (ii) ensuring the financial and administrative 
management  of  project  resources  in  line  with  the  Loan  Agreement  and  IFAD  rules;  (iii)  planning 
project  activities  in  consultation  with  project  stakeholders;  (iv)  procuring  project-related  services  and 
supplies; (iv) coordinating project activities with the various project partners; (v) securing M&E and KM 
in relation to all activities; and (vi) promoting inclusive approaches and the mainstreaming of targeting 
and gender requirements in all of the project activities. 
74.  Composition.  FPDA  based  in  Goroka  (Eastern  Highlands),  the  apex  industry  coordinating 
body  for  the  fresh  produce  sector.  FPDA  provides  technical  and  market  information  to  smallholder 
farmers  and  other  key  players  in  the  horticulture  value  chain.  The  MVF  PMU  and  the  Eastern 
Highlands Provincial team will be based in Goroka at FPDA premises. FPDA will expand its existing 
office  (with  MVF  financing)  to  accommodate  the  PMU  until  FPDA  new  premises  are  ready.  MVF 
Liaison Officer and the IFAD Liaison Officer will be based in Port Moresby, within DAL premises. The 
Galip Nut Manager will be based at FPDA provincial office in Kokopo. 
75.  The PMU will comprise the staff indicated in Table 2. Detailed job descriptions are attached to 
Appendix 5.  
Table 2 – PMU Staff 
Goroka 
1 PMU Coordinator 
1 Production and Value Chain System Manager 
1 Infrastructure Engineer 
1 Policy Development Officer  
1 Senior M&E/KM Officer 
1 MIS Content Manager 
1 GESI Officer 
1 Financial and Administration Manager   
1 Procurement Officer 
1 Accountant  
24 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
1 Office Assistant 
2 Drivers 
Port Moresby (based at DAL) 
1 MVF Liaison Officer 
1 IFAD Liaison Officer 
Mount Hagen, Kurumul, Kundiawa, Goroka, Lae 
1 Provincial Team Manager (paid by FPDA) 
2 seconded District Agriculture Officers (paid by districts) 
1 M&E Officer 
Kokopo (based at FPDA) 
1 Galip Nut Manager 
76.  The IFAD Liaison  Officer  that  will be based in  the PCU within  DAL. S/he  will be responsible 
for facilitating the  linkages  between IFAD and  the GoPNG.  Sh/e  will  also help  GoPNG  in accessing 
IFAD  regional  initiatives  and  other,  non-project  services  that  will  tap  on  IFAD  expertise  to  foster 
inclusive rural growth. 
77.  Project Expeditor.  A  Project Expeditor  will be  hired  to support fast project start-up. Terms of 
reference are in Attachment 4. 
78.  Service providers. Service providers will be hired to implement specific packages of activities 
that  go  beyond  FPDA  competences  or  capacities.  Aside  from  CEFI  and  the  consortium  that  will 
implement  the  family-based  approach  and  financial  education  (see  above),  service  providers  will  be 
engaged to provide technical and business management services to the partnerships. FPDA will have 
overall  responsibility  for  facilitating  and  monitoring  technical  advisory  services  supplied  by  service 
providers.  The  availability,  range  of  services  offered,  capabilities  and  capacities  of  potential  service 
providers will be assessed as part of the scoping study undertaken within Component 1.1. All service 
providers  will  be  hired  based  on  a  competitive  basis  in  line  with  IFAD  procurement  guidelines.  All 
service providers’ contracts will stipulate clear deliverables and will specify responsibilities with regard 
to  monitoring  and  reporting.  Terms  of  reference  for  service  providers  will  require  gender-balanced 
teams, and that contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target and indicators. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
79.  Objectives.  The  integrated  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  and  knowledge  management 
(KM) system will be developed with three main objectives: 
 
 
 
steer project implementation: it should provide project stakeholders with information and analysis 
required to: measure project outcomes; assess project effects on the livelihoods of target groups, 
and  in  particular  women,  poor  households  and  youth;  assess  the  relevance  of  the  project 
strategy,  methodologies  and  implementation  processes;  detect  difficulties  and  successes;  and 
support decision-making to improve project performance;  
support economic decisions and policymaking: it should provide project stakeholders, in particular 
farmers  and  agribusiness  partners,  service  providers,  FPDA  and  the  PMU,  with  the  information 
and  analysis  they  need  to  assess  the  return  brought  by  innovation,  to  develop  profitable  and 
sustainable activities and to adapt their strategies accordingly. It should also provide FPDA and 
DAL with the information needed to make policy decisions; 
share  knowledge  and  upscale  good  practices:  it  should  develop  lessons  learnt,  capture  good 
practices  and  successful  innovation,  and  share  knowledge,  with  a  view  to  support  project 
performance and policy dialogue.  
80.  Strategic principles. The M&E and KM system will be accessible to  all stakeholders and not 
restricted  to  PMU  or  FPDA  staff,  and  it  should  associate  project  stakeholders  in  the  definition  of 
indicators,  data  collection,  analysis  and  dissemination  of  results.  It  should  be  geared  to  generate 
analysis, learning and sharing in support of decision-making and policy dialogue, and not merely on 
data  production.  It  should  be  harmonised  with  FPDA  and  GoPNG  relevant  information  systems.  It 
should  have  an  inclusive  approach  so  that  women,  poor  and  marginalised  groups  participate  in  the 
system.  Finally,  it  should  be  phased,  thus  small  initially  and  developing  as  needs  and  capacities 
increase. 
25 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
81.  Framework and implementation plans.  The M&E system will be setup and managed by the 
PMU, in consultation  with  FPDA and  other project stakeholders,  and  with support from  a short-term 
international  consultant.  PPAP  PMUs  will  be  consulted  to  build  on  their  experience.  The  consultant 
will  produce  a  detailed  M&E/KM  manual,  together  with  an  implementation  plan,  including  capacity 
development arrangements.  
82.  Baseline and completion survey. The PMU will carry a baseline study measuring the status 
of  main  indicators  at  project  onset,  with  assistance  from  an  outsourced  qualified  consulting  firm. 
Additionally,  mini-baseline  surveys  will  be  carried  out  by  Lead  partners  as  part  of  the  partnership 
preparation process. An impact assessment and outcome survey will be carried out in preparation to 
the second  interim review  (end of 2021) and again  at the end of the project, to  compare the impact 
generated by project interventions with the baseline study.  
83.  Project  planning,  data  collection  and  analysis.  The  M&E/KM  cycle  will  start  with  the 
preparation  of  the  project  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPBs),  which  will  build  on  AWPBs 
prepared by Lead Partners, CEFI and other service providers and they will be submitted to the PSC 
for final approval.  M&E data will be collected against both qualitative and quantitative indicators and 
disaggregated  by  gender,  at  the  partnership  level  (where  information  will  be  gathered  by  Lead 
Partners and Village Extension Workers, with support from the Provincial Teams), provincial and sub-
contractor levels (CEFI) and will be collated by the Senior M&E/KM Officer. The MIS (see Component 
3) will also encompass project related data, as well as lessons learnt, good practices and innovative 
business  models.  Data  will  be  consolidated  and  analysed  so  as  to  provide  information  on  the 
performance of the various components, detect problems, identify possible solutions and track good 
practices to share through the knowledge management system. A monthly dashboard will be issued 
by  the  PMU,  which  will  be  electronically  distributed  and  will  disclose  project  performance  and 
achievements  to  project  stakeholders,  after  the  experience  of  IFAD-financed  Coastal  Community 
Development Project (CCDP) in Indonesia8.  
84.  Knowledge  management.  The  purpose  of  KM  is  to  ensure  that  knowledge  generated  within 
the  project  is  systematically  identified,  analysed,  documented  and  shared,  and  that  it  is  used  to:  (i) 
improve  project  performance  and  delivery  of  project  objectives;  (ii)  be  flexible  and  responsive  to 
changing  circumstances;    (iii)  support  the  dissemination  of  innovation  to  the  benefit  of  stakeholders 
throughout the project area and beyond; (iv) provide information to support decisions on up-scaling  to 
be  made  at  interim  review;  and  (v)  identify  important  issues  to  convey  to  policy  makers.  Particular 
attention  will  be  given to documenting: (i) business models for ensuring farmers’ access to services 
and  markets,  in  the  framework  of  MVF-supported  partnerships;  (ii)  innovative  modalities  for  sharing 
benefits  and  risks  between  partners;  (iii)  innovative  models  for  accessing  financial  services;  (iv)  the 
family-based  approach  and  women  and  youth  empowerment. 
In  consultation  with  project 
stakeholders  and  in  collaboration  with  the  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer,  the  same  consultant  hired  to 
design  the  M&E  system  will  prepare  a  detailed  KM  framework  and  implementation  plan.  The 
framework will include objectives, responsibilities and methodology, together with an implementation 
plan for the first  year,  which  will be regularly  updated. It  will also  include  a communication strategy, 
which  will  outline  how  knowledge  will  be  disseminated  and  will 
identify  most  appropriate 
communication channels according to the target audience.  
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
85.  DAL  will  have  overall  accountability  for  the  Project,  including  fiduciary  aspects.  The  Project 
Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  approve  the  project's  annual  work  plans  and  budgets  (AWPBs)  and 
Procurement Plans, for IFAD´s no objection. A good governance and mutual accountability framework 
(IFAD  and  GoPNG)  will  be  adopted  to  strengthen  accountabilities  and  transparency,  in  line  with 
international best practices. 
86.  The day to day implementation will be delegated by DAL to the PMU embedded within FPDA, 
which  will  be  responsible  for  day  to  day  financial  management  activities,  including  accounting, 
reporting and coordinating audit processes 
8 https://asia.ifad.org/web/ccdp/resources/-/resource_library/7805/newsletter.  
26 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
87.  DAL will request DOF to open two Trust Bank Accounts for FPDA/PMU to received funds from 
IFAD and from the government, beneficiaries and partners and one trust bank account for the FPDA 
Provincial Team to receive IFAD funds to cover operations costs. 
88.  Financial  management.  MVF  financial  management  will  be  governed  by  the  Public 
Management  Act  and  the  Department  of  Finance  (DOF)  regulations,  and  will  be  in  line  with  IFAD 
guidelines  on  financial  management.  The  financial  management  system  will  be  under  the  overall 
responsibility of the PMU. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are 
used  only  for  the  purpose  intended  under  the  Financing  Agreement,  in  an  efficient  and  economical 
way  and  in  accordance  with  the  activities  described  in  the  Project  Design  Report  and  in  the  Annual 
Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs);  (ii)  the  disbursement  of  project  funds  facilitates  the  timely 
implementation  of  activities;  (iii)  funds  are  properly  managed,  disbursed  and  documented  and  flow 
rapidly,  adequately,  regularly  and  predictably;  (iv)  accurate  financial  reports  are  issued  on  a  timely 
basis;  (v)  a  robust  flow  of  reliable  information  on  project  activities  facilitates  accountability, 
transparency and disclosure; and (vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded. 
89.  Main  features  of  the  financial  management  system  will  be  as  follows:  (i)  establishment  of  the 
PMU  with  delegated  authority  to  plan,  manage,  disburse  and  control  project  resources  (including 
counterpart financing); (ii) hiring of key financial and administrative management staff from the market 
with  relevant  experience  and  qualifications  and  establishing  the  PMU  office  with  adequate  office 
facilities and equipment; (iii) establishment of Provincial Teams; (iv) preparation of AWPBs, for review 
by DAL PCU, and approval by the PSC and by IFAD; (v) (iv) submission of WAs and SOEs to DAL 
PCU  for  endorsement,  with  a  cover  letter  by  FPDA  GM  for  submission  to  DoT  for  approval  and 
onward  submission  to  IFAD  for  fund  release;  (v)  procurement  and  installation  of  an  accounting 
software, and associated  staff capacity  building; (vi) preparation of a financial management manual, 
integrating  controls  closely  linked  to  the  project  operational  dimensions  and  consistent  with  FPDA 
financial  policies  and  IFAD  financial  and  disbursement  guidelines;  (vii)  establishment  of  a  control 
framework integrating periodic internal audits and annual external audits, and social safeguards to be 
adopted based on IFAD policies; (viii) adoption of a good governance and mutual (IFAD and GoPNG) 
accountability framework to strengthen accountability and transparency in line with international best 
practices (see below). Details of financial management arrangement are in Appendix 7. 
90.  Procurement.  The  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  from  resources 
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with the GoPNG regulations and 
consistent with the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook. Goods and services 
(non-consulting)  procured  using  International  or  National  Competitive  Bidding,  National  Shopping 
(NS)  and  Direct  Contracting  (DC)  will  follow  the  procedures  and  processes  defined  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) approved by the Project Steering Committee and IFAD. The selection 
of individual consultants and individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM,  which shall 
include details of the selection method to be applied in case of consultancies services such as Quality 
and  Cost  Based  Selection,  Fixed  Budget  Selection,  Least  Cost  Selection,  Consultants  Qualification 
Selection  and  Single  Source  Selection.  The  PMU  will  submit  an  18-month  Procurement  Plan 
immediately after the Financing Agreement enters into force, with support from the Project Expeditor, 
and it  will update it  annually  or as required to reflect  actual  implementation  needs.  Procurement will 
be  undertaken  as  per  the  consolidated  procurement  plan  submitted  by  the  PMU  approved  by  the 
Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  and  by  IFAD.  Detailed  procedures  for  procurement  are  in 
Appendix 8. 
91.  Governance.  PNG  is  ranked  139th  out  of  168  countries,  with  a  score  of  2.5/10,  in  the 
Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) published by Transparency International in 2015.  This  indicates 
high risk in overall country context. The 2015 Public Financial Management (PFM) conducted by the 
International Monetary Fund  rated  inherent risks at country  level, based on an assessment of PEFA 
indicators grouped under seven pillars. Three pillars (Credibility of fiscal strategy and budget, Policy 
based  planning  and  Budgeting  and  comprehensiveness  and  transparency)  scored  well,  while  the 
remaining  four  (Assets  and  liability  management,  Predictability  and  control  in  budget  execution, 
accounting,  recording  and  reporting,  and  External  scrutiny  and  audit)  were  deemed  weak  (details 
provided in Appendix 7 Financial Management).   
92. 
IFAD  will  apply  a  zero-tolerance  policy  on  corruption.  The  PMU  will  prepare  an  Integrated 
Framework for Good Governance, which will be included in the PIM and published on MVF website. 
27 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
This  framework  will  include  provisions  to  ensure  that  procurement  and  the  selection  of  enterprises 
that will enter into business partnerships and benefit from MVF support, are carried out in accordance 
with  GoPNG  and  IFAD  rules  (including  IFAD’s  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  Its 
Activities  and  Operations);  and  with  project  design  specifications.  The  framework  Measures  will 
include:  (i)  the  publication/posting  of  all  procurement,  calls  for  proposals,  contract  awarding  and 
business  partnership  details  on  local  newspapers,  at  district  and  provincial  offices  and  on  MVF 
website,  including  assessment  criteria  and  weighing;  (ii)  the  participation  of  representatives  of  end-
users in bid assessments; (iii) the prompt communication to bidders of bid evaluation outcomes; (iv) 
contracts  will  include  a  provision  requiring  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants  to  ensure 
compliance  with  IFAD  zero  tolerance  anticorruption  policy  and  to  permit  IFAD  to  inspect  their 
accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission and contract performance, and 
to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors; and (iv) rules to allow potential project beneficiaries 
and other stakeholders to channel and address any complaints they may have on the implementation 
of the Project.  
93.  This  framework  will  also  include  an  internal code  of  conduct  to  be  signed  by  all  PMU  staff, 
and a  code  of  business  ethics,  to  be  signed  by  all  partners  and  beneficiaries  of  MVF  activities  and 
business partnerships. The draft framework and codes will be prepared with support from the Project 
Expeditor and subsequently discussed and agreed upon at the project inception workshop. 
94.  Other  measures  reflected  in  project  design  to  ensure  transparency  include  the  following:                      
(i)  IFAD’s  direct  supervision  process  will  specifically  address  fiduciary  compliance  and  the 
implementation of the project framework for transparency and publicity; (ii) project stakeholders will be 
directly involved in programming, implementation and M&E of MVF activities; (iii) MSPs will provide a 
forum  for  raising  issues  affecting  value  chain  development,  including  transparency.  Details  are 
provided in Appendix 8... 
E.  Supervision and Implementation Support 
Inception. An inception workshop will be organised with project stakeholders and implementing 
95. 
partners to ensure that all partners understand and agree on the scope and implementing modalities 
of the project and to introduce key processes, tools, strategies for M&E and KM. 
96. 
Implementation Support.  Twice annually joint review missions (supervision) will be organised 
by  IFAD  jointly  with  GoPNG  and  participating  partners,  in  close  collaboration  with  FPDA,  Provincial 
Teams and project stakeholders. ISMs will offer an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons 
jointly,  to  review  compliance  with  the  conditions  of  the  Financing  Agreement,  to  review  innovations, 
and to reflect on improvement measures.  
Interim reviews. Two interim reviews will be organised by IFAD, the GoPNG and participating 
97. 
donors,  at  the  end  of  year  three  and  in  year  five.  The  reviews  will:  (i)  assess  achievements  and 
interim  impact,  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  MVF  management,  and  the  continued  validity  of 
MVF design; (ii) identify key lessons learnt and good practices; and (iii) provide recommendations for 
improved performance. Specific issues to be addressed include the following: 
  Effectiveness and performance of the partnerships, including with regard to the sharing of benefits 
and risks between partners; 
  Performance of partners in terms of productivity, quality, and profitability; 
  Progress in gender equality and social inclusion, and effectiveness of targeting and of the  family-
based approach; 
  Performance  of  financial  institutions  in  delivering  project-supported  financial  instruments  and  in 
improving financial inclusion in the financial sector; 
  Progress and effectiveness of value chain organisation and institution building; 
  Performance of the PMU and of key implementation partners.  
Impact  assessment.  Impact  surveys  will  be  carried  out  in  preparation  to  the  second  interim 
98. 
review (end  of 2021) and  again prior to project completion to measure changes at beneficiary  level, 
28 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
compared to the baseline study. Survey data and analysis will be shared with the multi-stakeholders’ 
platforms.  
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
99.  Table 3 identifies main risks and mitigation measures built into project design. 
Table 3: Risks and mitigation measures  
Risk description 
Limited interest on behalf of agribusiness to 
expand operations with smallholders 
because of the risks and high transaction 
costs involved 
Limited benefits to women because of social 
and cultural context 
Wantok networks or cultural patterns 
undermine partnership operations and 
economic lines of cooperation at community 
level 
Weak technical and management capacities 
of farmers’ organisations and lack of 
capacities to negotiate fair deals with private 
investors  
Climate change and extreme climatic events 
(higher rainfall, longer dry seasons) 
Probability of 
occurrence 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Remoteness of some production areas 
High 
Tenure  insecurity  associated  to  demographic 
pressure  and  expansion  of  cash-cropping 
activities 
Medium 
Uncertainty with regard to profitability of 
commercial galip nut processing  
Medium 
Financial institutions are not interested in 
extending services in the rural areas 
Low 
Delays in making available public funds 
High 
No experience by FPDA for management of 
IFAD funds 
Medium 
29 
Mitigation measures 
.  Provision  of  incentives  to  support  private  sector 
engagement 
.  Technical  support  services 
productivity  
.  Family-based  approach 
empowerment within family unit 
. Family-based approach to gain community support for 
partnerships and project activities 
support  women 
improve 
farmers’ 
to 
to 
.  Project  playing  role  of  a  fair  broker  to  support 
equitable and remunerative partnerships 
.  Support  to  developing  sustainable  management  of 
farmers’ organisations 
. Integration of climate risk assessment into the value chain 
analysis and assessment 
. Promotion of climate-resilient varieties and of water, crop 
and soil management practices 
.  Promotion  of  crop  insurance  and  weather-based  index 
insurance 
. Climate-resilient improvement of feeder roads 
.Spot improvements on feeder roads 
. Development of mobile phone money applications and 
ICT-solutions for accessing services  
.  Community  structures  will  be  sensitised  to  facilitate 
sustainable land tenure arrangements as part of family-
based approach 
.  All  communal  land  uses  will  be  covered  with  Clan 
Land Usage Agreements between the partnerships and 
the land owners 
.  Preparatory  activities  aimed  at  demonstrating  viable 
business model and independent assessment required 
to confirm viability prior to invest in processing plant 
.  Thorough  technical,  economic  and  marketing  studies 
prior to unlock financing 
.  
. Incentive schemes and risk-sharing will offset risk, as 
well  as  prospect  to  build  a  financial  literate,  credit-
worthy clientele 
Availability  of  district  funds  will  be  a  criterion  to  select 
spot 
proposals 
locations 
improvement 
forwarded by partnerships 
FPDA  has  experience  with  administering  external 
financing.  FPDA  has  a  Finance  and  Administrative 
Manual  and  a  fully  structured  and  staffed  Finance  and 
Administrative unit. PIM will include detailed procedures 
on  financial  management  and  procurement  including 
the  adoption  of  a  financial  and  administrative  manual 
consistent  with  FPDA  financial  policies  and  IFAD 
financial  and  disbursement  guidelines.  Mitigation 
measures include 
(i)  the  establishment  of  the  PMU  with  delegated 
among 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Risk description 
Probability of 
occurrence 
Mitigation measures 
financing); 
experience 
authority to plan, manage, disburse and control project 
(ii) 
(including 
resources 
counterpart 
financial  and  administrative 
contracting  of  key 
management 
and 
relevant 
with 
qualifications; (iii) preparation of AWPBs, for review by 
DAL,  and  approval  by  the  PSC;  (iv)  procurement  and 
installation  of  an  accounting  software,  and  associated 
staff  capacity  building;  (v)  preparation  of  a  financial 
management manual, integrating controls closely linked 
to  the  project  operational  dimensions  and  consistent 
with  FPDA  financial  policies  and  IFAD  financial  and 
disbursement  guidelines;  (vi)  establishment  of  an 
internal  control  framework,  including  periodic  internal 
audits;  (vii)  submission  of  quarterly  financial  reports  to 
DAL  and  IFAD;  and  (viii) coordination  of external  audit 
processes. 
Because  of  the  structure  of  the  economy  and  of  the 
country’s  population,  agriculture  sector  will  remain  an 
important  priority.  The  project  start-up  has  been 
delayed to October 2017 to mitigate the risk of political 
instability immediately following elections 
Changes in policy orientations further to 
June 2017 elections 
Low 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
100.  The  total  programme  costs,  including  physical  and  price  contingencies,  duties  and  taxes,  are 
estimated  at  USD  50.26 million  over  a  six-year  implementation  period.  Programme  investments  are 
organised  into  three  major  components:  (i) Inclusive  business  partnerships  (44.8%  of  the  costs); 
(ii) Supportive  Value  Chain  Investments  (39.6%  of  the  costs);  (iii)  Collective  governance  and 
programme  management  (15.6%  of  the  costs).  A  summary  breakdown  of  the  programme  costs  by 
components is shown below in Table 4. 
Table 4. Programme costs by component 
30 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 8703,4645,6137,6812,10274820,4792. Galip nut development 4302968814287-2,042Subtotal 1,3013,7606,4948,1092,10974822,521B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads -523,7314,7575,0823,36916,9902. Financial inclusion 82983479835781-2,899Subtotal 8298864,5295,1145,1633,36919,889C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 1474645463961701611,8832. Project Management 1,0648521,0339711,0659825,966Subtotal 1,2111,3151,5791,3671,2341,1437,849Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,260 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
B.  Project financing 
101.  An IFAD loan will cover USD 25.5 million, or 50.7% of the total programme cost. The GoPNG 
will contribute USD 2.85 million (5.7%), beneficiaries USD 1.21 million (2.4%), financial institutions will 
finance USD 4.22 million  (8.4 per cent) of the total programme cost, and provinces and districts will 
contribute USD 13 million or 25.9% of the total programme cost. The project currently has a financing 
gap  of  USD  3.47  million,  or  6.9%.    Should  another  co-financier  not  be  confirmed,  such  as  the  EU, 
IFAD will meet this financing gap over the next PBAS cycle.  
102.  Financial  institutions  and  beneficiaries  will  contribute  to  the  financing  of  partnerships  in 
Component 1. Provinces and districts will contribute with USD 13 million to the Spot Improvements of 
Field  Roads  sub-component.    The  Government  contribution  will  mainly  consist  in  exemption  from 
taxes  and  duties  on  all  programme  inputs  that  involve  funding  from  the  IFAD  loan.  The  estimate  of 
taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect prevailing at the time of the design. The proposed 
financing plan is summarised in Table 5 below. 
Table 5: Programme Financing Plan 
103.  For  detailed  information  on  programme  cost  and  financing,  reference  is  made  to  Appendix  9, 
which  includes  a  more  elaborate  explanation,  as  well  as  a  complete  set  of  summary  and  detailed 
costs tables in its Attachments.  
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
104.  The  programme  objective  is  to  achieve  sustainable  increased  returns  to  village  farming 
households,  from  improved  market  linkages.  Benefits  will  derive  from:  (i)  improving  small  farmers’ 
access to markets, technologies and services in the target value chains; (ii) developing different types 
of business partnerships involving small farmers and agribusiness; (iii)  reducing post-harvest losses; 
(iv) improving value chain environment to facilitate smallholder farmers’ inclusion; and (v) supporting 
policies and institutional capacities required to ensure sustainability. 
105.  Number  of  beneficiaries.  The  project  is  expected  to  benefit  about  23,2009  households.  This 
would  represent  46,400  primary  beneficiaries  in  application  of  the  household  approach,  where  two 
members  of  the  same  family  (generally  husband  and  wife)  will  receive  project  support  (see 
Component  1).  Women  will  constitute  50%  of  beneficiaries.  Around  117,500  people  would  directly 
benefit  from  project  activities  based  on  a  household  of  five  members.  Moreover,  based  on  FPDA’s 
experience  whereby,  for  every  trained  farmer,  four  people  indirectly  benefit  (by  spontaneously 
adopting  improved  practices  introduced  by  training  beneficiaries),  the  total  number  of  indirect 
beneficiaries  expected  is  185,600  individuals.  In  the  final  economic  aggregation,  the  analysis 
conservatively considers a benefit/adoption rate of 70% for the farm models  and an adoption rate of 
90% for the consolidators business models, reflecting the following: (i) farmers’ project uptake may be 
9 Indicative figure based on the number of estimated number of farmer groups supported by each partnership and the number 
of  farmers  per  group.  Actual  numbers  will  depend  on  the  number  and  content  of  actual  partnerships  EOIs  and  applications 
received. 
31 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersComponents by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 1,1885.811,53456.3--2,32011.31,2145.94,22320.620,47940.72. Galip nut development 1175.777337.9--1,15256.4----2,0424.1Subtotal 1,3055.812,30754.6--3,47215.41,2145.44,22318.822,52144.8B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads 3782.23,61321.313,00076.5------16,99033.82. Financial inclusion 2458.42,65491.6--------2,8995.8Subtotal 6223.16,26731.513,00065.4------19,88939.6C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 29415.61,58984.4--------1,8833.72. Project Management 62910.55,33789.5--------5,96611.9Subtotal 92311.86,92688.2--------7,84915.6Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.0 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
lower  than  expected;  and  (ii)  farmers  supplying  micro  partners  will  not  receive  any  input  packages 
(see annex 10 for more details). 
106.  Summary  of  the  results  of  financial  models.  Eleven  illustrative  financial  models  were 
prepared  to  demonstrate  the  financial  viability  of  the  investments.  Five  crop  models,  on  1  ha,  were 
prepared and used as bases for the farm models: (i) broccoli crop model, (ii) sweet potato crop model, 
(iii)  cabbage  crop  model,  (iv)  bulb  onion  crop  model,  and  (v)  potato  crop  model.  Two  farm  models 
were  developed  on  0.5  ha:  (i)  farm  1  –  where  0.2  ha  is  cropped  with  sweet  potato,  0.1  ha  with 
broccoli, 0.1 ha  with cabbage and 0.1 ha  with bulb onion, (ii) farm 2  - where 0.2 ha is cropped  with 
sweet potato, 0.1 ha with broccoli, 0.1 ha with bulb onion and 0.1 ha with potato. In order to show the 
benefits  accruing  to  other  actors  of  the  value  chain,  three  consolidators’  business  models  –  micro, 
small and medium10 -  were also developed.  Finally, a  galip nut intercropped with cocoa model  was 
also developed in order to show the additional income that a smallholder cocoa producer can earn by 
also harvesting nuts from galip trees, where they are used as shade trees for cocoa trees.. 
107.  Table 6 below summarizes the main results of the crop models, farm models, business models 
and  the  galip  nut  model11.  All  models  generate  attractive  results  in  terms  of  NPV,  and  Benefit/Cost 
ratio. Similarly, the net incomes after labour are positive already starting from the second year. 
Table 6. Financial models summary
108.  Economic  Rate  of  Return.  The  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  of  the 
programme is estimated at  39% for the base case. The  Net  Present Value  (NPV) of the net benefit 
stream, discounted at 7%, is USD 140.4 million. The economic analysis is detailed in appendix 10. 
109.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  In  order  to  test  the  robustness  of  the  economic  analyses  results,  a 
sensitivity  analysis has  been carried  out. The sensitivity  analysis shows the economic impact that  a 
decrease in programme benefits – up to -50%  – would have on the programme viability. Similarly, it 
shows how the economic viability of the programme would be affected by an increase of up to 50% in 
programme  costs;  and  by  a  one  to  three-year  delay  in  programme  implementation.  The  analysis 
confirms that the economic viability of the programme remains attractive as a positive NPV and ERR 
above 7% are preserved in each case analysed. 
D.  Sustainability 
110.  All  partnerships  will  have  access  to  up  to  three  years  of  project  support,  after  which  they  are 
expected to be self-sustaining, which would imply that: (i) farmers enjoy continued access to services 
and  markets  beyond  the  completion  of  their  partnership  agreement;  (ii)  buyers  have  well  managed 
10 There is no model representing a large consolidator for two main reasons: (i) only two large companies are envisaged to be 
involved in project activities; (ii) there are no grant incentives budgeted for equipment for large companies, but only for micro, 
small and medium companies. This is mainly because large companies are able to finance their own equipment. They will only 
access project support to deliver advisory services and technical assistance to their farmers/suppliers. 
11 The galip nut model is developed on 0.5 ha of land intercropped with cocoa. Galip trees are initially only used as shade trees 
and it is assumed their mortality rate is 40% (therefore total number of galip nut trees harvested is 12 in the model). 
32 
WOPWPFARM 11,8555,32716,6492114FARM 21854.6975,54317,8442120Galip nut0164794142Micro6844089,78086,5531.2Small93310215,984540,4201.4Medium216200479,500653,5621.1NPV @ 10% (PGK)Return to family labour per day (PGK)Farm and business modelsPGKIncome after labour costsB/C ratio 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
and  profitable businesses  with reliable markets that they  are able to supply consistently  with quality 
products.  
111.  The progressive construction of sustainable access to services and markets will be addressed 
as  part  of  the  preparation  of  every  single  partnership  agreement,  which  will  have  a  specific  section 
devoted  to  building  sustainability.  Furthermore,  the  M&E  system  will  specifically  monitor  partnership 
progress  in  ensuring  sustainable  access  to  services  and  markets  (see  Appendix  6).  While  it  is 
expected  that  every  partnership  will  develop  a  tailor-made  approach  building  on  local  opportunities 
and  partners’  specificities,  key  elements  of  the  project  approach  that  should  support  sustainability 
include the following: 
  Farmers’  organisation:  MVF  will  provide  support  to  assist  farmers  in  strengthening  their 
organisation so that they can undertake collective actions facilitating their access to services and 
allowing them to make economies of scale and to increase their bargaining power; 
  Cooperatives and service hubs:  the FPDA model farm has potential to develop into a farmers’ 
organisation  (possibly  a  cooperative,  as  supported  by  FPDA  in  Ela  province)  as  well  as  in  a 
service hub, whereby a bundle of services (such as access to inputs, aggregation and marketing, 
mechanisation,  access  to  financial  services  etc.)  could  be  accessed  by  farmers  in  a  single, 
farmer-owned facility. Partnership preparation will explore how the model farm may progressively 
develop into a service or farmer hub, in line with local needs and potential. Preliminary steps will 
be detailed in the business plan and in the partnership proposal submitted to project approval. As 
partnerships  develop,  a  final  decision  on  whether  model  farms  evolve  into  farmer  hubs  can  be 
made, depending on partnership interest and development. This will be assessed after one year 
of partnership formation with evaluation criteria including confirmation of the types of services the 
partnership  would  like  to  organise  collectively  within  the  hub  and  how  they  intend  utilising  and 
managing the hub facility 
  Local  resources:  the  use  of  local  resources  to  develop  partnerships  (BDSPs)  and  to  provide 
technical advisory services (VEWs) will increase local empowerment as well as the adaptation of 
MVF-supported  mechanisms  to  local  potential  and  capacities.  A  similar  approach  governs  the 
Provincial  teams,  which  will  be  constituted  by  FPDA  middle  managers  and  seconded  district 
officers,  thereby  ensuring  that  the  experience,  systems  and  tools  acquired  through  project 
implementation will be mainstreamed into regular procedures at FPDA and district level; 
  Capacity  building:  capacity  building  will  be  provided  to  ensure  that  stakeholders  (farming 
households, private sector partners, private sector service providers and public institutions) have 
the  right  mix  of  technical  and  management  competences  to  carry  on  activities  beyond  project 
completion; 
 
Innovative business models and knowledge management: project implementation will lead to 
the  development  of  a  set  of  innovative  business  models,  which  will  be  documented  and 
disseminated  through  MSPs  at  the  district,  provincial  and  national  level.  This  is  expected  to 
generate  a  knowledge  basis  for  sustaining  project  achievements,  as  well  as  to  promote  further 
public  and  private  sector  engagement  in  up-scaling  most  promising  and  commercially  viable 
mechanisms. 
112.  The  second  Interim  Review  planned  for  the  end  of  the  fifth  year  will  make  recommendations 
with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability of project achievements, based on 
which the PMU will prepare a detailed exit strategy. 
33 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Economic and agriculture context 
1. 
Growing,  diverse  population.  Papua  New  Guinea  is  a  relatively  young  nation  (it  became 
independent in 1975) with a territory composed of more than 600 islands of various sizes and a total 
land  area  of  460,000  km2.  Because  of  extended  forests,  mountains,  volcanoes  and  flooded  plains, 
only 30% of the territory is occupied by a population of 7 million, of which 80% live in the rural areas. 
The harsh terrain contributes to the  isolation  of many rural communities,  who live far from any road 
connection  and  have  to  walk  or  use  aircrafts  for  travel.  Population  density  varies  considerably 
between the highlands,  which constitute 16% of the territory, hold most fertile land and host 42% of 
the population, and the lowlands and islands, which hold 54% of the population over 66% of the total 
land  area.  Around  52%  of  the  population  is  under  19  years  of  age,  which  reflects  a  high  annual 
demographic  growth  rate  averaging  2.9%.  Due  to  significant  rural-urban  migration,  the  urban 
population  rates  are  growing  faster  (4.5%  per  annum),  contributing  to  social,  economic  and 
environmental stress, particularly among youth. The country has considerable linguistic diversity, with 
over 800 spoken languages, or 13% of the world total for only 0.1% of the world population. Language 
creates powerful social bindings: wantoks, or group of people speaking the same language, constitute 
strong solidarity networks that offer support in times of difficulty, but may also favour patronage and 
deter individual initiative and entrepreneurship.  
2. 
Dual economy. PNG is a lower-middle-income economy with a GNP per capita of USD 2,381. 
Steady  economic  growth  averaging  5%  has  been  sustained  over  the  last  decade  through  a  mix  of 
sound  macro-economic  management,  high  commodity  prices  and  broad-based  private  sector 
investment, linked to developing the productive capacity in mineral extraction and mostly financed by 
foreign  direct  investment.  However,  the  country’s  economy  remains  dominated  by  two  sectors:  a 
formal,  largely  capital-intensive  sector  which  draws  on  the  country’s  rich  endowment  in  natural 
resources, particularly in the mining and energy industry, and a largely informal agriculture sector that 
employs  the  majority  of  the  active  population.  Rapid  economic  growth  has  not  transformed  into 
improved livelihoods or increased opportunities to participate in the monetised economy for the 40% 
of the population that live under the poverty line and are unable to meet minimum food and non-food 
needs.    Revenues  starting  to  flow  from  a  USD  19  billion  Liquefied  Natural  Gas  (LNG)  project  were 
expected  to  boost  economic  growth  and  to  generate  a  flow  of  public  resources  that  were  to  sustain 
ambitious public investment in infrastructure and services. Instead, with the drop in commodity prices, 
GDP growth plummeted from 9% in 2014 to a forecasted 3% in 2016. The drastic fall in government 
revenues and increased public expenditure now contribute to a growing deficit, exacerbated by high 
public debt.   
3. 
Agriculture. Agriculture employs 80% of the active population and accounts for 27% of GDP. 
The  limited  contribution  of  agriculture  to  the  country’s  economy  can  partly  be  explained  by  the 
dominance  of  extractive  industries  and  falling  commodity  prices,  but  it  also  reflects  low  production 
levels  and  declining  productivity12.  Most  of  the  farming  sector  is  held  by  about  4.3  million 
smallholders, or village farmers, who operate close to subsistence level. Diversified farming systems 
are dominated by food crops (tubers, banana, sago), which provide most of the food consumed in the 
country,  with  pigs,  poultry  and  cash  crops  (mainly  coffee,  cocoa  and  copra)  supplementing  income. 
Fresh vegetables and fruits are grown by about 94% of the population, followed by coffee (45%), betel 
nut (35%) and cocoa (27%).  
4. 
Low  access  to  services  and  markets.  The  policy  focus  on  plantation  agriculture  and 
commercial livestock pre- and  early post-independence has deprived  village agriculture of adequate 
government  attention,  despite  the  fact  that  it  supports  the  vast  majority  of  the  population13.  While 
extension programmes have assisted smallholder participation in the tree crops sector over the post-
independence  period,  the  food  sector  has  been  totally  neglected  by  policy  makers.  Low  availability 
and  high  cost  of  modern  inputs  and  technologies  and  low  access  to  support  services  (and,  in 
particular, to under-funded public extension) contribute to low  yields.  High logistical costs due to the 
poor  transport  network,  and  the  lack  of  market  organisation  and  of  market  information  further 
12 Functional Expenditure Review (FER), DAL, 2014. 
13 FER. 
35 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
discourage small farmers from raising production for the market  – it is estimated that only 4% of the 
country’s land is used for commercially-oriented agriculture production.  
 Low access to finance. The vast majority of agricultural stakeholders lacks access to finance 
5. 
and are unable to invest in modern inputs and technologies. It is estimated that 85.6%, or 3.5 million 
adults, have no access to deposit services14 and that 83% of the population have no access to credit. 
In the absence of any studies on credit demand, the overall demand of project stakeholders has been 
assessed by the design mission based on interviews with farmers, traders, end buyers and different 
types  of  financial  institutions  (banks,  micro-banks  and  finance  companies. Based  on  the  projected 
partnerships,  the  following  demand  for  credit  has  been  identified:  (i)  for  growers:  investment  loans 
would amount to approximately USD 3.3 million while working capital loan would amount to USD 0.8 
million; (ii) for micro-traders, investment loans would represent USD 0.04 million and they would need 
approximately USD 0.3 million for working capital during the first two years of operations; (iii) for small 
traders, investment loans would amount to USD 0.2 million while working capital loans would amount 
to  USD  0.5  million  revolving  over  2  to  3  years;  (iv)  for  medium  traders,  investment  loans  would 
amount to USD 1,0 million while working capital loan would amount to approximately USD 0.5 million 
as medium traders have the financial capacity to self-finance a substantial part of the working capital 
needed (around 60 %).  
6. 
Climate change. While high rainfall, long dry seasons and excessive cloud cover are common 
constraints  to  agricultural  development,  they  are  further  aggravated  by  increasing  climate-change 
related hazards. These include irregular rainfall  patterns, hail storms and cyclones, longer droughts, 
extended floods both in the extensive river system and along the 20,000 km coastline, and rising sea 
level causing the gradual submersion of coastal areas and some of PNG’s islands. Food security for 
more  than  one  million  people  in  vulnerable  parts  of  the  highlands  and  lowlands  is  considered  to  be 
seriously at risk, due to recurrent and increasingly intense El Niño and La Niña events, with  20% of 
the districts experiencing existing or emerging food insecurity based on energy per capita. 
7. 
Access  to  land.  With  97%  of  the  land  under  customary  tenure  and  considerable  social  and 
cultural  diversity,  land  tenure  systems  vary  greatly  throughout  the  country.  While  land  disputes  may 
be  common  and  are  believed  to  intensify  under  the  impact  of  high  demographic  rates  and  an 
increased  number  of  large-scale  extractive  resource  industries,  they  do  not  affect  food  crop 
production  systems.  It  is  assumed  that  the  annual  (and  not  perennial)  nature  of  the  crops,  coupled 
with the relatively low scale of development and the system of tenure ownership by family units, may 
have  contributed  to  this  tenable  outcome.  Despite  this  overall  positive  assessment,  the  commonly 
used Clan Land User Agreement (CLUA) should be used to give assurance to interested parties on 
the  tenure  security  of  land  used.  CLUA  is  a  standard  land  use  agreement  signed  between  the  land 
developer and several clan leaders, which can be used by clan members in the absence of legal land 
titles  for  bank  collaterals.  The  CLUA  is  an  accepted  agreement  used  by  the  National  Development 
Bank (NDB) and other financial institutions to legitimise the use of land by the developer for a specific 
purpose over a certain period. There are no known disputes due to the use of CLUAs. 
8. 
Access  to  roads.  Farmers  in  the  PNG  highlands  rely  on  access  along  the  road  network  for 
receiving  their  farm  inputs  (seedlings,  fertilizer,  tools  etc.)  and  for  transporting  their  produce  to 
markets. The entire road network, including primary (national) and secondary (provincial) roads, is in 
very variable condition due to chronic lack of maintenance, but the tertiary roads (district access and 
feeder roads) are generally in very poor condition. Feeder roads, which provide the immediate access 
to  and  from  farming  areas,  are  little  more  than  earth  tracks  over  rugged  topography  with  minimal 
drainage,  and  are  often  rendered  impassable  in  wet  weather  by  flooding  or  bogging  in  vulnerable 
locations. The purpose of this sub-component is to provide targeted spot improvements to the tertiary 
network to restore priority roads to all-weather passability, and to establish sustainable arrangements 
for maintaining the completed works beyond the life of the project. 
New business models. New business models offer potential  to curb some of the constraints 
9. 
affecting  the  rural  sector  and  to  improve  the  access  of  small  producers’  to  markets  and  services. 
These include service-oriented cooperatives,  limited liability companies and nucleus  farms providing 
access  to  inputs,  technical  assistance,  transport,  storage  and  markets  are  emerging.    Next  to  more 
traditional schemes of collectors clustering production and selling to different types of market outlets, 
14  Based  on  data  on  total  deposits  submitted  by  financial  service  providers  (commercial  banks,  microbanks,  and  SLSs)  to 
BPNG as of June 2013, cross-referenced with demographic data. 
36 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
innovative  partnerships  between  smallholders  and  agribusiness  (exporters,  processing  companies, 
supermarkets  and  hotels)  source  from  small  farmers and  advertise  local  origin.  New  models  for  the 
provision of financial and  non-financial services are also developing, including outgrowers’ schemes 
or  mobile  phone-based  service  delivery,  due  to  the  dramatic  increase  of  mobile  phone  network 
coverage  (80%  coverage  and  49%  subscribers).  Private  service  providers  become  available  to 
provide  technical  and  management  services  to  farmers’  organisations,  with  resources  provided  by 
commodity  boards  or  local  governments.  Yet  these  initiatives  remain  scattered  because  of  the  risks 
involved  both  for  private  investors  and  for  smallholders,  and  of  the  current  inability  of  an  ineffective 
public sector to provide incentives needed to offset risks and promote innovative partnerships. A few 
examples of innovative business models are in Attachment 2. 
Target value chains 
10.  Fresh produce sub-sector. Population growth at an estimated 2.3% per year, combined with 
internal migration to urban and peri-urban areas, generate increased demand for food products, which 
is further intensified by  a growing middle class and the expatriate community in  the mining and gas 
industry. The total  volume of fresh produce production in  PNG is not known, but it is estimated  that 
the total market demand for fresh produce is 1.32 million tonnes per annum, of which about 60% is 
covered by local production. Conversely, about 60 % of the modern market segments (supermarkets, 
catering  companies,  hotels,  public  institutions)  are  yet  to  be  captured  by  PNG  producers  (details  in 
Working Paper 1).  
11.  Fresh produce is farmed by 94% of village-based families throughout the country. The majority 
grow  small  vegetable  gardens  for  family  consumption  and  sell  tiny  surpluses  on  local  markets 
whenever they need cash, either to traditional nearby local markets or to middlemen selling to a chain 
of intermediaries that can reach as far as Port Moresby. Volumes are limited or irregular as is quality. 
Smallholders  are  often  reluctant  to  collaborate  for  production  or  marketing,  particularly  outside  their 
own family group, feeling that they lack the skills or are unfairly treated by other players in the chains 
and so  are not motivated to do so  or restrict marketing to  local markets. Women traditionally play a 
bigger  role  than  men  in  producing  and  marketing,  especially  at  open‐air  wet  markets  and  roadside 
markets.  
12.  As  urban  demand  is  growing,  increasing  numbers  of  highland  farmers  attempt  to  switch  from 
semi-subsistence  production  to  market-oriented  farming.  Smallholders’  capacity  to  deliver  larger 
volumes of good quality produce is however affected by low access to inputs, lack of support services 
and  lack  of  simple  irrigation  technologies  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  more  recurrent  droughts  and  to 
sustain consistent production over longer periods of time. Low outreach of financial institutions in the 
rural areas, combined with a lack of financial education, constrains farmers’ ability to turn to credit for 
the  financing  of  farm  improvements.  Market  access  is  further  hampered  by  the  lack  of collaboration 
between  smallholders,  inadequate  post-harvest  management  and  long  travel  distances  to  urban 
markets.  
13.  However, largely informal and un-structured trading relationships result in high price variability, 
surpluses and shortages, and high wastage levels.  Traditionally, poor buyer-seller relationships, lack 
of  collaborative  arrangements  and  limited  communication  between  value  chain  players  are 
compounded  by  poor  transport  infrastructure,  lack  of  cool  chains,  lack  of  specialised  transport 
equipment  and  packaging  and  high  transaction  costs.  The  lack  of  access  to finance  at  all  stages  in 
the  value  chain  eventually  affects  farmers’  incentive  to  sell:  while  they  demand  cash  payment  on 
delivery,  buyers  lack  financial  resources  to  assemble  a  consignment  and  pay  upfront.  Small  and 
medium-sized  buyers  also  lack  the  technical  and  management  capacities  that  would  enable 
sustainable business development.  
14.  Growing  demand.  Nevertheless,  the  demand  for  PNG  produce  in  domestic  markets  is 
strengthening,  especially  in  regards  to  import  replacement.  This  is  providing  an  incentive  for  the 
development  of  enhanced  buyer-seller  relationships,  evidenced  by  emerging  examples  of  improved 
communication between end markets and fresh produce suppliers, new business relationships and a 
greater  whole  of  chain  awareness  of  limitations  in  value  chain  infrastructure,  equipment  and 
distribution systems.  
15.  A  major  trigger  event  for  emerging  value  chain  relationships  was  the  PNG  Government’s 
banning  of  selected  vegetable  imports  in  2015  (subsequently  lifted)  which  left  PNG  markets  totally 
37 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
reliant  on  domestic  supply  of  staple  products  such  as  potato,  bulb  onion,  some  cabbage  varieties, 
carrot,  tomato,  capsicum, pumpkin,  peas,  zucchini,  eggplant,  French  beans,  lettuce  and  celery.  The 
ban provided an opportunity for some local growers to fill gaps in the market and also made PNG end 
markets critically aware of how heavily reliant they were on imports of fresh produce. Consequently, a 
number of leading retailers and food service companies have begun actively modifying their sourcing 
programs to include greater supplies of fresh produce from domestic suppliers, including those in the 
PNG  Highlands.  Value  chain  limitations  such  as  quality  degradation  and  high  postharvest  losses, 
unreliability  of  supply,  significant  transportation  constraints  and  delays  due  to  poor  road  conditions 
and  lack  of  specialised  fresh  produce  road  transport  options,  breaks  in  cool  chains,  poor 
communication  and  inadequate  packaging  and  labelling  are  starting  to  be  addressed  collaboratively 
by formal end markets and selected suppliers. The private sector, including supplier companies and 
end  market  retailers  and  food  service  companies  are  beginning  to  invest  in  enhanced  cool  chain 
systems  including  refrigerated  transport  and  cool  store  facilities  at  consolidation  points.  Chain 
collaborations are being further enhanced by input from other key chain participants (such as newly 
formed Fresh Produce Industry Working Group under PHAMA) and facilitation and technical support 
from agencies such as FPDA.  
16.  These nascent initiatives coincide ideally with the planned commencement of the MVF project, 
as  they  confirm  access  to  new  and  expanding  market  opportunities  for  fresh  produce  growers  and 
traders via inclusive, market-driven value chain developments. 
17.  While it is recognised that fresh produce cropped and marketed in PNG lumps together a large 
range of vegetables, including roots, stem and leaf vegetables,  they are considered as a sub-sector 
because  they  have  the  same  buyers,  markets  and  broadly  similar  constraints.  However,  the  fresh 
produce sector  in the target provinces can be further refined and described  in terms of variances in 
postharvest  handling  and  storage  requirements  of  different  crops  and  variances  in  end  market 
requirements.  
18.  Variance of post-harvest requirements. Fresh produce ranges from relatively ‘hardy’ through 
to ‘highly perishable’ products. Hardy products are mainly characterised by potentially long shelf lives 
if handled and stored correctly, whilst highly perishable crops have a relatively short shelf life, even if 
handled and stored optimally. An example of a hardy vegetable crop is kaukau (sweet potato) which 
can be stored for up to 28 weeks at an optimum temperature of 13-15 degrees C and a high relative 
humidity.  Broccoli is an example of a highly perishable crop, with a potential shelf life of only 2 to 3 
weeks,  even  in  ideal  storage  conditions  of  0  to  4  degrees  C  and  very  high  relative  humidity. 
Composite postharvest handling, marketing and storage systems for both hardy and highly perishable 
products must factor in differences in product temperature and relative humidity requirements as well 
as  other  critical  factors,  such  as  the  product’s  production  of  or  susceptibility  to  ethylene. 
Incompatibility between products may limit options for mixed transport loads (for example, within one 
container) or  longer term  storage  within cool rooms. However,  where postharvest compatibility does 
exist, products can be conveniently grouped and consolidated within distribution and storage systems 
to enhance efficiencies and reduce costs.  
19.  Shelf  life  also  has  a  direct  bearing  on  choosing  how  to  best  transport  fresh  produce  from  the 
Highlands, particularly to distant markets. Combined road and sea freight from the target provinces to 
Port Moresby is a viable option only when adequate shelf life within the end market can be assured. 
When  it  can’t,  airfreighting  of  produce  may  be  necessary.  The  respective  end  market  value  of 
products is another transport consideration. Whilst air freight greatly reduces transportation time, the 
relatively high cost (as much as 9.9 kina per kilogram from Mt Hagen to Port Moresby) requires a high 
market value to justify the investment.  
20.  Different  end  markets  for  fresh  produce  may  also  require  compliance  with  different  quality 
specifications. For example, the food service industry normally requires that produce be delivered in a 
“ready  to  use”  stage  of  ripeness/readiness,  whilst  retailers  more  often  require  a  longer  shelf  life  to 
facilitate  sale  of  the  product.  Tomatoes  are  an  example  where  retailers  may  specify  delivery  of 
products at “half to three-quarter ripeness” measured by the ratio of green to red colour of the fruit as 
an  indicator  of  continued  shelf  life,  whilst  food  service  companies  may  require  “full  red  colour”  at 
receipt for immediate use in meal preparations.  
21.  Farmers’  diversification.  Whilst  these  variances  add  complexity,  fresh  produce  growers  and 
marketers  in  the  target  provinces  will  generally  produce  and  sell  a  range  of  different  crops.  This  is 
38 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
considered a sound strategy for several reasons. Agronomically,  it allows crop rotations to occur on 
limited  productive  land  and  the  consequences  of  crop  failures  due  to  climate  change  issues  like 
drought  can  be  reduced  through  planting  of  crops  with  varying  drought  susceptibility.  Growing  and 
marketing a range of crops can even out income streams over the year due to differing harvest times 
and helps compensate for ups and downs in market returns due to changes in supply and demand.  
22.  Highlands growers have a competitive market advantage with cool temperate products such as 
broccoli,  potatoes  and  onions  due  to  the  suitable  growing  conditions.  This  is  reflected  in  buyer 
demand  in  distant  markets  such  as  Port  Moresby.  However,  formal  markets  accessible  by  road  to 
growers  in  the  target  provinces,  such  as  mining  companies  and  retailers  located  in  the  region,  may 
require a broader range of locally grown produce  to  meet their needs. This includes cool temperate 
crops but also other crops such as salad lines and tomatoes that grow well in other parts of PNG such 
as Central Province, but can be sourced more cost competitively from local suppliers.  
23.  Therefore, whilst the same buyers and suppliers are involved in the fresh produce sector in the 
target provinces and in the markets, many factors impact on the design and management of specific 
fresh produce value chains. Industry relevant issues such as considering market demand and climate 
change  risk  mitigation  when  choosing  crops  to  produce,  developing  methods  to  ensure  product 
compatibility  in  postharvest  transport  and  storage  and  awareness  of  varying  end  market  quality 
requirements  will  be  reflected  in  the  scope  of  proposals  and  business  plans  put  forward  within  the 
MVF project. 
24.  Fresh produce value chain interventions may be designed to increase productive yields through 
enhanced production methods. They may also be designed to reduce postharvest losses, which also 
increase  marketable  yields  and  subsequent  financial  returns  at  each  applicable  stage  of  the  chain.  
When attempting to quantify the causes and extent of postharvest losses in an agricultural sub-sector 
such  as  fresh  produce,  many  variables  come  into  account,  which  can  lead  to  generalised  and 
sometimes  misleading  loss  estimates;  Surveys  and  interviews  may  require  chain  actors  to  try  and 
recall  what  happened  in  the  past,  perhaps  over  a  period  of  weeks  or  months  in  which  a  range  of 
weather,  production  and  crop  cycle  factors  may  have  influenced  postharvest  quality;  postharvest 
losses in the fresh produce industry are often  aggregated to include multiple products, even though 
these  products  may  have  varying  susceptibility  to  physical  damage  (a  major  cause  of  postharvest 
degradation);  losses  calculated  in  the  market  are  likely  to  be  cumulative,  but  the  causes  of  these 
losses may have occurred at various stages of the chain and need to be clearly identified in order to 
take appropriate corrective action. Sampling and direct measurements along each link in value chains 
can provide more accurate data, but sampling and testing methodologies need to be well defined and 
appropriate  to  the  value  chain  and  product/s  being  evaluated.  In  order  to  ensure  that  interventions 
within  MVF  partnerships  are  the  most  appropriate,  more  in-depth  research  is  needed  into  the  real 
causes and extent of postharvest losses within the PNG fresh produce sector, from point of harvest to 
final point of sale.  
25.  Galip nut. Canarium indicum is an indigenous tree known as galip, which is an excellent shade 
tree for cocoa, increases cocoa gardens’ resilience to climate change and to major pest and disease 
outbreaks, and produces edible nuts. Efforts to domesticate the crop and develop manual processing 
technologies have been led by  NARI since the early  2000s,  with support from the Australian Centre 
for  International  Agriculture  Research  (ACIAR)  and  the  EU.  These  include:  250,000  galip  seedlings 
produced  with  EU  funding  and  mainly  distributed  to  smallholders  between  2008  and  2012;  600,000 
trees  planned  for  planting  in  the  next  few  years  under  the  Productive  Partnership  in  Agriculture 
Project  (PPAP)  cocoa  partnerships  (see  below);  6,000  trees  planted  by  Agmark,  the  major  cocoa 
exporter,  in  2011-2012,  which  are  now  bearing  nuts  and  are  replanted  to  expand  nurseries;  galip 
plantations developed in New Ireland; private forest development in East New Britain project in which 
landowners  included  in  the  contract  with  the  forest  developer  the  replanting  of  logged  areas  with 
cocoa  and  galip  nut,  over  an  area  that  could  range  from  2,000  to  5,000  ha.  It  is  expected  that  the 
volume of nuts available for processing will reach 50-70,000 tonnes of nuts in shell by 2030, and yield 
some 7,000 to 10,000 tonnes of saleable products (dried nuts and high quality virgin oil).  The global 
market for nuts of all types is strong, particularly those with a favourable health profile like galip. Galip 
could become a profitable smallholder export crop, provided processing and marketing pathways can 
be developed.  
39 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Policy and Institutional Context 
26.  SDP.  The  PNG  Strategic  Development  Plan  (2010-2030)  aims  at  transforming  PNG  into  a 
prosperous  middle-income  country  by  2030,  by  promoting  quality  education  and  health,  equal 
participation  in  development  and  access  to  services,  good  governance  and  a  broad-based  growth 
drawing on sustainably managed natural resources and on PNG’s rich heritage of traditional wisdom 
and knowledge. Objectives for the agriculture sector are a five-fold increase in agricultural production, 
mostly  through  improved  land  use  and  productivity.  Public-private  partnerships  are  to  become  a 
cornerstone of the sector development, including with regard to service delivery.  
27.  NADP.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  National  Agriculture  Development  Programme  (2007-2016) 
aims  at  stimulating  economic  growth  in  the  agriculture  sector  by  increasing  income  earning 
opportunities,  focusing  on  increased  private  sector  participation  and  on  three  priority  sub-sectors, 
which  include  food  and  horticultural  crops.  In  the  face  of  the  low  implementation  rate  of  NADP  and 
reported  abuse  and  corruption,  a  Functional  Expenditure  Review  (FER)  of  the  Department  of 
Agriculture and Livestock (DAL) and seven commodity boards and agencies was carried out in 2014. 
28.  FER. The review notes that agriculture public departments have very weak capacities and that 
it is unclear to what extent the limited available funds have impacted the rural areas, in part due to the 
lack  of  data  on  sector  performance.  Main  weaknesses  identified  include:  limited  size  and  skills  of 
human  resources;  lack  of  clear  directions  and  weak  systems  for  planning  and  for  policy  monitoring 
and  evaluation;  lack  of financial  capacity  and  associated  staffing  and  capital  equipment  constraints; 
dysfunctional delivery systems, in particular for extension.  
In  the  face  of  the  low  implementation  rate  of  NADP  and  reported  abuse  and  corruption,  a 
29. 
Functional  Expenditure  Review  (FER)  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  and 
seven  commodity  boards  and  agencies  was  carried  out  in  2014.  The  review  noted  that  agriculture 
public departments had weak capacities and limited resources, which contributed to a lack of visible 
impact  on  the  agriculture  sector.  FER  called  for  a  reorganisation  of  the  agriculture  institutional 
framework, with: (i) DAL refocusing on policy development and on the coordination and monitoring of 
policy implementation by commodity boards and provincial agencies; (ii) the creation of an Agriculture 
Investment Corporation to provide a funding and governance structure for the commodity boards and 
agencies; and (iii) the reorganisation of the commodity boards, to become responsible for regulation, 
farmer-driven research, business facilitation and the promotion of farmer-based SMEs. This includes 
the creation of a Food and Grains Board to be established through the merger of the Fresh Produce 
Development  Agency  (FPDA)  with  the  National  Agriculture  Research  Institute  (NARI),  which  would 
become the lead agency for the food and grains sector, including fresh produce as well as alternative 
crops (which could cover galip nut). 
Development projects  
30.  Few  donors  have  remained  in  the  agriculture  sector.  Key  projects,  also  of  interest  to  MVF, 
include the following: 
  PPAP:  the  Productive  Partnerships  in  Agriculture  Project  (PPAP)  is  co-financed  by  IFAD,  the 
World Bank, the European Union and the GoPNG. The project aims at improving the livelihoods 
of  smallholder  coffee  and  cocoa  producers,  by  promoting  partnership  agreements  between 
farmers  and  agribusiness  for  the  provision  of  technologies  and  services,  through  a  package  of 
incentives directly benefitting farmers. It also aims at strengthening the organisation of the coffee 
and  cocoa  industries,  and  at  increasing  smallholders’  access  to  markets  through  road 
improvement.  The  success  of  the  project  and  of  the  partnership  model  has  prompted  GoPNG, 
IFAD, the World Bank and the European Union (EU) to recently approve additional financing for 
the  PPAP  to  replicate  and  scale  up  the  project  nationally.  Lessons  learnt  on  PPAP  are  in 
Appendix 3; 
  Lead  Firm  Programme:  New  Zealand  Aid  has  been  funding  institutional  support  to  the  Fresh 
Produce  Development  Agency  (FPDA)  for  many  years.  While  it  is  still  focusing  on  the  fresh 
produce sector, the ongoing Lead Firm Programme aims at supporting the growth of three value 
chain  leaders  that  source  from  smallholders,  by  co-financing  50%  of  the  cost  of  collection  and 
storage  facilities  as  well  as  transport  equipment,  in  addition  to  providing  funding  for  extension 
services and technical assistance delivered by the International Finance Corporation (IFC). New 
40 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Zealand  Aid  has  indicated  interest  in  participating  in  MVF,  which  has  strong  potential  for 
synergies with the Lead Firm Programme; 
  PHAMA:  the  Pacific  Horticultural  and  Agricultural  Market  Access  (PHAMA)  Program  is  an 
Australian government  initiative,  co-funded  by  the  New  Zealand  government.   It  is  designed  to 
help  Pacific island  countries,  including  PNG,  better  manage  and  utilise  opportunities  to  export 
primary  products.  While  there  are  few  opportunities  for  export  in  the  fresh  produce  sector  (the 
main market is domestic and the main scope  is to substitute imports), PHAMA is supporting the 
creation  of  a  PNG  Fresh  Produce  Association,  which  will  gather  key  players  in  the  industry. 
PHAMA is ending in 2017, but a second phase is under; 
  TADEP:  the  Transformative  Agriculture  and  Enterprise  Development  in  Papua  New  Guinea 
(TADEP) is co-financed by the Australian government and the Australian Centre for International 
Agriculture  Research  (ACIAR).  TADEP  brings  together  five  research-for-development  initiatives 
that  all  aim  at  increasing  food  security  and  rural  income.  Of  particular  relevance  to  MVF  are:                 
(i) Improving opportunities for economic development for women smallholders in rural PNG, which 
has  developed  the  Family  Team  approach;  (ii)  Supporting  commercial  sweet  potato  production 
and  marketing  in  the  PNG  highlands;  and  (iii)  Enhancing  private  sector-led  development  of  the 
canarium industry, which will undertake a range of studies, including market research, economic 
analysis  and  feasibility  studies,  upon  which  this  project  will  build  to  support  the  creation  of  a 
commercial plant for galip nut processing under Component 1.2; 
  MEP:  the  Microfinance  Expansion  Project  (MEP)  is  financed  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank 
(ADB).  It  aims  at  promoting  financial  inclusion  through  capacity  building  provided  to  financial 
institutions, financial education and the operation of a risk-management facility. MEP has assisted 
in  creating  the  Center  for  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI),  which  is  a  public  institution  responsible  for 
coordinating  financial  inclusion  initiatives,  disseminating  knowledge  and  implementing  specific 
innovative projects in support to financial inclusion. CEFI will be entrusted with the implementation 
of Sub-component 2.1 – Financial inclusion. 
41 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Attachment 1: Country Data Sheet 
42 
 COUNTRY ECONOMIC BACKGROUND  Land area (km2 thousand) 2015 1/ 452.9  GNI per capita Atlas method (Current USD) 2014 1/ 2 240 Total population (million) 2015 1/ 7 619 000  GDP per capita growth (annual %) 2014 1/ 5.8 Population density (people per km2) 2009 1/ 14.8  Inflation, consumer prices (annual %) 2014 1/ 5.2 Local currency     Papua New Guinea Kina (PGK)    Exchange rate:  USD 1 = 3.06780      Social Indicators   Economic Indicators  Population growth (annual %) 2014 1/  2.1  GDP (Current USD million) 2014 1/ 16 928 Crude birth rate (per thousand people) 2015 1/ 28.2  GDP growth (annual %) 1/   Crude death rate (per thousand people) 2015 1/ 7.6                                    2010 7.7 Infant mortality rate (per thousand live births) 2015 1/ 44.5                                    2014 8.5 Life expectancy at birth (years) 2015 1/ 63         Number of rural poor (million) (estimate) 1/                              n/a    Poor as % of total rural population 1/                              n/a  Sectorial distribution of GDP 2014 1/  Total labour force (million) 2014 1/ 3.4  % agriculture n/a Female labour force as % of total 2014 1/ 48.3  % industry n/a    % manufacturing n/a Education   % services n/a School enrolment, primary (% gross) 2013 1/ n/a    Adult literacy rate (% age 15 and above) 2013 1/ 63.3  Consumption            General government final consumption expenditure (as % of GDP) n/a Nutrition   Household final consumption expenditure, etc. (as % of GDP)  n/a Daily calorie supply per capita n/a  Gross domestic savings (as % of GDP) n/a Malnutrition prevalence, height for age (% of children under 5) 2011 1/ 49.5    Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5) 2013 1/ n/a  Balance of Payments (USD million)     Merchandise exports 2014 1/ 5 670 Health   Merchandise imports 2014 1/ 4 000 Health expenditure, total (as % of GDP) 2014 1/ 4.3  Balance of merchandise trade n.a Physicians (per thousand people) 2010 1/ 0.1    Population using improved water sources (%) 2015 1/ 40  Current account balances (% of GDP) 14 Population using adequate sanitation facilities(%) 2015 1/ 18.9       before official transfers  1/ n/a         after official transfers  1/ n/a Agriculture and Food   Foreign direct investment, net BoP current USD 2014 1/ -203.6 Food imports (% of merchandise imports) 2011 1/ 11.6    Fertilizer consumption (kilograms per hectare of arable land)  2014 1/  107.3  Government Finance  Food production index (2004-06-01=100) 2013 1/ 118.2  Cash surplus/deficit (as % of GDP) 2012 1/ n/a Cereal yield (kg per ha) 2014 1/ 4970  General government final consumption expenditure (% of GDP) 2014 1/ n/a    Present value of external debt (as % of GNI) 2014 1/ n/a Land Use   Total debt service (% of GNI) 2014 1/ 7.1 Arable land as % of land area 2013 1/ 0.7    Forest area as % of total land area 2015 1/ 74.1  Lending interest rate (%) 2015 1/ 8.7 Irrigated land as % of total agric. land  2005 1/ n/a  Deposit interest rate (%) 2015 1/ 0.4 1/ World Bank, World Development Indicators Online database ( http://databank.worldbank.org/data)   
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background 
Attachment 2 - Emerging business models supporting farmers’ integration in the target value 
chains 
Ownership 
Services 
Model 
Example 
Province 
Farmer- 
owned venture 
organising 
service provision 
around a storage 
or processing  
facility 
Simbu 
Farmers 
Marketing Ltd 
Morobe 
Farms 
Produce Ltd 
Simbu 
Morobe 
South Waki 
Organic Food 
Farmers 
Western 
Highlands 
Jiwaka 
MP Camillus 
Dangima’s 
project 
Simbu 
Value 
chain 
Fresh 
produce 
Fresh 
produce 
Fresh 
produce 
Pigs and 
poultry 
72% farmers’ 
ooperative,28% 
provincial 
government 
Private joint 
venture 
Public-private 
partnership 
(district and 
farmers) 
Public-private 
partnership 
(district and 
farmers) 
DOMIL 
Cooperative 
Jiwaka 
Pigs and 
poultry 
Farmers’ 
cooperative 
Contract farming/ 
outgrowers’ 
schemes 
Niugini 
Tablebirds 
Ltd 
Morobe 
Pigs and 
poultry 
100% privately-
owned 
Simbu 
Morobe 
Fresh 
produce 
Owned by 
charity 
Pigs 
poultry 
and 
Landowners’ 
company 
Input supply, extension, storage 
facility, sorting, grading, collection at 
farms’ gate and delivery to buyers 
with own trucks 
(Planned) 
Input supply, extension, sale/use of 
equipment, collection , grading and 
packaging, financial services 
Extension, collection, grading, 
packaging, selling to hotels and 
supermarkets 
(Planned) 
Breeding farm, input supply, vet 
services and extension, transport, 
slaughtering, cutting, packaging, 
marketing  
Input supply, extension, credit, 
transport, slaughtering, cutting, 
packaging, marketing 
Hatchery,  provision  of  day-old 
chicks, feed and drugs, vet services 
and extension, transport to and from 
farmers’ sheds 
(Planned) 
Inputs, extension, collection, 
storage facilities, transport 
Inputs,  extension,  collection  and 
aggregation, 
slicing, 
packaging  
grading, 
Public 
private 
providers 
and 
service 
Organic 
Mountain 
Produce Ltd 
NKW 
Holdings/Wau 
Fresh 
Fresh 
Produce 
Development 
Agency 
Smallholder 
Support 
Services 
Project 
(SSSP) 
FARMSET 
7 provinces 
Fresh 
produce 
Public agency 
Extension, booster kits, market 
information system 
Several 
provinces 
7 provinces 
All crops 
and 
livestock 
production 
All crops 
and 
livestock 
production 
Public 
(provincial) 
service 
Training in technical and business 
skills, nutrition 
100% privately-
owned 
Input supply with extension and 
demonstration , interest-free credit 
43 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
Poverty Trends 
1.  With  a  GNP  per  capita  of  USD  2,381,  Papua  New  Guinea  (PNG)  is  a  lower-middle-income 
economy, but the country’s ranking along the  Human Development Index (HDI)  has regressed from 
126 in 1997 to 157 in 2013 (HDI of 0.491). National data conceals wide disparities between and within 
provinces,  and  for  the  majority  of  the  population,  rapid  economic  growth  has  not  transformed  into 
improved livelihoods or increased opportunities to participate in the monetised economy.  
2. 
There  is  no  official  definition  of  poverty  in  PNG.  The  2009-2010  Household  and  Income 
Expenditure Survey (HIES) published in 2012 is the first comprehensive and nationally representative 
survey  of  the  socio-economic  status  of  PNG  households  since  1996.  Notwithstanding  significant 
caveats  regarding  the  comparability  of  data  between  the  previous  1996  HIES  and  the  2009–2010 
HIES,  available  evidence  suggests  that,  despite  more  than  eleven  years  of  sustained  high  average 
rates of economic growth, there was no decline in poverty between 1996 and 2010. The proportion of 
people living below the basic needs poverty line rose from 34% in 1996 to 36% in 2010, whilst close 
to 40% of the population are below the upper poverty line. The proportion of people living below the 
food poverty line – 26.5% - is very high by Pacific standards.  
Table 1: Poverty Measures for PNG (%) 
Food Poverty Line  Basic  Needs  Poverty 
Line 
Upper  Poverty  Line 
HIES) 
(used 
in 
By proportion of population below the line 
PNG 
Urban 
By economic activity 
No activity 
Wage Earner 
Self-employed 
Source: UNDP (2014)15 
26.5 
14.4 
29.8 
17.1 
29.5 
36.2 
24.3 
36.2 
42.2 
39.2 
39.9 
29.3 
44.5 
28.4 
43.5 
3. 
The  2011  National  Census  shows  PNGs  population  was  at  7,254,442.  This  is  an  increase  of 
just over 2 million people from 2000, showing average annual growth of 2.9 per cent, which indicates 
that  the  population  is  likely  to  double  by  2030.  Life  expectancy  is  growing  and  –  by  international 
standards – continuously high fertility rates outweigh high mortality rates. As a result, the population is 
very young, with 40 per cent under the age of 15 (and a median age of 19-years (2000).  With around 
20 per cent of the population living in the urban areas, PNG is one of the most rural countries in the 
world. 
4. 
Poverty  is  more  prevalent  in  the  rural  areas  where  people  have  lower  access  to  services, 
education,  markets  and  economic  inputs;  80%  of  the  population  depends  on  semi-subsistence 
agricultural production as a main livelihood strategy. A large share of household consumption is self-
produced,  with cash incomes used for essential non-food  items (school fees, kerosene,  and garden 
tools),  to  improve  diet  quality  by  allowing  consumption  of  purchased  protein  and  energy-dense 
staples,  and  to  provide  insurance  for  periods  of  agricultural  stress. Unexpectedly,  in  rural  areas, 
where  access  to  customary  land  should  lead  to  lower  incidence  of  food  poverty,  the  rate  of  food 
poverty was estimated at 28.5 per cent of the population compared to 14.4 per cent of the population 
in urban areas. Broad national poverty trends and symptoms include: (i) high levels of inequality (Gini 
coefficient  at  0.50);  (ii)  an  increasing  welfare  divide  between  households  with  access  to  formal 
employment  and  households  dependent  on  the  informal  economy;  (iii)  36%  of  the  population  is 
15  UNDP  (2014)  From  Wealth  to  Well-Being:  Translating  Resource  Revenue  into  Sustainable  Human 
Development, National Human Development Report PNG. 
45 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
illiterate and poverty is strongly correlated with education levels of the household head and; (iv) poor 
performance on all Human Development Indicators (HDI).  
5.  Widespread malnutrition is another expression of poverty. Over 50% of children under 5 years 
of  age  suffer  from  moderate  to  severe  chronic  malnutrition/undernourishment,  with  marked 
deficiencies in animal and plant proteins. The overall stunting, underweight and wasting rates are high 
(48.2  percent,  27.2  percent  and  16.2  percent,  respectively)  and  appears  to  be  increasing.  Severe 
cases  among  the  stunted,  underweight  and  wasted  children  are  also  high  at  around  50  percent  in 
each category. The stunting rate is particularly high in the Highlands region, at 58 %.  Malnutrition is 
associated  with  low  monetary  income  and  poor  delivery  of  health  services.  Furthermore,  food  and 
nutrition security are critically constrained by a lack of co-ordination between public sector agencies.  
National  level  development  indicators  conceal  some  marked  differences  in  development 
6. 
achievement. There are four critical dimensions of inequality and exclusion: (i) a rural/urban divide; (ii) 
provincial  and  district  level  variations;  (iii)  differences  by  gender;  and (iv)  differences derived  from 
wealth. First, the approximately 20 per cent of Papua New Guineans living in the urban areas have, 
overall, significantly higher levels of human development than the 80 per cent of the population who 
reside in rural areas. While an urban/rural divide in human development is common in many parts of 
the  world,  in PNG it  is  particularly  stark[1]. Second,  the  rural/urban  divide  also  conceals  significant 
differences  across  different  urban  and  rural  areas.  For  instance,  the  incidence  of  hardship  is 
significantly higher in the highlands and remote and isolated islands, compared to other rural areas. 
The  highest  rates  of  deprivation  by  almost  every  measure  occur  in  rural  parts  of  the  Highlands  and 
Momase regions. Within  each  of  the  regions,  there  are  again  significant  variations  by  province,  and 
then again by district within most provinces. Because of this it is important to speak of ‘poor places’ or 
‘hotspots’ of deprivation at quite local scales. 
The National Population Policy (draft 2013) contains an analysis of a set of indices related to 
7. 
various  MDGs  at  the  provincial  level.  In  the  absence  of  data  that  will  allow  for  the  calculation  of  a 
province  level  HDI,  this  shows  that  after  the  National  Capital  District  (NCD),  the  five  provinces  that 
make  up  the  Island  region  of  Papua  New  Guinea  (the  provinces  of  Manus,  New  Ireland,  East  and 
West  New  Britain,  and  Bougainville)  have  higher  levels  of  achievement  of  the  MDGs  (and  hence 
higher  human  development)  than  the  rest  of  the  country  (along  with  Milne  Bay).  After  this,  the 
geographic spread of achievement is mixed, with the four provinces with the lowest overall rankings 
being Enga,  Gulf,  Southern  Highlands  and  West  Sepik.  Table  2  provides  a  composite  index  of 
progress  related  to  5  MDG  targets  on  a  scale  from  one  to  ten.  These  include:  (i)  eradication  of 
extreme  poverty  and  hunger;  (ii)  education;  (iii)  gender  parity;  (iv)  infant  mortality  and  (v)  maternal 
health and reproductive health care.  
Province 
National Capital District 
Manus 
E. New Britain 
Northern Ireland 
Milne Bay 
Autonomous Region of Bougainville 
West New Britain 
Central 
Western 
Northern 
Western 
Chimbu 
Morobe 
Madang 
Eastern 
East Sepik 
Enga 
Gulf 
Southern 
West Sepik 
Table 2: Composite Index and Rank Order Related to MDGs 
Rank Order 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19/20 
19/20 
Composite Index 
.773 
.727 
.723 
.715 
.683 
.676 
.658 
.656 
.630 
.611 
.587 
.574 
.570 
.557 
.554 
.551 
.514 
.489 
.478 
.478 
46 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
Source: National Population Policy 2013 (draft) 
8. 
Thirdly,  as  will  be  further  discussed  below, measures  of  Human  Development  vary  greatly  by 
gender  in  Papua  New  Guinea.  On  virtually  every  measure  of  social  and  economic  wellbeing  and 
empowerment (from income to school enrolment, life expectancy and parliamentary representation), 
males  score  more  highly.  Gender-Based  Violence  (GBV)  and  female-specific  health  measures 
(including the Maternal Mortality Rate) are shockingly high (more than twice as high as elsewhere in 
the Pacific).  
9. 
Finally, economic inequality continues to stratify the measures of Human Development among 
Papua  New  Guineans.  The  high Gini translates  into fewer  opportunities  for  social  and  economic 
advancement  for  the  large  proportion  of  poor  people  in  PNG,  urban  and  rural.  For  instance,  the 
proportion  of  15-29  year  olds  completing  grade  6  in  the  poorest  40%  of  the  population  [effectively 
those  living  in  poverty]  is  half  that  of  the  top  20%[2].  This  in  turn  creates  a  social-economic  cycle  of 
insecurity and deprivation: educated people are far less likely to end up in poverty than those without 
an  education  –  around  55  per  cent  of  those  with  no  education  live  below  the  upper  poverty  line 
compared with around 30 per cent for those who have completed high school, and less than 15 per 
cent of those who have a university qualification. 
10. 
In summary, poverty trends show stagnant poverty levels and high levels of inequity in income 
and  opportunity,  both  between  rural  and  urban  areas  and  within  rural  areas. The  rapid  economic 
growth  led  by  the  extractive  industries  has  not  translated  into  tangible  benefits for  the  majority 
population,  many  of  whom  continue  to  depend  on  rain-fed  semi-subsistence  agriculture  with  high 
levels of vulnerability to natural disasters and changing environmental conditions.  
11.  The  four main  drivers  of  poverty, according  to  the  UNDP  2014  National  Human  Development 
Report[3],  are:  (i) the diverse,  fragmented and  rugged  landscapes  of  the  country  which  impedes 
government extension and market access; (ii) the relatively recent exposure to the cash economy and 
to  modern  health  and  education  systems;  (iii)  the  resource-driven  growth  in  PNG  over  the  last  four 
decades has not required large-scale mobilisation of the labour force or new technologies and neither 
has it generated the development of a consumer base for products, and; (iv) subnational governance 
and government capacity remains limited in many areas, impacting centrally on social, environmental 
and  economic  issues. The  Project  concept  and  approach,  as  outlined  further  below,  responds  to 
these  constraints  as  well  as  the  challenge  outlined  in  Vision  2050,  which  is  reflected  in  national 
development  strategies, described  as:  “How  do  we  shift  an  economy  that  is  currently  dominated  by 
the mining and energy sectors, to one that is dominated by agriculture, forestry, fisheries, eco-tourism 
and manufacturing, between 2010 and 2050?” 
Social Dynamics 
12.  The  HIES  2009-2010  does  not  establish  poverty  indicators  or  provide  a  framework  for  the 
analysis  of poverty  trends  and  differentiation  between  rural  producers.  It  is  therefore  of  limited 
guidance  for  the  identification  of  different  needs  and  capacities  amongst  the  potential  target  group. 
There  are  however  several  smallholder  and  fresh  produce  sub-sector  studies  that  provide  some 
insight into poverty and social dynamics amongst smallholders, although as noted; ‘the complexity of 
the  sociocultural  environment  of  PNG  farming  systems  means  that  it  is  difficult  to  extrapolate  and 
predict  how  livelihood  improvements  can  best  be  made.  It  also  means  that  such  improvements  (for 
example, new technologies or crops) are not likely to succeed if they are promoted without sufficient 
reference  to  the  prevailing  sociocultural  context.’[4] Whilst  none  of  the  studies  makes  reference  to 
household differentiation or ownership of assets (finance, land size, tools, infrastructure) and how this 
affects  production  and  market  access,  there  are  several  recurrent  themes  on  social  dynamics  that 
have implications for the design. These are outlined below. 
13.  Social fragmentation, wantokism and social safety nets. With over 800 spoken languages, 
PNG  is  one  of  the  most  ethnically  and  linguistically  diverse  countries  in  the  world.  It  is  home  to  a 
diverse and highly fragmented society, with small and unstable clans, shifting allegiances and short-
lived  cooperation.  Cooperation  amongst  households  has  been  dominated  by  the wantok system,  a 
system  of  reciprocity  and  obligation  that  binds  people  of  a  common  language,  place,  kinship  group 
and/or  ethnic  origin.  The wantok system  still  constitutes  the  single  most  important  factor  influencing 
social  and  cooperative behavior in  PNG. These  binds  provided  traditional  coping  mechanisms, 
including  rural  households’  access  to  land  for  home  food  production  and  strong  support  through 
47 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
reciprocal  exchange.  Whilst wantok networks  have  in  the  past  provided  social  safety  nets  there  are 
several challenging aspects of the wantok system that need to be considered: (i) many households in 
PNG  are  unable  to  participate  fully  in  an  increasingly  monetized  society,  with  a  resultant  lack  of 
adequate cash to meet customary household obligations. This contributes to an increasing inequality 
and reduced effectiveness of the wantok system as a safety net for all members, because poorer and 
more vulnerable households are often not able to fulfil their cash wantok obligations; (ii) wantokism is 
by  definition  exclusive,  because  it operates on the principles of social and kinship membership, and 
so  can  work  against  cooperation  along  economic  lines,  for  example  those  that  may  be  created  by 
development  initiatives  around  market access;  (iii)  the  obligation  to  ‘give  back’  and  share  economic 
gains can act as a disincentive to household accumulation and (iv) these entrenched social networks 
are  evident  in  state-society  relations  and  vertical  patronage  lines,  undermining  the  effectiveness  of 
public services  and of horizontal social  and economic lines of cooperation. These dynamics are not 
unique to PNG, however they are unusually pronounced and have been accounted for in the targeting 
and gender strategy described in this annex. 
14.  Gender dynamics in  PNG and in agriculture. PNG occupies  the 134th position in the 2012 
Gender  Inequality  Index  out  of  148  countries  (index  value  0.617).  Gender  inequality  is  a  significant 
development challenge in PNG and is recognized in the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) as 
a “threat to future development”. Whilst female-headed households are not statistically poorer, women 
have substantially poorer access to health care services, and lower levels of educational attainment 
and  literacy  pose  barriers  to  their  equal  participation  in  economic  activity  and  political  life.  Gender 
Based Violence (GBV) is very high, and women’s access to justice and legal protection is low[5]. GBV 
has been considered to have epidemic proportions and the social, physical, emotional and economic 
costs  at  the  national  level  are  widely  recognized.[6] Women’s  disempowerment  has  wide-ranging 
consequences, notably, economic gains are not as consistently invested in household human capital, 
especially nutrition and education, as in other development contexts.[7] Women do not generally own 
land and  or productive assets, have lesser access to credit, do  not generally take decisions (unless 
allowed by the man) and often are not able to retain the income they generate. They have less access 
to markets then men and are often not safe in the public domain, such as transportation and markets. 
Successful  women  run  the  risk  of  antagonizing  their  husbands,  as  well  as  others  in  the  village 
(including  women),  with  potentially  violent  repercussions,  including  accusations  of  sorcery.  Whilst 
women have a lesser status throughout PNG[8], the exact gender relations and how this impacts their 
role as economically empowered smallholders will vary significantly between regions.[9] There is also 
a strong gender division of labour in agriculture but this varies by commodity, activity and region. 
15.  Young people and inter-generational differences. PNG is a young country, with 52% of the 
population  under  19  years  of  age.  The  lack  of  opportunities  for  the  youth  in  both  the  formal  and 
informal sectors as well as growing intergenerational tensions constitute both a social and economic 
challenge. Youth unemployment contributes to insecurity, which, in the rural areas, adversely affects 
business  development  and  smallholders’  investment  and  fuels  criminality.  Studies  note[10] a  strong 
intergenerational  gap  in  values  and  norms  in  PNG.  Relationships  between  the  generations  have 
historically  been  quite  rigid,  with  decision-making  power  consolidated  with  the  clan  elders.  These 
relationships  are  being  challenged  by  recent  socioeconomic  changes,  including  increased  mobility 
between  some  geographic  areas,  urbanisation,  and  the  shift  away  from  exclusively  subsistence 
agriculture.  Young people  are taking on  leadership roles in some cases, and are being privileged in 
access to some economic opportunities, but lack the social skills that would enable them to play these 
roles  in  ways  that  contribute  to  increased  social  cohesion.  At  the  same  time,  young  people  are 
becoming  disconnected  from  the  social  norms  that  regulated  the  behaviour  of  their  parents  and 
grandparents,  deepening  a  rift  between  the  generations.  Young  people  also  struggle  to  access 
employment  and  income  generating  opportunities,  particularly  when  preference  for  jobs  goes  to 
elders or particular clans. 
Institutional fragility, conflict and violence. PNG’s institutions – both customary and formal – 
16. 
are struggling to effectively manage the stresses that have arisen from social and economic changes. 
PNG is socially fragmented with little common identity or vision, rapidly transforming social norms, a 
large  youth population, distrust in modern state institutions and substance abuse. Triggers of violent 
conflicts include: (i) extreme power imbalances between genders; (ii) land, which is held communally 
and  is  central  to  identity,  has  historically  been  a  source  of  conflict  and  continues  to  be  a  source  of 
conflict  as  investments  increase  the  productive  potential  of  land;  (iii)  patronage  politics  within  state 
structures,  the  limited  professionalism  of  political  parties,  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the  justice  system 
48 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
and frequent incitement of political violence[11]; (iv) increased household income is frequently spent on 
substance  abuse,  can  increase  the  incidence  of  sexually  transmitted  diseases  (STDs),  lead  to  an 
increase  in  GBV,  be  spent  on  patronage  politics  and  generally  erode  hard  earned  gains;  and[12] (v) 
jealousies,  accusations  of  sorcery  and  violent 
increased  household 
reprisals. These social themes are universal, but whilst in other country contexts the consequences of 
a design ‘getting it wrong’ can be a less effective project, in PNG it can mean one-step forward, three 
steps back. 
income  can 
lead 
to 
Gender and social inclusion issues in the project value chains 
17.  Production  and  livelihood  strategies.  The  salient  parts  of  agricultural  production  in  PNG 
include:  (i)  a  semi-subsistence  orientation  of  low  input-low  output  production;  (ii)  diversified  farming 
systems, comprising mainly food and limited cash crops, provide for risk management; (iii) land held 
under  customary  tenure;  (iv)  production  and  ownership  of  the  means  of  production  is  highly 
differentiated  by  gender  and;  (v)  social  structures  and wantok have  a  powerful  influence  on 
determining livelihood strategies. Limited access to finance, technology, inputs, as well as low literacy 
levels, poor infrastructure and a resultant incapacity to supply the quality demanded in formal markets 
constrains  market  options  for  poor  farmers. For  the  majority  of  rural  households,  the  flexibility  to 
switch  between  subsistence,  semi-subsistence  and  limited  ‘commercial’  agriculture  is  key  to  the 
production of fresh produce. Producers in PNG, as has been the finding elsewhere[13], are most likely 
to adopt technologies if these are proven and reversible and will prefer investments that enable them 
to switch between different production orientations, enabling them to access higher value markets on 
their own terms[14]. 
18.  Market  access  and  marketing  channels. There  is  limited  information  about  the  social  and 
economic  factors  that  influence  access  to  markets;  most  of  the  analysis  is  on  constraints  resulting 
from  remoteness,  poor  infrastructure  and  produce  of  poor  quality  not  ready  to  enter  competitive 
institutional markets. A recent study[15] notes that there are distinct differences between smallholders, 
based on their origin, on  their responses to market opportunities,  with Highlanders, particularly from 
the Western Highlands showing a greater capacity to recognise entrepreneurial  opportunities, acting 
more  cohesively,  and  producing  a  greater  variety  of  produce.  However,  in  general,  several  points 
stand  out as  characterising most  of 
information  and 
understanding of value added and often go to markets not knowing whether they will be able to make 
a profit; (ii) up to 40% of losses are incurred through poor packaging and transport; (iii) a part of these 
losses  are  incurred  because  there  is  no  clear  price  signal  for  quality  and  understanding  of  how  to 
grade  produce; 
(iv)  mistrust  between  producers,  as  well  as  between  producers  and 
transporters/traders, prevent collective action and problem solving that could generate greater value 
for  everyone  and;  (v)  most  production  and  marketing  activities  are  unplanned  with  no  relationship, 
communication or formal marketing arrangement. 
the sector:  (i)  producers  have 
limited 
improving 
livelihoods. 
impact  on 
19.  Support  services  for  smallholders. Rural  producers  have  poor  access  to  support  services, 
such  as  finance,  extension,  training  and  transport  and  where  support  services  are  available,  they 
have  had  a  negligible 
to 
access financial services through group loans have a poor record because of: “wantokism, nepotism, 
corruption,  financial  illiteracy,  a  lack  of  savings  culture,  irregular  incomes  and  farmers’ attitudes 
towards  marketing  as  a  means  to  gain  cash,  not  build  wealth.”  In  addition,  for  women,  credit  is 
hazardous because they have no control of the income generated through their work. There are some 
useful  lessons;  the Fresh  Produce  Development  Agency  (FPDA)  invested in  financial  literacy,  rather 
than  focusing  on  groups  to  overcome  credit  constraints  and  found  that  for  the  first  time vegetable 
farmers had received credit and were able to access new markets as a result of investments in new 
seed,  fertilizers  and  packaging  because  financial  literacy  changed  attitudes  towards  both  farming 
(seeing it as a business) and borrowing (seeing it as a debt not a grant). 
to  support 
Initiatives 
farmers 
20.  Extension  and  training programs  have  a  poor  record  in  PNG  due  to  the  social  obstacles 
already outlined. There are some valuable lessons on extension and training emerging from the work 
of  FPDA,  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  and  ACIAR  in  the  fresh  produce  sub-
sector. The following are brief findings: (i) extension services have to be sensitive to gender division 
of labour in production; (ii) like elsewhere, but even more so, “place based training needs, determined 
and prioritized by the people themselves, will benefit adoption of improved horticultural practices more 
than  generic  horticultural  training  which  does  not  appeal  to  different  needs  of  men,  women  and  the 
49 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
young”[16;  ](iii) farmer  to  farmer  and  lead  farmer  technologies  will  only  work  through  social  not 
economic  networks ,  namely  where community,  kinship  and wantok networks motivate  sharing  and 
learning;  (iv)  in  sum,  for  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector:  “content  based  training  that  would  allow  for 
regional  context,  low  levels  of  literacy  and  would  be  supported  by  pictorial  based  training  manuals 
in Tok Pisin,  covering 
financial 
literacy.”[17] Considerable  progress  has  been  made  with  the  Family  Team  (FT)  approach,  a  method 
whereby all members of a household create a household vision through joint livelihood planning which 
was  developed  under  an  ACIAR  project,  in  collaboration  with  FPDA.  It  is  a  consensus  driven 
approach at both community and household level that has proved effective in overcoming social and 
gender  constraints  in  PNG.  The  success,  however,  remains  with  work  done  within  a  single  wantok, 
community work that expects cooperation between wantok groups remains challenging.  
farm  planning  and  management  and 
issues  such  as 
Target Group and Targeting Strategy 
21.  Targeting rationale and self-targeting. The project goal of delivering livelihood improvements 
to poor farmers in the selected provinces is well served through the fresh produce and galip nut value 
chains as these involve large numbers of small producers, have potential for productivity growth and 
serve differentiated markets accessible to farmers with different capacities. The value chains already 
play an important role in the livelihood, food security and risk management strategies of the poor and 
therefore  offer  an  opportunity  for  relatively  low  risk  diversification  into  generating  income  from 
agriculture.  Given  high  levels  of  food  insecurity,  the  targeting  of  differentiated  markets  and 
concentration  on  food  commodities  is  particularly  important,  as  the  project  can  deliver  differentiated 
benefits 
their  absorptive  and  organizational 
capacity.  Furthermore, more than 90% of smallholders already grow vegetables. 
to  participating  households,  depending  on 
22.  Target group. The project provinces include a high percentage and density of the poor in PNG, 
as noted  in the analysis.  MVF primary beneficiaries will be semi-subsistence farmers (low input-low 
output farmers mostly growing food crops and limited cash crops) and market-oriented small farmers 
involved  or  with  potential  to  get  involved  in  the  target  value  chains.  Women  village  farmers  will 
constitute a specific target  group,  because of their  disempowerment, lack of access to services and 
markets  as  well  as  elevated  gender-based  violence,  which  altogether  negatively  affect  household 
revenues and well-being. The project will also benefit youth, by creating new economic opportunities 
in the production and trading of fresh produce, facilitating access to innovation and new technologies 
and  services 
through  digital  applications)  and  supporting  small  business 
growth. The project  complies  with  IFAD’s  Indigenous  Peoples  Policy  as  all  people  of  PNG  are 
considered  to  be  indigenous  according  to  the  policy  and  as  extensive  free,  prior  and  informed 
consultation  ensures  voluntary  participation.  In  addition,  a  highly  participatory  approach  to 
implementation  will ensure broad inclusion and support for more vulnerable  households, as outlined 
below. 
(including 
Main drivers of targeting strategy 
23.  There  is  limited  information  on  socio-economic  differentiation  at  the  household  level  and 
no evidence  of successful socio-economic targeting  using, for instance, government poverty criteria, 
wealth  ranking,  Participatory  Poverty  Analysis  and  community  based  targeting  in  PNG.  The  social 
dynamics in PNG point to broad based community participation, going through traditional leadership 
structures,  supported  by  measures  to  insure  broad  inclusion  and  negotiate  social  constraints  on 
production and diverse livelihood strategies. 
24.  Empowerment and capacity building. The main strategy for empowerment, capacity building 
and targeting of appropriate interventions will be a family-based approach. As noted in the preceding 
analysis, in PNG the challenge is not only to deliver benefits but also to ensure that communities and 
into  sustainable  household  welfare 
these  benefits 
households  are  able 
improvements. Measures  to  address  social  divides  and  build  social,  financial,  technical  and 
organisational capacity for livelihood planning in the context of the fresh produce and galip nut value 
chains will therefore be central to the design and an integral part of project activities.   
translate 
to 
In  the  last  ten  years,  growing  attention  has  been  paid  to  participatory  or  farmer-driven 
25. 
extension.  This  has  been  an  important  shift  in  training  and  extension  thinking,  as  the  focus  of  the 
extension  work  goes  beyond  training  to  collaborative problem-solving.  However,  the  very  strongly 
delineated  social  and  gender  roles  in  agriculture  and  a  lack  of  understanding  of  PNG  women 
50 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
smallholders’  learning  context  and  training  needs  create  an  ‘invisible  barrier’. The  family-based 
approach addresses the fact that households are not cohesive units with shared needs and resources 
and  that  different  member's  pursue  different  goals  and  are  responsible  for  different  production  and 
consumption  activities. The  family-based  approach  enables  farming  families  to  explore  issues 
of gender  and  culture  within  communities  and  families,  seeking  to  encourage  more  effective, 
sustainable  and  gender-equitable  farming  and  business  practices.  The  approach  helps  families  to 
look  at  the  work  done  by  women,  men  and  youth  to  work  towards  a  more  equitable distribution of 
agricultural  and  household  work  and  to  create a  joint  vision  and  an  action  plan  for  working  towards 
this  vision. The  family-based  approaches  implemented  by  ACIAR  and  CARE  have  been  successful 
because  they  work  through  traditional  leadership  structures  and  explicitly  includes  men,  seeking  to 
build  a  consensus  and  demonstrate  that  social  inclusion  and  gender  empowerment  will  bring  social 
and economic benefits to the entire family.  
26.  The family-based  approach,  because  it  has  been  successfully  used  to  support  smallholders 
and  women  empowerment  in  PNG,  will  form  the  foundation  through  which  the  project  will  support 
partnership  development  and  promote  support  services  such  as  extension,  financial  literacy  and 
business  education.  The  following  key  elements  are  envisaged  to  prepare  and  implement  a  family-
based approach and are fundamental to the empowerment of the project target group 
Table 3 – Envisaged activities in the family-based approach 
Activity 
Community mobilisation 
Creating and achieving a family vision 
Financial education 
Healthy families 
Follow-up 
Description 
Information and consultations on the project (including an 
overview of the family-based approach) and partnership 
objectives directed at the community and traditional structures, to 
ensure that there is prior and informed consent to carry out the 
partnership and that the community will support the partnership 
objectives and partners’ operations. Community structures will be 
sensitised to facilitate sustainable land tenure arrangements 
between landowners and vegetable growers. Will also enable 
completion/confirmation of farmers’ registration 
Setting family long-term objectives, understanding the family 
budget and looking at household gendered roles and 
responsibilities, creating a basic plan for achieving the family 
dream by working together as a family 
Planning and monitoring the family budget (one module) and 
saving to meet family goals (one module) 
Enhancing the health of family members through good nutrition 
and hygiene practices 
Discussing specific challenges and opportunities and providing 
targeted support and advice 
27.  The  family-based  approach  will  be  adapted  to  the  specific  features  of  the  project,  particularly 
with  regard  to:  (i)  extension:  different  extension  approaches  may  be  chosen  in  the  various 
partnerships, but they will all have to be harmonised with the FT approach; (iii) social inclusion: the FT 
approach will also be used to identify more vulnerable households and to facilitate their participation 
in  the  partnership.  The  approach  will  be  implemented  in  communities  pre-selected  through 
partnerships  (whose  farmers  are  included  in  an  expression  of  interest  and  the  subsequent 
development of partnership plans and agreement).  
28.  The  family-based  approach  will  be  implemented  by  a  consortium  composed  of  the  Centre  of 
Financial  Excellence  in  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI),  which  has  developed  a  set  of  comprehensive 
modules  on  financial  education  widely  used  in  PNG,  and  an  international  NGO  with  experience  in 
implementing  family-based  approaches  in  the  PNG  context.  The  consortium-based  implementation 
approach  aims  at  ensuring  that  the  overall  family-based  approach  and  the  financial  education 
component  will  be  perfectly  harmonised  into  a  seamless  gender-inclusive  programme  aiming  at 
raising  household  capacity  to  take  the  best  advantage  of  project  services  and  to  improve  family 
livelihoods. CEFI,  which is the implementing agent for Sub-component 2.2  – Financial inclusion,  will 
also be the leader of the consortium.  
51 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
29.  The  consortium  will  also  be  responsible  for  building  the  capacities  of  FPDA  and  the  PMU 
technical staff, including provincial teams, as well as of the Business Development Service Providers 
that  will assist in developing partnership plans and agreements (see Component 1) so that they  are 
conversant with the approach and that it is mainstreamed throughout all project activities.  
30.  Gender  and  youth  targeting.  The  project  design  provides  for  a  50%  participation  rate  of 
women as project beneficiaries and the family-based approach is explicitly directed at supporting the 
empowerment  of  women  in  a  socially  acceptable  modality  that  will  not  risk  negative  consequences 
against women. The project will work towards the equal participation of women throughout the project 
management  and  implementation  structure,  including  the  PMU,  FPDA,  CEFI  and  the  Business 
Development Service Providers. Experience and capacity for supporting gender empowerment will be 
a key criterion for selecting service providers and once selected they will be required to institutionalize 
best  practice  gender  policies,  such  as  ensuring  equal  opportunity  and  a  working  environment  and 
modality that is safe for women. Women will be represented as a special interest group in the multi-
stakeholders’  platforms,  through  which  the  project  aims  at  contributing  to  reforms  in  the  policy  and 
institutional system to support women to operate as empowered smallholders. 
Inclusive business partnerships offer a solid opportunity for young people, both as smallholders 
31. 
and  as business partners,  to capture  value from the  fresh produce sub-sector, building  on  available 
assets. The family-based approach will provide an opportunity to work with  young people to change 
the gender dynamics and social norms that inform production, consumption and livelihood choices for 
improved  and  more  equitable  household  welfare.  Young  people,  and  young  women  especially,  will 
also  benefit  from  project  support  for  improved  nutrition  practices  which  will  be  integrated  into 
agricultural extension services. 
32.  GESI  provisions  for  project  components  and  activities. Gender  and  social  inclusion 
objectives  will  be  mainstreamed  throughout  the  project  and  integrated  into  all  activities  and 
interventions.  The  main  GESI  provisions  will  be  integrated  into  the  establishment  of  the  project 
management structure, the definition of a GESI action plan, its operationalization through the  project 
Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  and  the  capacity  building  and  empowerment  work  in  Component  1.    
Table 4 provides an outline of the GESI provisions for the Project. 
Table 4: Project Provision for Gender and Social Inclusion 
GESI Provisions 
Activities/ GESI Purpose 
 Implementation 
Responsibility 
Project Structure 
Recruit GESI officer 
Write GESI strategy 
GESI integrated into PIM 
GESI  criteria 
service providers 
GESI training 
for  hiring 
Overall responsibility for GESI outcomes. 
Develop  GESI  objectives,  targets,  action  plan  and 
indicators  for  M&E. Gender  targeting  of  50%  in  all 
project  activities.  Youth  targeting  of  30%  in  all  project 
activities. 
Practical guidelines and procedures for GESI 
Ensure  that  all  SP’s  willing  and  able  to  contribute  to 
GESI objectives 
Provide  training  on  GESI  objectives  to  all  project  staff, 
implementing partners and SP’s. 
PMU/International TA  
GESI  Officer  with  support 
from International TA 
GESI  Officer  with  support 
from International TA 
GESI  Officer  with  support 
from International TA 
GESI  Officer  with  support 
from International TA 
Component  1:  Inclusive  Business  Partnerships  –  GESI  provisions  to  ensure  that  poor  and  vulnerable 
households  are  included,  that  they  are  empowered  to  negotiate  their  interests,  and  that working with  poor 
households  is  a  viable  economic  option  for  private  sector  operators,  as  well  as  accepted  as  a  legitimate 
intervention by the community.  
Phase  1:  Pre-investment 
activities 
Scoping study 
 Knowledge gathering and partnership selection 
GESI Officer 
Include  information  on  socio-economic  differentiation 
amongst  producers  in  project  value  chains  and  the 
impact  of  gender,  generation  gaps,  wantok networks, 
land  rights etc. on  opportunities  to  benefit  from  the 
project16. 
16 See details in Attachment 1. 
52 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
GESI Provisions 
Activities/ GESI Purpose 
Information campaigns 
Expression of Interest 
Screening of proposals 
Family-based Approach 
Community mobilisation 
approach 
Family-based 
modules 
Community  baseline  and 
household profiles 
Partnership 
and implementation 
brokering 
Agricultural  extension  & 
nutrition training 
Business development and 
partnership management 
for 
Ensure  free  prior  and  informed  consent  of  the  target 
group to participate in partnerships.  
Disseminate information in language & media accessible 
to target group. 
Integrate GESI eligibility criteria into EOIs 
Compare  and  evaluate  GESI  potential  of  different 
proposals. 
Creates  inclusive  framework  and  foundation  for 
partnership implementation 
Community 
inclusive  business 
level  support 
partnerships,  identification  of  capacities,  priorities  and 
participant  households.  Rapid  rural  appraisal  to  ensure 
that  social  dynamics  (wantok,  land  issues etc.)  enable 
inclusive business partnerships and GESI objectives. 
Establish  the  principles  of  inclusive  household  level 
action plans around project investments.  
Identification  of  differentiated  household  needs  and 
priorities to support financial inclusion services, business 
training and nutrition education. 
Support  the  development  of  inclusive  management 
and  communication  systems  between  communities 
and business partners.  
training  delivered 
Extension/technical 
through/in 
family-based 
approach.  Financial  literacy  and  business  development 
services for project households 
Business development services to maximise partnership 
arrangements  and  support 
identification  of  GESI 
practices 
that  support  business,  such  as  gender 
inclusivity  as  smart  economics,  investing  in  smallholder 
loyalty, price and payment schedules that buffer risk and 
reward loyalty 
. 
inputs  and 
with the 
line 
 Implementation 
Responsibility 
Component 1 Manager 
GESI Officer 
Provincial Teams 
GESI Officer 
Component 1 Officer 
GESI officer 
GESI Officer 
Component 1 Manager 
Consortium 
Provincial teams 
Consortium 
Consortium 
Provincial Teams 
VCE 
Provincial Teams 
GESI Officer 
Extension SPs 
BDSP 
Support 
Financial 
Services 
Component  2:  Supportive  Value  Chain  Investments  -  address  key  bottlenecks  in  transport,  storage, 
processing and rural finance that impede GESI in project value chain. 
Financial Inclusion 
CEFI 
Access to savings, credit and other financial services as 
appropriate, using the FT as entry-point 
International TA 
GESI Officer 
CEFI 
International TA 
GESI Officer 
FPDA Provincial Manager 
Market Access  
As above – GESI bottlenecks to be addressed. 
Infrastructure  investments  that  address  constraints  on 
women’s safety and mobility to be prioritised.   
Produce  Multi-
Platforms 
Component  3:  Value  Chain  Governance  and  Project  Management  –  creation  of  a  policy  and  institutional 
environment that supports GESI in the fresh produce and galip nut value chains. 
Community/household  representatives,  such  as  VCEs, 
Fresh 
as MSP members 
Stakeholder 
(MSPs) 
Women  and  youth  to  be  represented  as  separate 
interest groups. 
Exploration  of  food  standards/grading that  are  GESI 
supportive. Support for  GESI 
integrated 
support services  
Support  for  nutrition  advice  to  be  mainstreamed  into 
agricultural extension packages for fresh produce 
Support for measures to increase the security for women 
and  children  in  transport,  markets  and  processing  and 
storage facilities. 
Enhanced policy and 
regulatory environment in 
the target value chains 
support inclusion 
Project Manager 
Component 3 Officer 
GESI Officer 
Project Manager 
Component 3 Officer 
Component 1 Officer 
sensitive 
53 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
GESI Provisions 
Activities/ GESI Purpose 
Promote knowledge 
management and 
communication 
Set up gender-sensitive M&E system 
Disseminate  information  about  business  models  that 
support GESI outcomes 
Promote ICT solutions that enable GESI 
 Implementation 
Responsibility 
Senior M&E Officer 
M&E/GESI consultants 
KM  &  Communication 
Officer 
GESI Officer  
Implementation Arrangements and Responsibilities 
33.  The  design  provides  for  comprehensive  support  for  GESI  objectives  managed  by  a  GESI 
Officer  within  the  PMU.  With  support  from  international  technical  assistance,  the  GESI  Officer  will 
write a GESI Action Plan and be responsible for ensuring that GESI interventions are mainstreamed 
into all component activities and interventions, with guidelines outlined in the PIM. 
34.  The  family-based  approach  will  provide  the  main  entry-point  for  empowerment  and  capacity 
building to enable GESI objectives and  will  also  provide the modality  through  which specialist  value 
chain  support  services,  such  as  agricultural  extension,  financial  literacy  and  business  development 
are  channelled.  A  consortium    led  by  CEFI  and  associating  an  international  NGO  experienced  in 
household-based methodologies in the context of PNG will provide training to the FPDA and service 
providers  involved  in  project  implementation  on  how  to  mainstream  the  family-based  approach 
throughout all project activities.  
35.  The  project  will  take  the  family-based  approach  as  a  departure  point,  as  it  has  been 
successfully  trialled  in  PNG  and  in  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector.  However,  during  the  initial  pilot 
phase  in  which  the  approach  is  adapted  to  interventions  required  to  build  smallholder  capacity,  the 
approach  used  in  similar  and  parallel  methodologies  will  be  examined  for  useful  material. These 
include the Gender Action Learning System (GALs) approach  implemented in several IFAD projects 
as  well  as  the  material,  modules  and  training  material  that have been  developed  to  support  gender 
inclusion in value chains. 
36.  The project aims to support the institutional capacity building of the FPDA for supporting GESI 
in fresh produce. Accordingly, the FPDA will work closely  with the consortium to support sustainable 
information and knowledge transfer. Within the Provincial teams and the PMU, technical staff will be 
given  training  on  the  family-based  approach,  as  well  as  on  the  different  aspects  of  the  integrated 
approach  (core  family-based  approach,  partnership  implementation,  financial  inclusion).  This 
approach  supports  the  sustainable  development  of  a  ‘community  of  practice’  in  PNG  able  to 
implement and roll-out GESI sensitive support services for the fresh produce sub-sector. 
[1] This section draws on the analysis in the UNDP 2014 Human Development Report: From Wealth to Well-Being.   
[2] UNICEF (2012) Annual Report for Papua New Guinea. Available on- line 
at http://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Papua_New_ Guinea_COAR_2012.pdf  
[3] UNDP (2014) National Human Development Report PNG_ From Wealth to Well-Being. 
[4] ACIAR (2013) Socio-Economic Research in PNG, pg. 115. 
[5] A recent study of business in PNG reviews the cost of GBV at the firm level and argues that costing the multi-dimensional impact of 
GBV is smart economics and an important first step in building the business case for an intervention in GBV. 
[6] ODI (2015) Gender Violence in PNG: The Cost to Business. Overseas Development Institute, London.  
[7] Empirical research from PNG shows that a mother’s education is at least three times more ‘productive’ than father’s education in 
terms  of  generating  positive  health  and  nutritional  outcomes  for  children.  (Gibson,  J.  1997, “How  Can Women's  Education  Aid 
Economic  Development?  The  Effect  on  Child  Stunting in  Papua  New  Guinea” Background  paper  prepared  for  a  poverty 
assessment of PNG, World Bank,) 
[8] The Eastern Highlands, for example, is characterised by an emphasis on extreme masculinity, a strict separation of the sexes in all 
activities and often violent defence of clan and territory. Whilst commercial agriculture, because of coffee, has been active in the 
Eastern Highlands and there has been an explicit agenda of commercialisation as a means to counter warfare and male cults, the 
underlying gender relations have not been significantly improved. Economic exchange has contributed to the workload of women 
without a significant improvement in their status or welfare. 
[9] Toombe,  H. 
(2013)  Exchange  and  Gender  Relations 
in 
the  Papua  New  Guinea Highlands,  Academic Edu. 
Anthropology, www.academia.edu. 
[10] Summary of an assessment on youth presented in the World Bank Country Program Strategy, 2012 
54 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
[11] Allen, M. and Z. Hasnain (2010). Power, pork and patronage: Decentralisation and the politicisation of the development budget in 
Papua New Guinea. Commonwealth Journal of Local Governance, 6: July 2010. Available on-line at 
http://epress.lib.uts.edu.au/ojs/index. php/cjlg/article/download/1617/1748 
 [12] World Bank (2012b). Papua New Guinea - Country gender assessment for the period 2011-2012. Washington D.C.: World Bank. 
 [13] Hystra (2015) Smallholder Farmers and Business: 15 Pioneering Collaborations for Improved Productivity and Sustainability. 
 [14] Chang, H (et al) Improving Access to Credit for Smallholder Farmers in PNG: Lessons Learned, in ACIAR (2013) Socio economic 
Agricultural Research in Papua New Guinea. Proceedings of a workshop held in Lae, 5-6 June. 
[15] Bonney (et  al)  2012, Feasibility Study for  a  New Wholesale Market for  the Fresh Produce  Market  in  Port  Moresby,  New  Zealand, 
MFAT. 
[16]  ACIAR (2013) Socio economic Agricultural Research in Papua New Guinea. Proceedings of a workshop held in Lae, 5-6 June. 
[17]  Pamphilon,  B  (et  al)  Two-Way Learning:  Key  Gender  Lessons  from  Participatory  Community  Workshops  with  Smallholders  in 
the Baiyar Valley  and Kerevat Areas  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  in ACIAR  (2013)  Socio economic  Agricultural  Research  in  Papua 
New Guinea. Proceedings of a workshop held in Lae, 5-6 June. 
[18] Hystra (2015) Smallholder Farmers and Business: 15 Pioneering Collaborations for Improved Productivity and Sustainability. 
55 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
Attachment 1 – Orientations for the GESI Strategy 
Whilst the selection of the fresh produce sub-sector is clearly justified from a GESI perspective there 
is limited information on socio-economic differentiation in the fresh produce sub-sector; analysis of the 
factors affecting access focus mainly on the key bottlenecks (finance, transport, storage), not on how 
these affect different socio-economic groups. The scoping study, and the community and household 
profiling  that  will  follow  initial  interventions  in  the  community  and  the  implementation  of  the  family-
based  approach,  should  gather  information  about  social  and  economic  factors  that  affect  access  to 
the fresh produce sub-sector and that  will  affect the operation of different intervention and business 
partnership modalities.  
The basic questions to be explored to improve the GESI impact of the project include:  
  What are the minimal assets and capacities a household requires to improve and commercialize 
production and interact with markets?  
  What factors will influence household level capacity to enter into traditional and modern markets?  
  Which  commodities  have  the  greatest  multi-functionality  and  potential  for  graduation?  For 
example  sweet  potato  serves  household  food  needs,  both  traditional  and  modern  markets  and 
can be used for livestock feed (traditional and modern)?  
  What  is  the  difference  in  the  asset  base  (finance,  labour,  time)  required  to  enter  traditional  and 
modern markets for particular commodities?  
  What  steps  support  graduation  from  traditional  to  modern  markets  for  different  commodities 
(would be useful also to break down the horticulture value chain into different products)? 
Key  questions  to  evaluate  the  comparative  advantage  of  different  institutional  options/business 
models for working with smallholders and optimising GESI outcomes include:  
  What is the ‘social catchment’ of members/participants (community, village, wantok, area based)? 
  What  asset  base  is  required  to  enter  into  the  partnership  (land,  labor,  literacy,  financial  assets) 
and do these meet those of the project target group? 
  What  investments  are  expected  of  farmers,  what  risks  do  these  entail  to  existing  livelihood 
structures and how reversible are these if they do not work?  
  What is the gender balance of membership/participation in the scheme?  
  What are the gender differences in the types of engagement in the partnership? 
  What  is  the  leadership  structure  of  the  partnerships,  how  are  farmer  interests  represented  and 
decisions taken?  
  How accessible are the services provided (distance, meeting schedules etc.)? 
  Who were the drivers/initiators of the business partnership?  
  How reliant is the partnership on external funding and support?  
  What is the loyalty, reward and penalty structure of the partnership for services and how and by 
who are these decided and enforced?  
  What  measures,  if  any,  were  taken  and  are  needed  to  secure  partnership  formalities/legalities 
with participants with limited literacy?  
  How  do  participants  understand  their  ‘ownership’  of  a  cooperative,  for  example  the  Simbu 
Farmers’ Cooperative and how is this managed and governed?  
GESI questions regarding production and livelihood strategies of smallholders in project value chain 
include:  
56 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender 
  Who owns and controls the assets and makes decisions at the household/community level?  
  What has been the main entry point to communities used by agribusinesses (lead farmer, public 
sector, NGO) and what can we learn from their experience?  
  What  are  low-hanging  fruit  for  technological  adaptation  and  market  graduation  (products  within 
the horticulture sector can also be broken down further these lines). 
  What factors determine household decision-making on which markets to enter?  
  Who are the key figures within the community who can act as a fair broker and intermediary in the 
introduction of project services?  
Sustainable  support  for  GESI  in  the  project  value  chains  will  require  the  internalisation  of  GESI 
capacity building first within the FPDA and public services and ultimately, as much as possible, in the 
business partnerships themselves. Some key questions regarding this shift include:  
  How  can  intensive  social  capacity  building  around  production  be  matched  with  agribusiness 
commercial interests and the limitations of these? 
  What,  if  any,  are  the  systems  of  extension  and  training  provided  through  the  business  models 
proposed for replication in the concept note?  
  How do current models of agribusiness extension and technology provision protect against default 
and ensure farmer loyalty for investments?  
  How  can  service  providers  be  used  to  bridge  the  capacity  building  gap  and  complement  the 
services provided through business partnerships?  
The  design  would  benefit  from  an  assessment  and  comparison  of  the  likely  returns  to  producers 
(differentiated by gender) of different intervention types (improved production, grading, processing) to 
support access to different market channels (traditional, modern, institutional). The following are three 
key questions:  
  What  are  social  and  economic  entry  costs  to  participate  in  traditional,  modern  and  institutional 
markets?  
  How do wantok networks affect the different market types, if at all?  
  Where is value added and captured by value chain actors in traditional, modern and institutional 
markets and what the implications for producers?  
57 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned 
IFAD  had  an  active  engagement  in  PNG  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  financing  three  investment 
1. 
projects: the Artisanal Fisheries Project approved by IFAD’s Executive Board in April 1982, the South 
Simbu  Rural  Development  Project  approved  in  September  1986,  and  the  North  Simbu  Rural 
Development Project approved in April 1993. After a period of disengagement following the closure of 
the  North  Simbu  project  in  1999,  IFAD  resumed  its  cooperation  with  GoPNG  in  April  2010  with  the 
financing of the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP), jointly with the World Bank. In 
April 2014, the Fund approved additional financing to scale up PPAP nationally, bringing IFAD’s total 
financing to PPAP to USD 36 million, or 30% of the total. 
An  independent  Country  Programme  Evaluation  (CPE)  was  carried  out  in  2001.  Little  or  no 
2. 
data  was  available  to  gauge  project  impact,  but  the  overall  assessment  of  programme  performance 
was  moderately  satisfactory  and  it  was  found  that  the  sustainability  of  interventions  was  rarely 
assured. Key explanatory factors were that: no funding was available to keep up with the provision of 
project-sponsored  services;  service  delivery  had  a  high  cost,  further  compounded  by  accessibility 
issues  and  law  and  order  problems;  community  participation  was  limited;  and  ownership  of  project 
interventions  at  the  local  level  was  very  low.  The  lack  of  measurable  progress  in  the  reduction  of 
malnutrition  from  lack  of  energy  and  animal  protein  deficiencies  was  an  issue  of  particular  concern. 
The empowerment of women and their organisations to access the services required to improve their 
standards of living, and the development of small livestock for raising protein supply were among key 
proposed solutions.  
3. 
Key  lessons  derived  from  the  CPE,  PPAP  and  consultations  with  stakeholders  (including  a 
session  on  lessons  learnt  from  past  engagement  in  Simbu  province  chaired  by  the  Provincial 
Governor) point to the following issues: 
  Access  to  markets:  few  farmers  are  commercially  oriented  because  they  face  excessive 
constraints  to  engage  with  markets  -  difficult  and  costly  transport,  lack  of  market  information, 
limited  bargaining  power  with  middlemen,  limited  access  to  support  services  or  technology  to 
improve  quality  and  to  adhere  to  market  requirements.  Accessible  markets  and  remunerative 
prices  constitute  a  powerful  incentive  for  small  farmers  to  increase  production  and  to  generate 
marketable  surpluses.  When  access  to  market  is  difficult  or  prices  found  to  be  less  attractive, 
farmers  reallocate  workforce  and  land  –  to  crops  that  can  bring  returns  where  there  are 
opportunities  (as  demonstrated  by  the  vanilla  boom  in  response  to  high  prices  or  by  PPAP 
experience) or back to food crops;  
  Role  of  private  sector:  agribusiness  enterprises  (buyers,  exporters,  processors,  private  service 
providers) are critical for linking smallholders to markets, for strengthening their ability to respond 
to  market  demand  through  the  provision  of  support  services  and  for  bringing  innovation. 
Furthermore,  they  have  the  ability  to  deliver  services  with  scale  and  in  line  with  market 
requirements. However, sourcing from smallholders also entails significant risks, because of their 
lack  of  organisation,  low  skills,  lack  of  experience  in  dealing  with  the  markets  and  connectivity 
problems. Incentives designed to offset those risks are therefore required to bring agribusiness to 
engage with smallholders and to assist in developing new partnerships in the early stages; 
  Farmers’ organisations: a high proportion of organisations established at local level are formed to 
obtain  external  funding  for  community  or  private  activities,  with  little  sustainability  prospects.  In 
particular,  the  development  of  agriculture  cooperatives  has  suffered  many  failures  in  the  past, 
mostly  related  to  mismanagement  and  internal  conflicts.  However,  the  experience  of  successful 
cooperatives  today  demonstrates  that  farmers’  organisations  that  have  clear  objectives  and 
governance  structures,  provide  effective  services  to  members  and  enjoy  transparent  and 
accountable management are sustainable and succeed in increasing their membership;  
  Community  mobilisation:  setting  up  effective  farmers’  organisations  and  developing  a  business 
mind-set  requires  a  major  transformative  process,  which  can  succeed  when  the  community  is 
involved  and  has  a  sense  of  ownership.  Traditional  leaders,  traditional  groups  (in  particular 
women  groups),  church  leaders  and  local  counsellors  can  play  a  positive  role  in  supporting 
change if they are mobilised rather than being side-lined; 
59 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned 
  Project organisational frameworks: complex project settings covering a large range of sectors are 
rarely  adapted  to  the  limited  institutional  capacities  and  end  up  spreading  benefits  too  thinly. 
Projects that start simple, concentrating on a focused range of industries in a limited geographical 
area (which is the approach adopted by PPAP) are more likely to reach impact, have increased 
potential for developing linkages and synergies within the target industries and can progressively 
be expanded or scaled up; 
 
Implementation  arrangements:  self-standing  project  implementation  units  are  not  conducive  to 
sustainability  and  have  largely  failed  to  build  institutional  capacity.  Project  implementation 
responsibilities  should  be  vested  in  existing  government  institutions  with  technical  assistance 
provided to ensure that service delivery can continue beyond project completion. 
4. 
More specific lessons directly deriving from five years of PPAP implementation are as follows: 
  A  successful,  innovative  model:  there  is  strong  demand  from  farmers,  their  organisations,  and 
lead  partners  for  engaging  in  partnerships  such  as  promoted  by  the  project.  Partnerships  with 
agribusiness  are  an  efficient  way  to  channel  services  enabling  village  farmers  to  increase 
volumes  and  quality  of  produce  and  to  connect  them  to  markets  at  a  scale  that  cannot  be 
matched by underfinanced public extension services; 
  Support to lead partners: the first calls for proposals underestimated the time required from lead 
partners for project reporting and partnership management, which led to a streamlining of project 
administrative  requirements  and  a  strengthening  of  project  support  to  partnerships.  Besides, 
project design overestimated  lead  partner’s abilities to provide quality support  to partnerships in 
key  areas  such  as  agricultural  extension,  community  development  and  farmers’  organisations. 
Lead  partners  require  technical  support  and  guidance  from  the  project  and  must  involve  co-
partners  for  the  delivery  of  some  services  in  areas  where  they  do  not  have  a  comparative 
advantage. In addition, the project must also be realistic about the incentives and capacity of lead 
partners  to  deliver  types  of  support  and  services  that  are  not  directly  linked  to  their  core 
competencies; 
  Sustainability: switching from semi-subsistence farming providing cash as needed to farming as a 
professionally run and profit-making business requires from farmers a complete change of mind-
set and the durable acquisition of a large range of technical and managerial skills. Such a process 
takes  time.  Partnerships  should  not  only  aim  at  helping  farmers  to  gain  the  skills  required  to 
produce  and  market  improved  volumes  and  quality  of  produce,  but  also  ensure  that  adequate 
structures and capacities are in place so that farmers can have sustained access to services and 
markets  once  partnerships  are  over.  Conversely,  the  funding  model  whereby  close  to  90%  of 
partnership costs are paid by a project grant is costly and hard to sustain for the GoPNG; 
  Farmers’ engagement: strengthening their organisation is important for farmers as it will facilitate 
the  channelling  of  services  and  produce  aggregation,  but  also  to  become  less  dependent  of 
buying companies by taking over some services or to improve their ability to negotiate terms and 
conditions. Farmers’ organisation  is also important for buyers to develop efficient  supply chains. 
Specific  support  is  required  to  support  farmers’  organisation  and  related  capacity  building. 
Besides, community participation has emerged as a factor of success in building cohesion and in 
promoting  sustainable  organisations.  The  construction  of  village-based  resource  centers,  i.e. 
simple  constructions  for  meetings,  trainings  and  storage,  has  proven  a  powerful  investment  in 
support of group strengthening; 
  Commercial  lead  partners:  non-commercial  partners  such  as  NGOs  or  universities  do  not  have 
access to markets and have no economic interest to sustain partnerships once project financing is 
over.  Lead  partners  should  be  commercial  entities  (buyers)  but  they  could  partner  with  non-
commercial  partners  to  retain  their  services  in  areas  where  they  have  comparative  advantages 
and expertise; 
  Local  government  engagement:  PPAP  innovative  model  has  generated  strong  interest  from 
provincial and local governments across the country. There is an untapped potential for synergies 
with local and provincial governments and for leveraging additional financial support, in particular 
for  infrastructure  development  and  maintenance.  There  are  also  opportunities  for  the  project  to 
60 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned 
better  link  with  local  government  agriculture  programs  and  to  strengthen  extension  support 
through greater participation of extensions agents; 
 
Improving road passability: investments are selected on a competitive basis (those with the most 
favourable  benefit/cost  ratio),  but  careful  consideration  needs  to  be  given  as  to  whether  there 
should be some threshold to the competition – e.g. allowing each partnership that applies at least 
one investment, so as to spread the benefits as widely as possible. The process for selection of 
priority  investments  needs  to  be  very  transparent  and  defensible,  both  within  partnerships  and 
among  partnerships,  as  those  farmers/partnerships  whose  candidates  are  not  selected  will 
understandably  be  very  disappointed.  At  all  stages  the  PMU  has  to  work  hard  not  to  raise 
expectations  of  farmer  groups  or  communities  unrealistically.  This  involves  a  well-resourced, 
carefully  programmed  and  actively  managed  preparation  process,  with  multiple  stages  and 
consultation at  all stages  with several partnerships,  communities and  local  authorities in several 
different  geographic  areas,  which  can  be  very  time  consuming.  Establishing  the  maintenance 
arrangements needs to be the responsibility of a specialist, rather than included in the role of the 
PMU  engineer,  since  it  requires  considerable  input  and  dedication  to  identify  the  future 
maintenance  needs,  carry  out  awareness  with  the  respective  parties,  negotiate  the  terms  of  the 
MoU, and undertake training of the parties once the works are complete. 
61 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
COMPONENT 1: INCLUSIVE BUSINESS PARTNERSHIPS 
1. 
Component  1  aims  at  building  inclusive  partnerships  between  village  farmers  and  buyers, 
whereby: (i) farmers will gain improved access to markets and to the services enabling them to supply 
buyers  in  line  with  market  requirements;  and  (ii)  buyers  will  source  from  farmers  to  supply 
remunerative  markets.  The  expected  outcome  is  that  village  farming  households  have  access  to 
markets, technologies and services in the target value chains. The main outputs from Component 1 
will  be:  (i)  different  types  of  business  partnerships  linking  fresh  produce  and  galip  nut  producing 
households  to  buyers;  (ii)  at  least  20,000  farming  households  (20,000  men  and  20,000  women) 
trained  in  and  using  good  agricultural  and  post-harvest  practices  for  fresh  produce;  and  (iii)  around 
23,000  farming  households  trained  for  family  engagement  in  decision-making  on  production  and 
marketing.  Component  1  includes  two  sub-components:  Sub-component  1  -  Fresh  Produce 
Partnerships,  which  will  concentrate  most  of  Component  1  resources  and  Sub-component  2  -  Galip 
Nut Supply Chain. 
Sub-component 1.1 – Fresh Produce Partnerships 
2. 
This  sub-component  aims  at  developing  linkages  between  village  farmers  and  other 
stakeholders in the fresh produce sector, whereby farmers will gain improved access to markets and 
to  the  services  enabling  them  to  increase  productivity,  quality  and  consistency  in  line  with  market 
requirements.  This  will  be  achieved  by  supporting  partnership  agreements  between:  (i)  village 
farmers,  looking  to  increase  and  improve  vegetable  production  provided  they  have  a  secure  and 
remunerative market outlet; and (ii) buyers of fresh produce with access to identified markets, willing 
to secure reliable and consistent supply from village farmers. Partnerships will be financed through a 
mix  of  partners’  contribution,  credit,  and  incentive  grants  aimed  at  decreasing  partners’  risk  and 
facilitating their engagement into innovative agriculture practices and marketing arrangements. They 
will  also  provide  access  to  support  services  both  for  farmers  (including  technical  and  business 
advisory  services  as  well  as  support  to  strengthen  their  organisation)  and  for  smaller  and  medium 
buyers  (business  development  services).  They  will  not  target  specific  crops  or  value  chains  in  the 
fresh  produce  sector,  but  will  rather  support  partnerships  to  respond  to  market  demand  and  to 
become profitable and sustainable after project support is phased out.  
The  sub-component  will  build  on  the  PPAP  approach,  drawing  lessons  from  experience  (see 
3. 
Appendix 3) and adapting it to the specificities of the fresh produce sector, where: 
  Buyers  are  smaller:  whereas  the  cocoa  and  coffee  sectors  have  large  traders  and  exporters, 
often global companies, that have the capacity to directly implement project resources to supply 
services  to  farmers,  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector  has  an  overwhelming  majority  of  micro  and 
small  operators,  that,  alongside  with  growers,  need  support  to  build  capacities  and  grow  their 
business; 
  Crops  are  diverse:  rather  than  specialising  in  one  single  crop,  farmers  produce  a  diversity  of 
crops,  which  enables  them  to  diversify  their  risk  and  compensate  price  variability,  but  also  to 
make  the  best  use  of  small  land  plots  through  crop  rotation.  Technical  advisory  services  are 
needed to support sustainable diversification  (ensuring a steady flow of revenues while allowing 
the preservation of land fertility) and need to be adapted to different agro-ecological potential and 
market demand; 
  Value chains are complex: as reviewed in Appendix 1, the diversity of traders (according to size 
and  capacity  to  source  from  varying  numbers  of  farmers  and  to  position  in  the  chain)  and  end 
buyers  (from  retailers  of  different  sizes,  to  catering  companies  and  hotels)  requires  a  flexible 
approach  to  adapt  project  support  to  different  types  of  partnerships  and  target  markets.  It  also 
requires support to strengthen value chain linkages and ensure regular communication between 
players  along  the  chain  (which  is  addressed  in  Component  3),  building  on  the  excellent  work 
started by FPDA; 
  Reaching out to markets is arduous: although mostly domestic, markets are hard to reach out, 
because of the remoteness of many production areas in the Highlands, but also because of the 
distance  between  production  areas  and  key  end  markets  (Port  Moresby  and  Lae)  and  the 
63 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
complexity  of  the  transport  chain  (road  and  sea  freight/air  freight).  This  in  turn  generates  high 
post-harvest losses. Here as well, the strengthening of value chain linkages is a key requirement, 
along with the building of post-harvest management skills of growers and traders, and the raising 
of investment capacities to improve transport equipment of traders.  
4. 
Partnerships will be market responsive, non-prescriptive and based on the principles of public-
private-producer  partnerships  (PPPPs).  In  the  Highlands,  most  partnerships  are  likely  to  engage  in 
production  and  marketing  of  temperate  produce  such  as  broccoli,  carrots,  cabbages,  onions  and 
potatoes for distant end markets and a broader range of products for regional, closer market outlets. 
In  the  Lowlands,  a  different  range  of  crops  will  be  covered  possibly  including  taro,  okra,  tomatoes, 
watermelons etc. Main activities will be as follows. 
Scoping Study and Climate Risk Assessment 
5. 
A  participatory  scoping  study  will  be  carried  out  in  the  target  provinces  at  project  inception  in 
order  to:  (i)  map  the  fresh  produce  sub-sector,  identify  crops  with  stronger  comparative  advantages 
and  business  opportunities,  as  well  as  potential  partners;  (ii)  the  availability  of  relevant  service 
providers able to provide relevant support services in each target province will be evaluated, including 
their  respective  capabilities,  capacities  and  interest  in  delivering  services  within  the  project;  (iii) 
provide  orientations  to  support  the  project  GESI  strategy;  and  (iv)  provide  orientations  to  address 
possible  tenure  challenges  that  might  affect  the  project  target  group.  The  study  would  therefore:  (i) 
carry out detailed value chain analysis in the target provinces through to the major domestic markets, 
identifying main production areas, market channels and specific market opportunities with potential for 
increasing  farmers’  income;  (ii)  identify  specific  chain  constraints  and  the  major  causes  and  likely 
extent  of  postharvest  losses  at  each  link  of  the  value  chain;  (iii)  identify  key  players  -  i.e.  existing 
farmer-owned  ventures  (cooperatives  and  limited  liability  companies),  different  categories  of  buyers 
and service providers and existing value chain relationships between chain actors – and assess their 
interest in participating in the project as well as their capacities; (iv) identify factors of socio-economic 
differentiation  amongst  producers  (such  as  gender,  generation  gaps,  wantok  networks)  that  could 
affect    opportunities  to  benefit  from  the  project  and  provide  orientations  to  secure  broad  inclusion;; 
and  (iv)  assess  tenure  systems  and  recommend  ways  to  secure  land  tenure  for  the  project  target 
groups.  The  study  will  be  carried  out  by  an  international  service  provider,  in  coordination  with  the 
preparation of the GESI strategy (described in Appendix 2). It  will  generate  information to orient the 
rest  of  pre-investment  activities,  as  well  as  baseline  data  for  the  M&E  system.  Detailed  terms  of 
reference for the scoping study are in Attachment 1.  
6. 
The  PMU/FPDA  will  organise  capacity  building  for  service  providers,  based  on  assessments 
carried out during the scoping study, to address identified capacity gaps. Annual partnership meetings 
will  discuss  service  provision.  Further  capacity  building  will  be  made  available  and  /or  amendments 
will be brought to partnership agreements as required. 
In  parallel  to  the  scoping  study,  MVF  will  finance  a  climate  risk  assessment,  which  will:                      
7. 
(i)  reference  existing  mapping  studies  undertaken  within  the  target  provinces;  (ii)  identify  areas  with 
climate  change  risks  that  must  be  addressed  (such  as  drought,  flood  and  frost  prone  localities);               
and  (iii)  establish  baseline  data  and  identify  a  suite  of  appropriate  short,  medium  and  longer  term 
agricultural  risk  management  strategies  and  best  practices.  The  climate  change  risk  assessment 
outcomes will  be reflected  in extension methodologies and recommended agricultural risk mitigation 
strategies  that  will  be  supported  through  partnerships.  Risk  assessment  outcomes  will  also  be 
reflected  in  the  MIS  by  way  of  dissemination  of  the  most  suitable  climate  change  risk  management 
practices  within  the  agricultural  sector.  The  study  will  be  carried  out  by  an  international  service 
provider. 
Pre-investment activities  
8. 
Pre-investment activities will be implemented in years 1, 2 and 3. Partnerships will benefit from 
project  assistance  over  a  maximum  period  of  three  years.  The  annual  sequence  of  activities  will 
unfold in six steps.  
9. 
Step  1:  Information  campaign.  Annual  campaigns  will  be  organised  to  disseminate 
information about the project and opportunities offered to buyers  and farmers. This  will  be achieved 
64 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
through media and information meetings organised by the Provincial Teams at provincial and district 
level. Existing industry networks, such as those initiated by FPDA (growers, traders and end buyers) 
will  also  be  referenced  as  a  means  to  further  disseminate  information  and  generate  interest  in  the 
project. 
10.  Step  2:  Calls  for  expression  of  interest.  The  PMU  will  issue  annual  calls  for  expression  of 
interests (EOIs) through regional radios, newspapers, notice boards and other appropriate supports, 
to  identify  market  players  interested  in  developing  partnerships  with  village  farmers  to  supply 
identified markets. Expressions of interests will be short proposals presenting the partners, identified 
markets, partnership objectives and proposed investments, expected benefits in particular for farmers, 
cost  estimate  and  financing  sources.  The  calls  will  specify  eligibility  criteria  for  partners  and  for 
investments. 
Eligible partners 
11.  Partnerships  will  be  formed  between  farmer  groups  and  village  farmer  households  in  the 
partnership target production areas, and, any of the following lead partners:  
 
large  buyers/chain  leaders  operating  substantive  operations  with  established  business 
management  structures  and  capabilities  and  owning  commercial  postharvest  and  cold  storage 
facilities,  such  as  farmer-owned  marketing  companies,  other  private  aggregating  and  marketing 
companies, catering companies supplying extractive businesses and major institutional buyers, or 
end buyers such as supermarkets;  
  medium buyers, or established entrepreneurs (most with a vegetable farming background) who 
are  buying  fresh  produce  direct  from  growers  or  from  small-sized  aggregators  and  consolidate 
and commercialise fresh produce to supply modern market buyers; 
  small  buyers,  such  as  farmers  with  an  entrepreneurial  mind,  usually  farming  larger  surfaces              
(1-2  ha)  aggregating  and  marketing  produce  from  their  neighbours  to  supply  modern  and 
traditional markets, or district-based traders/middlemen buying at farm gate; 
  micro  buyers,  wet  market-based  intermediaries  supplying  larger  traders,  who  provide  a  quick, 
safe and simple market outlet to growers and reduce transaction costs for larger traders. 
12.  The proposals will specify the number and location of farmer partners. Large buyers will have to 
be  a  registered  cooperative  or  legally  incorporated  company.  NGOs  and  service  providers  may  be 
included in partnerships but only as secondary partners, because of their limited potential to sustain 
the partnership post-project. 
Eligible investments 
13.  Partnerships will be demand-driven and will cover investments required to achieve the specific 
partnership objectives. To encourage innovation and to ensure sufficient flexibility exists to cover the 
scope  of  crops,  production  and  postharvest  scenarios  and  marketing  objectives  included  within 
partnership business plans there will be an open menu of eligible investments. These will fall into the 
following categories. 
  Nurseries: nurseries could be established at village level, to serve a group of farmers, and/or at 
household level. Nursery establishment will be matched with technical and management training. 
Larger nurseries serving a group of farmers will be geared for operation on a commercial basis; 
  Booster  kits:  booster  kits  will  support  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  for  increased 
productivity,  quality  and  risk  management.  They  could  include:  basic  inputs  for  soil  and  plant 
nutrition  (pest  control,  quality  seeds  and  planting  material);  farming  tools;  simple  and  adapted 
irrigation systems (see below); and post-harvest materials such as field harvesting crates. Access 
to the booster kit would be contingent on (prior) regular participation in extension activities; 
  Water  management:  because  of  the  very  small  size  of  smallholder  farming  plots  in  the  PNG 
Highlands,  watering  is  normally  done  manually  using  buckets/watering  cans  with  water  being 
carried  in  buckets  from  available  water  sources.  Where  a  suitable  water  source  is  available, 
booster  kits  could  include  small-scale  irrigation  equipment  (such  as  hydraulic  ram  pump  and 
65 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
pipe/hose systems) or farm-based water management systems (such as storage tanks), allowing 
farmers to better cope with seasonal weather patterns, drought and natural disasters, to improve 
product  quality  and  consistency,  wash  produce,  develop  water  based  postharvest  cooling 
systems  and  reduce  labour  demand  for  watering.  Small  scale  rainwater  harvesting  systems  are 
also  an  option  for  storing  irrigation  water  for  use  in  dry  periods  or  when  water  sources  are  not 
easily accessible; 
  Extension  and  advisory  services:  this  will  include  capacity  building  in  good  agricultural 
practices,  such  as  integrated  pest  and  disease  management,  climate  smart  agriculture, 
sustainable  land  management  practices,  nurseries  management,  production  planning,  post-
harvest  management,  primary  processing  (such  as  grading  and  packaging)  and  farm  business 
management.  The  project  will  support  multi-benefit  approaches  that  deliver  multiple  benefits  for 
production,  poverty  reduction,  environment  and  climate  resilience.  Main  features  of  the  project 
strategy  for  providing  extension  and  technical  advisory  services  to  growers,  which  will  be 
developed with the international technical assistance, are as follows: 
o  Capacity building will be provided along participatory approaches  and in line with the family-
based  approach  (participation  of  husband  and  wife),  building  on  FPDA-developed  Model 
Farm  approach,  and  the  training  of  Village  Extension  Workers  (VEW)  (also  see  Annex 
1).  Model farms provide technically sound participatory learning on small scale, commercial 
production  of  selected  crops.  A  model  farm  is  a  plot  of  about  0.5  hectare  that  is  made 
available  by  a  lead  partner  as  a  collective  learning  plot  catering  to  a  group  of  about  50 
growers. Farmers learn together and hands-on topics such as basic agronomy applicable to 
the  crops,  crop  planning,  plant  care  and  protection,  soil  management,  crop  nutrition, 
harvesting  practices  and  relevant  climate  change  mitigation  practices.  Practical  sessions 
include  construction  of  a  nursery,  land  preparation,  soil  conservation,  drainage,  pest  and 
disease management and on-farm safety practices. Model farms also assist farmers to better 
understand the needs of formal end markets and become more market driven in their farming 
practices.  VEWs selected among the group of farmers involved in the model farm get more 
intensive  training  so  that  they  are  able  to  provide  ongoing  technical  advice  to  the  group, 
getting a modest stipend. The VEW learning programme will include production, post-harvest 
management,  market  linkages,  farming  as  a  business  and  farmers’  organisation,  along  a 
gradual approach; 
o  Model  farms  will  be  the  starting  point  for  farmers’  organisation  and  can  evolve  into  farmer 
hubs for developing a more diversified range of services (such as input delivery, collection or 
primary processing), depending on partnership interest. This will be assessed after one year 
of partnership formation with evaluation criteria including the types of services the partnership 
would like to organise collectively within the hub and how they intend utilising and managing 
the hub facility. Farmer hubs could potentially be developed and managed based on the same 
principles evident within model farms that is a strong market focus, emphasis on the benefits 
of  participation  such  as  the  ability  to  aggregate  and  better  prepare  products  for  formal  end 
markets,  collaborative  decision  making,  clear  definition  of  roles  and  responsibilities  and 
allocation of same and strong community involvement. Farmer hubs are a practical means for 
facilitating  farmer  organisations  and  also  the  building  of  trust  between  value  chain  actors 
(growers,  buyers,  distributors  and  end  markets)  by  way  of  providing  a  forum  for  enhanced 
communication and information sharing; 
o  The  most  appropriate  extension  services  for  each  partnership  will  be  evaluated  and 
determined during preparation of partnership proposals and will be reflected within respective 
partnership business plans. In practice, for example, confirmation within the business plan of 
specific  production  and  postharvest  activities  needed  to  meet  contractual  market  objectives 
will be reflected in the design of the model farm established within that partnership; 
o  Extension  and  advisory  services  will  be  greatly  enhanced  by  further  development  of  a 
Management  Information  System,  which  will  benefit  all  the  partnerships  (and  is  therefore 
handled  in  Component  3),  as  access  to  smartphones  and  associated  technologies  are 
enjoyed by an estimated 95% plus of smallholder families in the target provinces. The MIS will 
provide  immediate  access  to  technical  production  and  postharvest  information  covering  the 
range  of  crops  grown  and  marketed  commercially  in  MVF-supported  partnerships.  The  MIS 
66 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
will  also  incorporate  crop  specific  marketing  information  and  updates  for  business  and  crop 
planning  purposes  and  hence  support  the  development  of  commercially  focused  farming 
groups and organisations. The on-demand availability of the MIS will constitute an invaluable 
resource  particularly  for  smallholders  and  VEWs  in  remote  areas.  The  MIS  will  also  ensure 
consistency  in  the  dissemination  of  production  and  postharvest  best  practices  within  the 
various extension modalities utilised within MVF; 
  Machinery  and  equipment  for  improved  production,  processing,  storing  and  transporting. 
mechanised  farming  equipment;  product  harvesting,  collection  and  packing  equipment  and 
facilities,  cooling  and  storage  systems;  other  specialised  equipment  (such  as  an  onion  dryer  or 
produce  washing  system);  enhanced  grading  and  packaging  systems;  and  dedicated  fresh 
produce suitable transport (such as trucks fitted with refrigerated containers to maximise mobility 
and  commercial  flexibility).  Equipment  would  be  fitted  with  generators  to  provide  an  alternative 
power source when needed. It may also include tablets for accessing ICT-based services such as 
extension,  marketing  related  information,  value  chain  case  studies  and  access  to  industry 
networks  developed  and  implemented  within  the  Management  Information  System  (Component 
3); 
  Business development and partnership management: this would include capacity building for 
mostly micro, small and medium lead partners (see above) so that they can operate sustainable, 
profitable  business  sourcing  from  village  farmers  and  supplying  markets  with  growing  quality 
requirements. This could cover both business management training and mentoring. It could also 
cover market development such as marketing exposure tours, support to the negotiation of supply 
agreements/contracts  with  catering  companies  and  other  end  buyers,  or  setting  up  standard 
compliance and quality assurance systems. Access to market information would benefit the whole 
value chain (as opposed  to specific partnerships) and is handled  in  Component 3. It  would also 
cover partnership management costs for medium and large partnerships. 
14.  The  sub-component  will  support  partnerships  for  crops  that  have  comparative  advantage  and 
can be sold at a competitive price 
15.  Step  3:  Screening.  The  PMU  will  screen  EOIs  to  determine  which  proposals  will  be  further 
developed  into  full  partnership  agreements,  based  on  the  following  criteria:  (i)  eligibility  of  partners 
and proposed investments; (ii) experience and capacities of the Lead partner; (iii) number of potential 
beneficiary households; (iv) target markets and technical requirements;  (v) estimated financial, social 
and nutritional benefits; and (v) risks. Preference will be given to partnerships that: (i) offer equitable 
opportunities  for  participation  by  men,  women  and  youth;    (ii)  incorporate  specific  measures  to 
facilitate  the  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  and  vulnerable  groups;  and  (iii)  address  the  need  for 
smallholders to adapt to climate change. 
16.  Step  4:  Family-based  approach.  Once  partnership  proposals  have  been  pre-selected, 
preparatory community-based activities will be implemented in the partnership target areas, with the 
objective  of:  (i)  ensuring  broad  community  information  and  consultation  with  a  view  to  gain  the 
community’s  free  and  prior-informed  consent  as  well  as  community  support  to  partnership 
development and implementation; (ii) increasing the capacities of participating farming households to 
take  advantage  of  project  benefits,  notably  through  financial  education;  (iii)  empowering  women  so 
that  they  access  project  benefits  alongside  with  men,  within  the  family  unit;  (iv)  raise  awareness  on 
good  nutrition  practices;  and  (v)  engaging  the  community  to  create  a  supportive  environment  for 
household  level activities and to support  broad inclusion. This  will  be  achieved  by  implementing the 
family-based approach, which is described in Appendix 2. The approach is based on the concept of a 
family  unit  as  an  inclusive  way  to  work  as  a  smallholder  family:  family  heads,  man  and  woman, 
determine together farming goals, financial goals and general family goals.  
17.  Two  financial  education  trainings  will  be  delivered  separately.  The  first  training  will  target  all 
households  participating  in  the  partnerships  and  will  consist  of  two  modules,  one  on  household 
budgeting, and the other on savings. Each module will last one day. At the end of this first training, all 
households will be invited to open a current account and a savings account at the financial institution 
of  their  choice.  The  second,  two-day  training  will  concern  about  30%  of  all  participating  households 
and will focus on mobile phone banking.  
67 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
18.  Community  support  will  be  sought  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  Family-based 
approach  and  to  support  households’  participation  in  the  development  of  partnerships.  In  particular, 
the  capacities  of  community  structures  will  be  built  to  facilitate  the  inclusion  of  more  vulnerable 
households  in  the  partnerships.  Community  structures  will  also  have  an  important  role  in  securing 
sustainable  tenure  arrangements  between  landowners  and  vegetable  growers,  building  on  the 
recommendations  of  the  scoping  study.  All  communal  land  uses  will  be  covered  with  voluntary  land 
use agreements (Clan Land Usage Agreements) between the partnerships and the land owners. 
19.  The family-based approach will not be delivered through partnerships because:       (i) activities 
involved fall out of the competence of Lead partners;  (ii) they will benefit the community as a whole 
and are therefore considered as public goods; and (iii) they will give capacity to farmers to enter into a 
partnership agreement The approach will be implemented by a consortium composed by CEFI, who is 
also the  implementing  agent of Sub-component  2.2  – Financial Inclusion,  and an international NGO 
with recognised experience in household-based methodology in the context of PNG. More details on 
the Family-based approach are in Appendix 2.  
20.  Step  5:  Preparation  of  partnership  proposals.  Applicants  approved  at  EOI  stage  will  be 
provided  with  assistance  from  a  business  development  service  provider  (BDSP)  to  prepare  full 
partnership proposals. The assistance package will include:  
  Due diligence of the lead partner(s), including capacity assessment and risk analysis; 
  Preparation  of  a  partnership  agreement,  detailing  the  contractual  arrangements  between  the 
buyer  and  the  farmers  and  their  respective  obligations,  including:  (i)  volumes  and  quality  of 
produce  to  be  supplied  by  the  farmers  and  that  will  be  bought  by  the  lead  partner;  (ii)  quality 
specifications,  modalities  for  quality  assessment  and  in  case  of  lack  of  conformity;  (iii)  terms  of 
delivery  (conditioning,  timing);  (iv)  pricing,  price  revision  modalities  and  payment  modalities;  (v) 
services to be provided by the partner and related modalities; (vi) modalities for risk sharing; (vii) 
modalities for communication (farmers’ representation and communication channels, especially in 
the larger partnerships) and mechanisms for dispute settlement (preferably on an amicable basis, 
and building on PPAP’s procedures for grievance); and (vii) role of the PMU and of the Provincial 
teams. Partnership agreements will also incorporate reference to the community awareness and 
consultation process (see Step 4) and a commitment by farmers to protect partnership assets; 
  Preparation of a business plan: the 5-year business plan should describe how the partners will 
achieve contractual objectives, including the organisation of production and marketing and service 
provision  to  farming  households;  partnership  investments  and  modalities  of  implementation; 
expected  financial,  social  and  nutritional  benefits  and  expected  portion  of  the  final  value  added 
accruing  to  farmers;  risk  management,  in  particular  environmental  and  financial  risks,  and 
measures  for  sharing  risks  between  farmers  and  buyers;  measures  to  ensure  sustainability; 
provisions  for  partnership  management  and  for  M&E.  It  will  include  a  3-year  financing  plan 
detailing the total cost of the partnership, how each partner will contribute to the costs (including 
through  value  chain  financing),  the  amount  sought  from  financial  institutions,  the  amount  of 
incentive funds to be provided by the project (see below) and the cost per farmer.  
21.  Step 6 -  Approval and signature of partnership agreements. Partnership proposals will be 
reviewed  by  the  PMU  to  make  sure  they  meet  more  detailed  assessment  criteria,  as  well  as 
management, procurement, financial, and M&E requirements. Once cleared, proposals will be sent to 
an  independent Technical  Appraisal Committee (TAC) for review and endorsement,  and then to the 
Project  Steering  Committee  for  final  approval.  TAC  will  be  composed  of  independent  personalities 
with  recognised  technical,  social,  economic  or  management  competences,  who  will  be  invited  to 
provide  their  advice  and  feedback  on  the  partnership  proposals,  on  the  model  of  PPAP’s  TAC. 
Partnership agreements will be signed by partners, FPDA and the PMU. 
Partnership Implementation 
22.  Number of partnerships. The number of large, medium, and micro Lead partners engaged by 
the project and the number of farmers they would partner with cannot be pre-determined since it will 
depend on EOIs received and developing into full partnerships. Indicative numbers are given in Table 
1,  based  on  assumptions  derived  from  FPDA  experience,  on  a  rough  mapping  of  the  different 
categories of traders and assessment of their capacities. These indicative numbers were determined 
68 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
for  the  sake  of  sizing  project  allocations  for  partnership  financing.  In  reality,  the  PMU  will  be 
accountable for delivering project benefits to 22,000 fresh produce farmers involved in partnerships – 
but the proportion of micro/small/medium/large partnerships can, and most probably will, be different 
than what is illustrated in Table 1. 
Table 1: Indicative number of partnerships and farming households 
Number of 
partnerships 
(A) 
Large lead partners 
Medium lead partners 
Small lead partners 
Micro lead partners 
Total 
2 
50 
100 
100 
155 
Number of 
HH groups 
per 
partnership 
(B) 
20 
4 
1 
1 
Total number 
of HH groups 
(C=A*B) 
Number of 
HH per 
group 
(D) 
Total 
number of HH 
(E=C*D) 
40 
200 
100 
100 
50 
50 
50 
50 
2,000 
10,000 
5,000 
5,000 
22,000 
23.  The  number  of  farmers  per  type  of  partnership  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  groups  of  50 
farmers, which is the average number of farmers that a VEW can cater for. As shown in Table 1, each 
of  the  large  lead  partners  is  expected  to  engage  with  and  support  about  20  groups  of  farming 
households each and a total of 2,000 households. Medium sized lead partners are each expected to 
work with about four groups/VEWs each and a total of 10,000 farmers. MVF will support around 100 
small  lead  partners  and  VEWs  farmers,  together  with  5,000  farmers,  as  well  as  100  micro  lead 
partners. The latter will not support farmers’ groups as they are based in wet markets but will extend 
marketing and post-harvest management advisory services to about 50 farmers each. 
24.  Phasing.  Table  2  shows  the  phasing  of  partnerships  and  related  number  of  households  by 
year. 
Table 2 – Phasing of partnerships and households 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Total 
Provinces phasing in 
% of partnerships phasing in 
Micro partnerships phasing in 
Total 
Small partnerships phasing in 
Total 
Medium partnerships phasing in 
Total 
Large partnerships phasing in 
Total 
Total number of partnerships 
Total number of HH 
0 
0% 
2 
20% 
3 
30% 
20 
20 
20 
20 
10 
10 
1 
1 
30 
50 
30 
50 
15 
25 
1 
2 
0 
50% 
50 
100 
50 
100 
25 
50 
2 
0 
0 
50 
50 
25 
80 
80 
40 
1 
100% 
100 
100 
50 
2 
51 
     4,640 
76 
        6,960  
125 
     11,600  
252 
     23,200  
25.  Financing modalities. Partnerships will be supported for up to three years. Different financing 
modalities  will  be  applied  for  capacity  building,  equipment  and  value  chain  coordination  within  each 
partnership:  
  Capacity building will be extended to farmers, as well as micro, small and medium lead partners.  
It  will  be  financed  100%  by  the  project,  with  the  exception  of  capacity  building  extended  to 
medium lead partners for which a contribution of minimum 10% will be required; 
  Equipment. Equipment will be considered for both growers and all partners with the exception of 
large lead partners. Investments will be financed by three financing sources:   
69 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
o  Partners’ contribution, to be provided both by lead partners and by farmers. It is expected that 
partners’ contribution will amount to a minimum of 10% of the envisaged investment; 
o  Credit,  which  will  be  made  accessible  by  participating  financial  institutions  or  through  value 
chain  financing,  using  financial  instruments  developed  with  project  support  (see  Sub-
component 2.2 – Financial inclusion); 
o  Project incentive grant, to promote innovation as well as to decrease perceived risk, both for 
farmers  and  for  buyers.  For  semi-subsistence  farmers,  changing  their  low-cost  cultivation 
practices  for  the  promise  of  bigger  revenue  by  indebting  the  family  is  perceived  as  a  major 
risk that could worsen their already precarious situation rather than improving it. The incentive 
grant,  together  with  financial  and  business  education,  will  facilitate  farmers’  adoption  of 
innovation and successful implementation of their obligation in the partnership. As for buyers, 
the incentive grant aims at facilitating their involvement in partnerships with smallholders and 
in accepting the responsibility to supply them not only with a market but also with a bundle of 
services  that  they  will  have  to  organise  and  deliver.  The  incentive  grant  on  productive 
investment  will  only  be  made  available  once,  after  which  partners  are  expected  to  resort  to 
credit  or  self-financing.  This  will  be  facilitated  by  the  financial  education  delivered  under  the 
family-based  approach  (where  one  of  the  expected  final  outcomes  is  that  all  participating 
households  have  opened  a  bank  account)  and  by  the  collaboration  with  partnering  financial 
institutions covering the target area, as described in Component 2; 
  Value chain coordination. Specific and specialised advisory services for medium and large lead 
partners will be cost-shared over two years as outlined in Table 2.   
26.  The  project  contribution  to  partnership  costs,  i.e.  the  incentive  grant,  will  be  limited  to  a 
percentage, which will vary according to the type of investment and beneficiary, within an established 
ceiling. In other words, while the partners will be free to include any type of investment and activity in 
the partnership, the project will only finance part of them, based on pre-established rules that will be 
advertised  in  the  call  for  EOI.  These  will  include  the  obligation  for  partners  to  mobilise  their  own 
contribution.  
27.  Table  3  details  financing  modalities  for  the  different  categories  of  eligible  investments  for 
farmers  and  for  each  category  of  lead  partners.  It  also  indicates  the  minimum  beneficiaries’ 
contribution  as  well  as  the  ceiling  for  investment  to  be  considered  for  the  calculation  of  the  project 
incentive grant. To simplify table 3, support extended to growers has only been mentioned once but 
will be included in small, medium and large partnerships (not in micro partnerships). 
70 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Table 3 – Types of partnership investment and financing modalities  
71 
Detailed activitiesProject FinancingBenef. Contrib.Detailed investmentsProject GrantBenef. Contrib. (1)Detailed costsProject GrantContrib.Micro Lead Partner100%-40%60%Growers100%-40%60%for an investment capped at US$ 500Small Lead Partner100%-40%60%Medium Lead Partner90%10%40%60%Large Lead Partner(1) Contributions can be made by the beneficiary either from his/her own resources or from borrowed funds from financial institutions including suppliers' credit for growers. n.a.Include provision for specialized and specific advisory services amounting to a maximum of US$ 62,000 for two years 70% 1st year - 30% 2nd year30% 1st year - 70% 2nd yearInvestmentsValue chain coordinatorn.a.n.a.n.a.n.a.Include: Business management tools such as tablets and product handling equipments such as storage crates, scales  for an investment capped at US$ 1,000Include: Entrepreneurship training, business management training and business support services during 1 year and refresher courses 2 years laterInclude: Technical advisory services and technical training as per model farm structure developed by FPDA during 2 years (1 day per week during two years)Include the same activities as for micro lead partners plus marketing study toursInclude the same activities as for micro lead partners plus marketing study toursStakeholdersCapacity BuildingInclude: Start-up kits inclusive of: basic irrigation elements, shade cloths, knapsack spray, seed trays, safety gears and necessary soil and plant nutrition inputs and pest and disease management inputsInclude: Fully-equiped nursery and 1st year crop inputs, machinery and equipments such as hand tractor, cultivation and/or post-harvest equipment. for an investment capped at US$ 5,000Include: Refrigerated truck(s); packing and packaging equipments; walkabout coldstores; cold stoarge facilities; back-up generator for an investment capped at US$ 50,000Include provision for 120 days of advisory services from SPs per year for 2 years to deal with production, organization, market and distribution, logistic constraints 70% 1st year - 30% 2nd year30% 1st year - 70% 2nd year 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
28. 
Implementation  modalities.  The  PMU  will  issue  detailed  guidelines,  which  will  provide  a 
detailed  description  of  the  sequence  of  activities  described  above  and  of  related  modalities  of 
implementation.  They  will  also  serve  as  a  basis  for  providing  training  and  capacity  building  to 
Provincial  Teams  and  service  providers  involved  in  implementation.  Guidelines  will  form  part  of  the 
PIM. 
29.  Key features would be as follows: 
  Start-up  kits  and  machinery/equipment:  a  four-party  arrangement  between  the  lead  partner,  the 
PMU,  a  financial  institution  and  a  partnering  supplier  (the  latter  selected  through  competitive 
bidding organised by the PMU and/or the Lead Partner) will secure direct payment to the supplier, 
who will deliver the goods to the partnership (supplier credit – see Component 2); 
  Extension  and  technical  advisory  services:  training  will  be  provided  by  VEWs  and  contracted 
extensionists or extension service providers, with FPDA providing orientations and overseeing; 
  Market  development  and  business  development:  services  will  be  provided  by  service  providers 
identified through the initial scoping study. 
30.  MVF-financed incentive grants will be managed by CEFI.  
31. 
 Once  approved  by  the  PMU,  the  partnership  business  plan  will  be  presented  by  the  lead 
partner,  on  behalf  of  the  partnership,  to  one/several  financial  institutions  (FIs)  participating  in  the 
project for obtaining credit. A copy of the business plan will also be submitted to CEFI, who will review 
eligibility to the incentive grant, in line with the specifications of Table 2, and will notify eligibility to the 
relevant FIs. CEFI will transfer the amount of the incentive grant to the FI, once the lead partner and 
growers will have: (i) agreed on the terms and conditions offered by the FI of their choice; (ii) signed 
the loan contracts, and (iii) transferred their contribution to the FI. Suppliers of equipment/services will 
be  directly  paid  by  the  FI.  Details  on  the  type  of  credit  accessible  through  participating  financial 
institutions are provided under Sub-component 2.2 – Financial inclusion. 
32.  Access  to  financial  institutions  and  to  credit  will  be  facilitated  by  the  financial  education 
provided through the family-based approach, with the objective of reaching around 80% of the target 
households  opening  a  bank  account  and/or  a  savings  account  with  partnering  financial  institutions. 
Moreover,  the  recently  enacted  Personal  Property  Act,  which  allows  individuals  to  provide  financial 
institutions  with  registered  movable  assets  as  collateral,  should  ease  access  to  financial  resources 
including for farming households. Once the regulation is approved, which may require some time, the 
PMU (through CEFI) will fine tune the financial approach of the project accordingly.  
33.  Resource  centres.  PPAP  experience  suggests  that  village-based  resource  centres  (covered 
area with cement slab) used as training and storage facilities greatly contribute to strengthen farmers’ 
groups and collaboration between groups. Resource  centres, their use and operation modalities  will 
be  programmed  jointly  by  partners  and  Provincial  Teams  during  partnership  implementation. 
Resource  centres  will  provide  suitable  facilities  for  farmer  hubs  that  not  only  offer  a  venue  for 
participatory  learning,  but  become  the  starting  point  for  farmers’  organisation  and  for  developing  a 
more  diversified  range  of  services  (such  as  postharvest  training  and  extension,  input  delivery, 
collection or primary processing) - harmonised within the family-based approach. 
34.  M&E  and  overseeing.  The  Lead  partner  (in  collaboration  with  VEWs/lead  farmers)  for  each 
partnership project supported by MVF will be required to submit brief progress reports to support each 
request for disbursement of the next tranche of funding from the project, as described in the specific 
Partnership  Agreement.  The  PMU  will  device  a  template  for  the  progress  report,  which  will  be 
attached to the Partnership Agreement. Progress reports should be brief in length so as not to burden 
project partners, but include at least the following information: financial summary, main activities and 
achievements  against  partnership  agreement/business  plan  (including  with  regard  to  marketing), 
number and description of beneficiaries, and support received by beneficiaries. Progress reports will 
be signed by the representatives of the partners (lead partner and others). 
35.  Provincial teams headed by FPDA and composed of district staff (see Appendix 5) will oversee 
partnership implementation, in line with the specifications of the partnership agreement. They will also 
provide capacity building to lead partners and VEWs to organize M&E and prepare progress reports.  
72 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
36.  CEFI  will  report  on  a  monthly  basis  to  the  PMU  on  grants,  disbursed  amounts,  and  key 
indicators to monitor the investment (such as return on investment, projected increase in the turnover, 
profit,  benefit  for  farming  households,  number  of  jobs  created).  Lead  partners  will  be  required  to 
maintain accounts showing how the grant proceeds were used, and to allow audit of these accounts if 
requested. 
37.  Every year, a partnership meeting will be convened, with representation of the Provincial team, 
to  review  implementation  results  and  challenges,  solicit  feedback  from  partners  and  address  any 
issues  affecting  smooth  implementation.  If  needed,  consensual  amendments  to  the  partnership 
agreement  will  be  agreed  upon  and  signed.  Annual  partnership  meetings  will  also  facilitate  the 
tracking  of  good  practices  to  feed  into  FPDA/the  project  knowledge  management  system.  They  will 
also offer an opportunity to identify  issues that should be put on the table of the Multi-Stakeholders’ 
Platforms (see Component 3).   
Sub-Component 1.2: Galip Nut Supply Chain 
38.  The sub-component aims at promoting an additional source of income for cocoa smallholders, 
by  taking  advantage  of  the  stock  of  galip  trees  planted  in  their  cocoa  gardens  and  opening  a  new 
market for the commercialisation of galip nut. While research programmes in galip nut production and 
manual processing conducted by NARI and ACIAR over the last decade show commercial potential, 
private  investors  are  deterred  by  the  absence  of  a  proof  of  concept  to  sustain  their  investment  and 
decrease the risk inherent to setting up a new industry.  
39.  Situation  analysis.  An  analysis  of  achievements  of  the  current  ACIAR/NARI  project17  has 
shown the following: 
  Upgraded  processing:  the  pilot  factory  has  progressively  increased  capacity  and  is  now  selling 
product into formal markets in East New Britain, with excellent response. Equipment and methods 
for  commercial  production  are  being  developed  for  mechanised  production,  including  the 
installation  of  an  8  ton  drier,  a  new  mechanical  cracking  machine,  ovens  and  a  cool  storage 
container; 
  Purchase  of  nuts:  production  has  increased  since  the  project  commenced  in  June  2015,  as 
indicated by Table 4. 
Table 4 – Production at NARI’s pilot galip nut processing plant 
Year 
Nut in pulp purchased 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Small  volumes  (<1000  kg)  for  research 
trials 
11 tons nut in pulp 
26 tons nut in pulp 
Processed 
product 
<200kg 
No of farmers selling 
N/A 
Approx. 1.1 tons 
Approx. 2.5 tons 
243 smallholder farmers 
647 smallholder farmers 
Further increase is contingent on efficient plant operation, but also on the stock of nuts available 
for selling at farmers’ level; 
  Resource  base:  close  to  one  million  seedlings  have  been  distributed  only  in  East  New  Britain 
(further planting has occurred in New Ireland by a private investor/plantation owner), which add to 
the  stock  of  wild  galip  trees.  However,  there  is  no  knowledge  of  how  many  seedlings  have 
actually  been  planted,  where  and  in  what  shape  they  are,  especially  after  the  major  El  Niño 
related  drought  of  2015-2016,  oil  palm  encroachment  on  cocoa  plantations  (which  has  also 
affected  intercropping  with  galip  trees)  and  recent  incursion  of  a  weevil  affecting  seedlings 
imported  from  Bougainville.  The  current  ACIAR/NARI  project  includes  a  resource  based 
assessment  to  be  carried  out  by  NARI.  While  results  are  not  yet  available,  it  appears  that  this 
exercise is of a limited scope (only one district covered in East New Britain with limited sample) 
and  will  not  be  sufficient  to  size  the  available  stock  –  comprehensive  data  is  however  critical  to 
size  the  processing  capacity  of  the  potential  new  commercial  plant,  build  marketing  projection, 
promote nurseries and planting, and ultimately ensure the viability of the new plant and the growth 
of the industry; 
17 Enhancing private sector-led development of the canarium industry in PNG. 
73 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
  Market  tests:  the  University  of  Adelaide,  through  the  ACIAR  project,  has  supported  the 
development  of  four  lines  of  products:  two  roasted  whole  kernel  products  produced  at  the  pilot 
plant,  as  well  as  a  spread  and  cookies  (using  broken  nuts)  to  be  produced  by  a  major  food 
manufacturing  company  in  Port  Moresby.  Agreements  are  now  being  negotiated  with  the  food 
company and retailers and the launching of the new products is expected to coincide with the next 
galip season (starting in June 2017). However, it is estimated that the domestic market ranges in 
the  order  of  20,000  consumers,  which  is  not  sufficient  to  launch  any  private  sector  investment. 
Further market research is needed  to target  export markets, as well as to clarify market access 
requirements; 
  Plant  operation:  the  plant  is  installed  in  NARI’s  premises  at  the  Kerevat  research  station  and  is 
operated by NARI’s staff. While they have accomplished a remarkable job so far, they struggle to 
manage the plant and carry out their regular duties with minimal resources. Aside from time and 
resource  limitations,  they  also  have  to  face  a  lack  of  specialisation  in  business  management, 
which is likely to become a constraint once the plant will need to operate at full capacity to start 
serving a wider, Port Moresby-based market; 
  Organisation of supply chain: the ACIAR/NARI project is focusing  on processing  and marketing, 
but  the  modalities  and  costs  for  harvesting  and  for  organising  the  supply  chain  from  farmers  to 
plant, have not yet been addressed. It is assumed that the collection, aggregation and transport of 
the  galip nuts should  build on  existing,  organised cocoa supply chains  where possible, so as to 
benefit from existing collection points and  transport system. This however remains to be tested. 
Besides,  farmers  have  been  delivering  their  nuts  directly  to  the  plant,  which  may  be  a  viable 
alternative that needs to be further assessed;  
 
Industry  roadmap:  while  there  is  growing  interest  in  a  future  galip  industry,  the  current  lack  of 
vision  and  of  a  clear  and  phased  strategy  to  achieve  it  is  a  major  obstacle,  as  it  prevents 
concerted action and the orderly and coordinated intervention of public and private stakeholders. 
The ACIAR/NARI project has set up a Reference Group composed of  potential private investors 
of  different  sizes,  which  may  constitute  the  starting  point  of  a  public-private  multi-stakeholder 
platform, whose role would be to develop a roadmap for developing a galip nut industry. 
40.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ACIAR/NARI  project  has  undoubtedly  created  a  momentum:  several 
private sector players have expressed interest to engage in the new industry as either processors or 
retailers, there is increased interest of farmers to grow galip trees, including outside of PPAP, and the 
Fresh  Produce  Industry  Working  Group  set  up  with  support  from  the  Pacific  Horticultural  and 
Agricultural  Market  Access  Program  (PHAMA) has  included  galip  nut  among  priority  crops  for 
export.  
41.  Approach. While the situation assessment carried out by the design mission reveals that there 
is potential for developing a new industry and that a number of building blocks are being laid out by 
the  ACIAR/NARI  project,  it  also  shows  that  these  will  not  be  sufficient  to  demonstrate  a  viable 
business model to support private investment into a commercial plant.  IFAD engagement will enable 
to provide the missing elements in areas that are better tied to an investment fund than to a research 
organisation.  Besides,  key  activities  envisaged  (partnerships  and  commercial  operation  of  the  pilot 
plant)  will  provide  direct  benefits  to  farmers,  while  the  remaining  ones  will  help  in  setting  up  an 
enabling environment for further scaling up. 
42. 
IFAD will organise its interventions in two phases. In the first, preparatory phase, it will finance 
a set of activities aimed at complementing ACIAR/NARI efforts to demonstrate a profitable business 
model for a commercial galip processing plant.  The preparatory phase will be implemented over the 
first  two  project  years,  by  the  end  of  which  IFAD  will  commission  an  independent  study  to  assess 
whether achievements of the ACIAR/NARI and of IFAD preparatory phase enabled the development 
of a viable business model for private investment into a commercial plant. If that is the case, IFAD will 
provide further support with a view to facilitate private sector into a full-fledged private-sector owned, 
commercial  plant,  along  modalities  to  be  defined  based  on  a  feasibility  study.  If  there  is  no  viable 
business  model  yet,  then  the  balance  of  resources  budgeted  for  Sub-component  1.2  will  be 
reallocated, based on proposals to be made by the first interim review.  
43.  Preparatory phase. Investments in the first phase will cover the following: 
74 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
  Galip  nut  resource  assessment  study:  the  study  will  aim  at  identifying  the  stock  of  wild  and 
planted trees, their age and condition, as well as farmers’ willingness to harvest nuts for selling. It 
will  also  explore  possible  modalities  for  nut  collection  and  transport  in  the  different  target  areas 
(cocoa collection system, agents, plantations…). It will be coordinated by NARI and will combine 
geospatial  technologies  (such  as  remote  sensing  or  UAV  technologies/drones)  and  physical 
surveying of areas known to have large number of galip trees, based on available assessments 
and  PPAP  records.  This  would  likely  cover  (parts  of)  four  districts  in  East  New  Britain  (Gazelle, 
Kokopo,  Rabaul  and  Pomio).  Areas  to  be  assessed  will  be  aligned  with  farmers’  access  to  the 
road  network  or  to  boat  transport.  NARI  will  seek  assistance  from  experts  at  the  Forestry 
Research Institute and the Remote Sensing Lab at the University of Technology (Lae), which will 
also facilitate the purchase of satellite imagery. Physical surveys will be coordinated by NARI and 
implemented in partnership with PPAP cocoa Lead Partners, the University of Natural Resources 
and Environment (students) and District Agriculture Officers, who will receive prior training;  
  Commercial  operation  of  NARI’s  plant:  with  assistance  from  a  specialised  consultant,  the  PMU 
will set up a management  operating system whereby  NARI  will lease the pilot plant to  a private 
manager  selected  through  competitive  bidding,  who  will  agree  to  manage  the  plant  and  its 
operations over a minimum of two seasons. This will enable the commercial operation of the plant 
with adequate resources and skills, for increased buying capacity from farmers, higher efficiency 
and  generation  of knowledge in  view of a  possible scaling  up. The management agreement  will 
include  a  business  plan  and  will  specify  the  modalities  of  partnering  with  the  current  ACIAR 
project so that the pilot plant can benefit from technical assistance and operate as a pilot, i.e. trial 
different  scenarios  for  processing  and  marketing  and  ensure  close  monitoring  and  detailed 
documentation  of  achievements.  IFAD  will  pay  the  operating  costs  of  the  pilot  plant  over  two 
seasons; 
  Organisation  of  supply  chain:  building  on  the  resource  assessment,  the  plant  manager,  with 
support  from  the  PMU  Galip  Nut  Manager  and  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems  Manager 
(see  below),  will  organise  the  supply  of  galip  nuts,  with  a  view  to  ensure  that  the  plant  can  be 
used  at  its  maximum  capacity.  To  best  serve  the  purpose  of  the  trial,  different  channels,  with 
different  modalities  for  collection  and  transport,  will  be  used  from  different  locations.  These  will 
include  agreements  with  two  major  trading  companies  that  have  confirmed  their  interest  in 
investing  in  a  future  commercial  plant,  Agmark  and  East  New  Britain  Development  Corporation 
(ENBDC).  Agmark  is  a  private  company,  with  over  6,000  shareholders,  of  which  a  majority  of 
smallholders,  and  ENBDC  is  owned  by  the  province  of  East  New  Britain.  They  both  are  cocoa 
exporters  and  have  an  established  supply  chain  for  the  collection  of  cocoa  beans  (including 
storage  facilities)  that  will  be  used  to  organise  the  galip  nut  supply  chain.  They  both  are  Lead 
Partners  for  PPAP.  Other  channels  could  include  agreements  with  agents,  plantations,  PNG 
Growers’ Associations, districts… or just rely on extensive dissemination of information to farmers 
in  the  target  areas,  and  will  be  explored  during  the  resource  assessment.  IFAD  will  finance  the 
working  capital  for  purchasing  the  nuts,  as  well  as  the  cost  of  an  information  campaign  every 
year,  in  areas  that  will  be  selected  based  on  their  availability  of  resources  (building  on  the 
resource assessment); 
 
International market study: the study will be undertaken by the University of Adelaide (which is co-
implementing  the  ACIAR  project)  building  on  preliminary  work  carried  out  for  Vanuatu  and  in 
partnership with PHAMA. It will target Australia and New Zealand potential buyers, with a view to 
assess  market  potential  and  position  galip  nut  products  on  the  Australia  and  New  Zealand 
markets.  It  will  include  market  analysis  and  market  tests  with  retailers,  processors  and  five-star 
hotels.  Furthermore,  PHAMA  will  conduct  a  market  access  study  to  identify  market  access 
requirements  prevailing  on  the  domestic  and  on  the  target  export  markets,  and  make 
recommendations to adapt processing accordingly; 
  Study tour to the Philippines:  a study tour to the Philippines will be organised to earn knowledge 
about the canarium (pili) industry and explore possible transfers of knowledge and technology; 
 
Industry roadmap: the  project  will  build on the Reference Group set up by  ACIAR/NARI project, 
with a view to upgrade it into a public-private multi-stakeholder platform and develop a roadmap 
for  the  development  of  a  galip  nut  industry  in  PNG.  This  activity  will  be  implemented  under 
Component 3.1; 
75 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
 
Independent  assessment  study:  the  independent  study  will  aim  at  assessing  whether  the 
conjunction of ACIAR/NARI project achievements (terminating in June 2018) and IFAD-financed 
activities  provide  sufficient  assurance  that  there  is  a  case  for  private  sector  investment  in  a 
profitable  commercial  processing  plant  that  could  serve  domestic  and  export  markets.  The 
assessment  will  cover  all  the  steps  in  the  tree  to  market  chain,  including  nut  production,  supply 
chain organisation, processing and marketing, and will analyse costs and revenues at the various 
steps.  
44.  Preparatory  phase  timeframe.  At  project  inception,  the  resource  assessment  study  and  the 
international market study will be launched by the PMU (through the Galip Nut Manager). In addition, 
the  PMU  will contract  an  international consultant,  who  will carry out a rapid  due diligence  of NARI’s 
plant, will draft the lease agreement for NARI’s pilot plant and will prepare the relevant documentation 
for  the  bidding  process  required  to  select  the  manager/management  team  for  NARI’s  plant.  The 
consultant will also prepare a 3-year business plan (including financial projections based on technical 
and  commercial  assumptions  from  the  current  level  of  NARI’s  plant  production  –  see  preliminary 
projections  in Annex 2 ) for the pilot  plant  and  draft  a set of reporting documents to be used by the 
manager/management  team  of  NARI’s  plan.  Once  the  lease  agreement  and  management  contract 
have  been  signed  (in  due  time  for  the  2018  galip  nut  harvesting  season),  the  selected 
manager/management  team  will  manage  the  plant  in  a  cost-effective  and  profitable  way  and,  with 
support from the Galip Nut Manager, will organise the galip nut supply chain. Before the start of the 
second  galip  nut  harvesting  season,  the  PMU  will  organise  the  study  tour  in  the  Philippines.  The 
Reference  Group/Industry  Working  Group,  extended  to  all  galip  nut  value  chain  stakeholders,  will 
regularly  meet  to  learn  and  discuss  plant  results  and  experience,  and,  with  support  from  technical 
assistance, will define the key priorities of the development of the galip nut industry and elaborate the 
industry roadmap. The independent assessment study will be carried out after the end of the 2nd galip 
nut harvesting season.  
45. 
Investment  phase.  If  the  independent  assessment  is  successful,  it  will  also  include 
recommendations  as  to  how  to  promote  private  sector  investment  into  a  new,  private-sector  owned 
commercial  plant.  A  budget  allocation  has  been  set  aside  for  providing  further  IFAD  support  to  the 
scaling  up.  It  is  expected  that  it  could  cover  the  following  pre-investment  activities:  (i)  full  feasibility 
study; (ii) call for expression of interest from potential investors and due diligence; (iii) business plan 
preparation;  (iv)  support  to  investment;  (v)  partnerships  with  farmers  along  the  model  used  in  Sub-
component  1.1;  (vi)  family-based  approach  training  and  financial  education  to  farmers.  Possible 
options are discussed in Annex 3. 
46.  Further  IFAD  investment  in  the  galip  sector  will  however  also  be  contingent  on  the  GoPNG 
securing a new phase to the ACIAR/NARI project, so that private sector investment can be matched 
by  public  investment  into  further  research  needed  to  increase  nut  productivity  (good  agronomic 
practices and tree selection), production (propagation) and marketing (market development studies). 
The management agreement with the manager of NARI-owned pilot plant will be extended for a third 
season, to bridge the gap with the entry in operation of the new commercial plant. ACIAR/DFAT have 
already  indicated  their  interest  in  further  promoting  research  in  support  of  the  nascent  galip  nut 
industry and of IFAD investment. 
47.  Monitoring  and  Evaluation.  The  plant  manager  partnership  will  be  required  to  submit  brief 
quarterly progress reports, in line with the management agreement. The PMU will device a template 
for  the  progress  report,  which  will  be  attached  to  the  management  agreement.  At  the  end  of  every 
season, MVF will Every  year, a meeting of the Multi-Stakeholder Platform will be convened to share 
results (see Component 3). 
Implementation Modalities for Component 1 
48.  The  implementation  of  Sub-component  1.1  will  be  the  responsibility  of  FPDA  Production  and 
Value  Chain  Systems  Manager,  in  collaboration  with  the  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems 
Manager.  In  every  target  province,  a  Provincial  Team  headed  by  an  FPDA  middle  manager  and 
staffed  with  two  seconded  district  extension  staff  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  the  sub-
component  activities.  International  technical  assistant  will  be  available  to  provide  methodological 
support and technical guidance.  
76 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
49.  The  implementation  of  Sub-component  1.2  will  be  the  responsibility  of  a  Galip  Nut  Manager, 
who will be based at FPDA provincial office in Kokopo. The independent assessment will be carried 
out by two short-term consultants hired by IFAD. 
50.  Details  on  the  implementation  structure  are  in  Appendix  5  and  terms  of  reference  for  the 
technical assistant are in Annex 4. 
COMPONENT 2: SUPPORTIVE VALUE CHAIN INVESTMENTS 
51.  While  Component  1  is  focusing  on  partnerships,  Component  2  aims  at  complementing 
interventions in support of specific partnerships, by addressing cross-cutting bottlenecks affecting the 
development of a whole value chain. This component therefore aims at: (i) facilitating farmers’ access 
to  markets  by  unlocking  production  areas  through  road  spot  improvements;  and  (ii)  improving  the 
access  of  farming  households  and  other  stakeholders  in  the  value  chain  to  adapted  and  affordable 
financial  services  extended  by  a  range  of  viable  financial  institutions.  The  expected  outcomes  are 
that  feeder  roads  to  key  production  areas  are  practicable  and  maintained,  and  that  at  least  18,000 
farming households have access to credit. The main outputs will be: (i) 50 km of feeder roads to key 
production  areas  are  practicable  and  maintained;  (ii)  up  to  10  districts  have  maintenance 
arrangements  in  place  to  sustain  feeder  road  practicability  after  spot  improvements;;  and  (ii)  9 
financial  institutions  with  increased  outreach  and  capacities  extend  adapted  financial  products  to 
farming  households.  Component  2  includes  two  sub-components:  (i)  Spot  improvements  of  feeder 
roads and (ii) Financial inclusion. 
Sub-Component 2.1: Spot improvements of feeder roads 
52.  Road  selection.  The  strategic  framework  for  selecting  investments  to  be  financed  by  the 
project (mini-programmes of spot improvements) builds on PPAP experience and will be as follows:  
  The  selection  and  prioritisation  of  investments  will  be  undertaken  within  the  scope  of  the 
partnerships supported under Component 1, to maximise the provision of complementary benefits 
through the reduction of constraints in geographical target areas; 
 
 
Investments will be financed by three complementary financing sources (province budget, district 
budget and project grant), which will ensure maximum leverage of available resources;  
Investments  will  only  be  implemented  once  sustainable,  resourced  commitments  for  their  long-
term maintenance are secured; 
  A  sustainable  framework  for  maintenance  of  facilities  and  transport  routes  should  be  achieved 
through  partnership  between  the  private  sector,  districts  and/or  provincial  governments,  sharing 
responsibility and costs; 
 
Investments  will  focus  on  spot  improvements  and  maintenance  of  existing  assets  to  maximize 
available resources and avoid increasing the burden of maintenance on stakeholders through the 
provision of new facilities.  
53.  A  key  element  of  the  framework,  therefore,  is  the  relationship  with  partnerships  identified  in 
Component 1: these  will have to be formed before any consideration is given to the  identification  of 
spot improvements. Individual partners and the Project Management Unit (PMU) will work together to 
identify,  screen  and  prioritise  market  access  infrastructure  within  the  partners’  geographical  area  of 
operation.  The  nature  and  scope  of  the  infrastructure  will  be  designed  to  support  the  improvement 
strategy  of  the  partnership  and  considering  the  market  access  infrastructure  constraints  identified 
after performing a technical review of the existing situation. Spot improvements will benefit the fresh 
produce  partnerships  exclusively,  given  the  limited  resources  available  and  the  anticipation  that  the 
collection  and  transport  of  galip  nuts  will  build  on  the  cocoa  transport  network,  which  is  also 
benefitting from investments financed by PPAP.  
54.  Type of works. While it is expected that most investments will be directed towards carrying out 
spot improvements on district access and feeder roads to remove ‘pinch points’, thereby providing all 
weather  access,  other  types  of  critical  infrastructure  will  be  considered,  e.g.  walking  tracks  and 
77 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
footbridges,  ropeways  or  ‘flying  fox’  aerial  transportation18.  Other,  non-transport  infrastructure 
improvements  may  include  warehouses  and/or  cold  stores  for  improved  storage  of  vegetables  at 
strategic  locations  on  partnerships’  supply  routes,  subject  to  confirmation  (based  on  the  scoping 
studies)  that  there  is  a  need  for  such  collectively  owned  storage  facilities  (which  could  not  be 
confirmed by the design mission). The public works investments will be limited to low-maintenance or 
maintenance-free  spot  interventions,  primarily  works  constructed  in  concrete  and/or  masonry.  For 
road  improvements  this  will  involve  culverts  and  headwalls,  lined  drains,  tyre  paths  on  steep 
gradients,  low-level  river/stream  crossings  (drifts/‘Irish  crossings’)  and  small  span  log  bridges.  All 
investments will be specifically designed and constructed to require minimal maintenance. 
55.  Scope and timing of investments. It is anticipated that over the life of the project, one or more 
spot improvements will be implemented in up to 100 different locations in around 30 districts spread 
approximately equally among the five target fresh produce producing provinces, over four years from 
Year 3 through Year 6 (with preparation starting Year 2). 
56.  Selection  of  spot 
improvement  programmes.  The  preparation  of  market  access 
infrastructure  investments  will  involve  a  process  of  identification,  data  collection,  consultation  with 
stakeholders  screening  and  evaluation  of  individual  candidate  sections  of  infrastructure.  The 
prospective  sub-projects  will  be  identified  in  collaboration  with  the  partnerships  formed  under 
Component 1, through an initial invitation to each partnership to nominate candidate sub-projects for 
prioritisation  assessment,  which  will  determine  the  location  of  the  sub-projects.  Proposals  will  be 
ranked based on pre-established criteria, including cost benefit analysis and resourced commitments 
form  relevant  districts.  Only  those  programmes  that  include  50%  financing  from  the  relevant  district 
will be taken into consideration. 
57.  The  preparation  of  individual  sub-projects  will  involve  consultation  with,  and  the  active 
participation of, all stakeholders to obtain their agreement to the scope and nature of the investment, 
and  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  party  in  the  future  operation  and  maintenance  of  the 
infrastructure,  once  rehabilitation  is  complete.  The  range  of  possible  stakeholders  includes  various 
levels of government, community groups, customary landowners and private sector.  
58.  The  following  steps  will  be  followed  during  the  annual  preparation  process  for  infrastructure 
within the target area of each partnership: 
 
Initial  list  of  priority  improvements:  in  Years  3  to  5  the  PMU  will  annually  invite  all  newly 
established partnerships to consult internally (lead partner and farmer groups) and externally (with 
local level government and district administrations) to identify, agree and submit a list of the top 
four  priority  access  infrastructure  improvements  within  their  operational  area  as  candidates  for 
project  funding.  The  submission  will  clearly  set  out  the  reasons  why  the  proposed  sub-projects 
are priorities based on: (i) the condition of the asset to be improved, (ii) the number of partnership 
farmers that will benefit and (iii) the volume of production affected. It will also include a preliminary 
estimate  of  the  scope  and  cost  of  improvement  works  required.  Finally,  the  submission  will 
confirm  that  each  of  the  proposed  sub-projects  meet  the  agreed  eligibility  criteria  for  project 
funding,  in  particular  a  commitment  in  principle  to  50%  matching  funding  from  the  district,  in 
principle  using  DSIP  resources19,  and  a  commitment  to  long-term  maintenance  by  the 
stakeholders. Only eligible candidates will advance to the next stage; 
  Field  screening  and  confirmation  visits:  the  PMU  Road  Engineer,  with  assistance  from 
consultants  as  required,  will  undertake  field  visits  to  each  partnership  to:  consult  with  the 
stakeholders;  confirm  the  identity,  scope  and  cost;  assess  the  likely  benefits  of  each  candidate 
sub-project; and screen the sub-projects to eliminate those that do not meet the project eligibility 
criteria.  To  minimize  the  possibility  of  project  infrastructure  development  resulting  in  serious 
adverse  social  or  environmental  impacts,  all  candidate  sub-projects  will  be  screened  against  a 
wide  range  of  potential  impacts  (e.g.  temporary  and  permanent  impacts  on  surface  water, 
18 Cableway or ropeway supported on pylons, with hooks, baskets or trays that can transport a single sack of produce from a 
collection  point  on  a  hilltop  or  high  ground  to  a  delivery  point  on  lower  ground,  or  across  a  river  or  gorge,  and  which  uses 
gravity or a small motor to move the goods. On a cableway, or ropeway, the cable or rope moves over pulleys – with a flying 
fox the cable or rope is stationary and the load is suspended from a pulley on the rope. 
19 Because of the requirement for each infrastructure works investment to be 50% financed by DSIP funding, the preparation 
process in each year will need to be closely aligned with the annual DSIP budgeting and allocation cycle – see table.  
78 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
gardens  and  plantations,  pedestrian  and  vehicle  safety,  extracting  construction  materials,  noise 
and dust levels etc.); 
  Ranking  of  priority  sub-projects  -  the  PMU  Road  Engineer,  with  assistance  from  consultants  as 
required, will undertake a careful cost/benefit assessment of all confirmed eligible candidate sub-
projects 
that  year’s 
to  establish  a 
implementation program; 
transparent  ranking 
list  of  priority 
investments 
for 
  Confirmation of DSIP funds: at this stage the PMU will seek formal written confirmation from the 
District Administrators in all districts of ranked priority projects, that District Services Improvement 
Programme (DSIP) funding to the value of at least 50% of the engineer’s estimated cost of works 
is available and has been budgeted in the district budget; 
  Sustainable maintenance assessment: the PMU Road Engineer, with assistance from consultants 
as  required,  will  discuss  the  proposed  future  maintenance  framework  with  the  stakeholders  of 
each ranked sub-project to assess and obtain the commitment of the public and private parties to 
undertake the necessary routine and periodic/emergency maintenance over the life of the asset; 
  Recommendation:  the  PMU  will  annually  prepare  and  submit  its  recommendations  to  the 
Technical  Appraisal  Committee  (TAC)  for  approval  to  implement  the  top-ranked  sub-projects 
(subject to available project component funding); 
  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU): a MoU covering the scope, financing, implementation and 
future  maintenance  arrangements  of  the  asset  will  be  negotiated  between  and  signed  by  the 
parties,  with  PMU  facilitation.  The  MoU  will  set  out  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  parties: 
partnership  (represented  by  the  Lead  Partner),  district/provincial  administrations,  communities, 
PMU. 
Table 5: Annual preparation process for infrastructure (starting in Year 3) and DSIP annual 
cycle 
Activity 
Timing 
Responsibility 
Expected 
Duration 
(Event) 
2 months 
(Event) 
2 months 
1 month 
1 month 
01 March 
PMU 
Partnerships 
Partnerships 
PMU 
PMU 
Districts 
Call for proposals 
DSIP budget preparation 
   Proposal preparation period 
   Deadline for return of proposal 
   Field screening & confirmation 
   Cost/benefit ranking 
   Confirmation of DSIP funds 
DSIP budget ceilings announced 
Sustainable maintenance assessment 
Recommendation /  
TEC approval 
DSIP budget approved by District Team 
MoU negotiations / agreements 
DSIP budget proposals submitted to Office 
of Local Development 
Detailed design / bid documents 
Bid period / evaluation 
DSIP funds available 
Award of works contracts 
March / April 
30 April 
May / June  
July 
August 
August / 
September 
Sept /October 
November 
November 
Nov / December  
December 
November / mid-
December 
Mid-Jan / 
February 
February 
01 March 
PMU 
PMU / TEC 
2 months 
1 month 
PMU 
2 months 
PMU / Consultants 
1.5 months 
PMU / Consultants 
1.5 month 
PMU / consultants 
(Event) 
Implementation.  The  implementation  phase  can  be  considered  as  three  separate,  repeated 
59. 
stages,  all  managed  by  the  PMU  Road  Engineer,  with  technical  support  as  required  from  outside 
consulting firms: 
  Pre-construction  stage:  site  investigation  leading  to  detailed  design  of  rehabilitation  works, 
preparation of tender invitation documents, bidding and evaluation process, and award of works 
contracts,  bidding  through  public  tender  or  shopping  procedures  under  Provincial  Tenders 
Boards, evaluation process, and award of works contracts; 
79 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
  Construction stage: construction of the infrastructure;  
  Operation and maintenance stage: introduction of sustainable maintenance regime for completed 
sub-projects. 
60.  Technical  support.  Outside  consulting  firms  will  be  contracted  through  the  PMU  to  provide 
technical engineering support during the preparation and implementation stages as required. This is 
likely to be in the form of back-up resources for field visits to confirm the scope and cost of candidate 
sub-projects,  nominal  engineering  design  of  individual  works  once  selected,  and  support  in 
preparation  of  bid  documents  and  evaluation  of  bids,  all  in  close  cooperation  with  stakeholders  and 
local  authorities.  During  implementation,  the  consulting  firms  will  be  responsible  for  construction 
supervision and works contract administration. 
61.  Works  procurement  and  contracting.  All  construction  works  will  be  publicly  procured  and 
contracted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Provincial  Tenders  Boards  processes  and  in  accordance  with 
IFAD  rules.  While  it  is  a  requirement  in  PNG  that  all  international  donor-funded  works  should  be 
procured through the Central Supplies and Tenders Board (CSTB) – a very time-consuming process - 
it  is  expected  that  all  works  contracts  in  this  sub-component  will  be  below  the  CSTB  threshold  of 
PGK500,000. 
62.  Financing.  Investments  in  public  infrastructure  will  be  cost-shared  between  the  project  and 
districts, using the  District  Services  Improvement Programme (DSIP) allocation. The remaining 80% 
will be financed by a Market Access Facility, which will pool MVF funds and provincial funds from their 
Province Services Improvement Programme (PSIP) allocation, and will be established under the form 
of a Trust Account (applying the same model as formerly ADB-financed SSS Programme). The basis 
of province and district financing will be as follows: 
  Provinces:  at  least  four  annual  contributions  of  PGK1.0  million  from  each  of  the  five  provinces 
where fresh produce partnerships are established. The project will establish a Financing Facility 
for Infrastructures through a joint bank account opened by the PMU, which will receive core IFAD 
funds and annual PSIP funds.  
  Districts: to be eligible for project funding, all sub-projects will require to have committed matching 
funds from the district on a 50/50 basis.  As it is expected that individual sub-projects will cost in 
the  order  of  PGK0.5  million,  the  district  contribution  would  be  on  average  PGK0.25  million  per 
sub-project.  This  would  represent  a  commitment  of  less  than  10%  of  its  current  annual  DSIP 
infrastructure  allocation  of  PGK3  million.  Depending  on  the  geographic  spread  of  priority 
investments, one district could expect to see requests for three or four contributions over the life 
of  the  project.  Provincial  administrations  will  raise  awareness  of  districts  as  to  the  opportunities 
offered by the project and will promote and facilitate their committing and delivering resources.  
63.  All provinces have confirmed  willingness to contribute as indicated above.  As for districts, the 
competitive  selection  approach,  and  provincial  authorities’  facilitation,  should  also  facilitate  district 
financing  as  planned.  Finally,  as  discussed  during  the  design  mission  with  provincial  and  district 
stakeholders,  the  possibility  offered  to  provinces  and  districts  to  leverage  their  funds  and  to 
programme  infrastructure  in  support  of  specific  economic  development  activities  is  expected  to 
constitute a major incentive to contribute. 
64.  Districts and provinces will also be required to commit sufficient resources for providing future 
periodic  maintenance  services  to  public  infrastructure  assets  that  will  be  constructed  under  the 
project. This commitment will be enshrined in the MoU to be signed by the parties. 
65.  Maintenance  framework.  The  framework  for  long-term  maintenance  of  improved  public 
infrastructure  assets  will  be  a  memorandum  of  understanding  (MoU)  between  private  and  public 
stakeholders - the partnership entities (Lead Partner and farmers) on the one part and the district and 
provincial administrations on the other – whereby the partnership entities will undertake simple routine 
maintenance  (drain  clearing,  vegetation  cutting  etc.),  while  the  public  administrations  will  carry  out 
periodic  and  emergency  maintenance  using  their  own  budget  resources.  The  project,  through  the 
Road  Maintenance  Specialist),  will  work  closely  with  the  stakeholders  at  the  location  of  each 
investment,  to  develop  understanding  among  the  parties  of  the  need  for  long-term  maintenance,  to 
provide training in simple but effective maintenance methods, and to develop and distribute manuals 
for maintaining specific improvements.   
80 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
66.  Other works will be subject to an agreed operations and maintenance regime to be undertaken 
by the facility owner. 
Increasing climate resilience. The spot improvements will incorporate measures to increase 
67. 
climate resilience of the improved assets. All drainage conduits (lined drains, culvert pipes, drifts, log 
bridges  etc.)  will  be  designed  for  a  longer  flood  return  period  (e.g.  20  years  instead  of  10  years)  to 
provide  a  lower  probability  of  annual  exceedance.  This  will  result  in  all  conduits  being  a  size  larger 
than  otherwise,  which  although  causing  marginally  increased  construction  costs,  will  provide  assets 
that  will  be  capable  of  passing  heavier  floods  generated  by  the  increased  rainfall  intensity  and 
frequency predicted to result from climate change over the design life of the assets. 
Sub-Component 2.2: Financial Inclusion 
68.  This  sub-component  aims  at  improving  access  to  affordable  and  diversified  financial  services 
for  farming  households  and  other  value  chain  stakeholders  that  can  unlock  access  to  markets  and 
services for farmers. This will  be  achieved  by  supporting financial  institutions to bridge the gap  with 
farming  households  and  other  value  chain  stakeholders  in  rural  areas  that  have  limited  access  to 
financial  services.  The  sub-component  will  aim  at:  (i)  increasing  the  outreach  of  selected  financial 
institutions in rural areas; (ii) developing innovative financial products and services meeting the needs 
of farming households and other relevant value chain stakeholders; (iii) reducing the risk for farming 
households  and  lending  financing  institutions  through  simple  risk-sharing  mechanisms;  and  (iv) 
building  the  capacities  of  financial  institutions  for  a  better  assessment  and  increased  financing  of 
agriculture-based projects.  
Due Diligence Exercise 
69.  Target financial institutions. The project will work with the three different types of institutions 
that compose the financial sector in PNG, i.e. commercial banks (4), non-bank financial institutions (6) 
and  savings  and  loans  societies  (21).  Preliminary  discussions  with  the  commercial  banks  and  non-
bank  financial  institutions  (microfinance  institutions  and  micro-banks)  indicate  that  one  to  two 
commercial banks and six.  non-bank financial institutions are willing to partner with the project. As for 
the  savings  and  loans  societies,  most  of  them  are  profession-based  societies  (such  as  for  police  or 
teachers  -  12  in  total).  Out  of  the  remaining  nine,  only  three  are  operating  in  the  project  selected 
provinces:  two  in  East  New  Britain  (East  New  Britain  Savings  and  Loan  Society  and  National 
Farmers,  although  this  last  one  is  currently  under  administration)  and  one  in  Eastern  Highlands 
(Alekano).  
70.  Selection  process.  The  selection  of  financial  institutions  to  partner  with  the  project  will  be 
based  on  a  call  for  expression  of  interest  launched  by  the  PMU  during  PY1,  followed  by  a  due 
diligence exercise undertaken by an audit firm or an international financial consultant. Due diligence 
will review, for each applying institutions: (i) financial statements (liquidity position, risk and quality of 
the portfolio, current outreach); (ii) governance; (iii) manual of procedures, especially the sections on 
portfolio  management  and  monitoring,  risk  assessment  and  management  of  the  non-performing 
portfolio, and social and environmental safeguards procedures; (iv) medium-term development plan, 
especially  growth  of  financial  base,  increase  of  outreach  and  ways  to  achieve  it;  (v)  products  and 
services;  (vi) pricing; and (vii) current and projected geographical zones of interventions. The service 
provider  (a  consulting  firm  or  a  consultant)  undertaking  this  assignment  will  also  visit  and  meet  the 
senior  management  of  each  responding  financial  institution.  It  will  submit  a  report  presenting  the 
outcomes of the review with conclusions for each applicant to an ad-hoc selection committee that will 
be set up by the PMU with CEFI’s assistance.  
71.  The  ad-hoc  selection  committee  will  be  composed  of  one  representative  from  the  Institute  of 
Bankers, one representative from the microfinance industry, and one representative from the Central 
Bank (outside of the supervision department). A representative from the Department of Agriculture will 
be invited to the discussions, without voting rights, for the selection to take into consideration specific 
constraints and needs of the agricultural sector. The Project Manager will act as the secretary of the 
committee.  It  will  review  the  conclusions  of  the  due  diligence  exercise  presented  by  the  consulting 
firm/consultant and will submit a shortlist of financial institutions to the Project Steering Committee for 
approval. It is expected that the project will start working with at least six financial institutions (i.e. one 
commercial  bank,  three  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  two  savings  and  loan  societies).  The 
number of selected financial institutions will also depend on their coverage and presence in the target 
81 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
provinces. The ad-hoc selection committee will ensure that at least two selected financial institutions 
are  operating  in  each  province  to  promote  competition  and  a  wider  range  of  financial  services.  The 
project will then gradually include at least three  more financial institutions and one savings and loans 
society  before  its  completion  (one  commercial  bank,  one  non-bank  financial  institution  and  one 
savings  and  loan  society).  In  that  respect,  another  round  of  due  diligence  exercise  will  take  place 
during PY4, following the same modalities. 
Support to Financial Institutions 
Business  development  plan.  Considering  the  important  differences  in  the  status  of  development 
among  the  three  different  types  of  financial  institutions,  the  project  will  adopt  an  à-la-carte  support 
approach. Once financial institutions have been selected, the same service provider who did the due 
diligence  will  work  with  each  selected  financial  institution  to  identify  their  needs  with  regard  to:  (i) 
outreach; (ii) products and services; (iii) risk-sharing mechanism, and (iv) capacity building. It will then 
develop a business development plan to be approved by the PMU and the ad-hoc committee. 
72.  Outreach.  With  more  than  92%  of  the  rural  population  unbanked,  outreach  of  financial 
institutions  is  a  key  issue  that  will  be  addressed  by  the  project.  Based  on  the  development  plan  of 
each selected financial institution, the project will support any of the following sets of activities, in line 
with activities described in the business development plans:   
  The development of agents’ networks covering the selected provinces. Agents constitute the 
most effective way to increase financial institutions’ outreach in rural areas and the Central Bank 
has  built  on  Kenya’s  legislation  on  agents  to  ensure  their  monitoring  and  control.  Participating 
financial  institutions  will  have  the  opportunity  select  and  recruit  new  agents,  who  could  also  be 
Village  Extension Workers. The project will partly finance the training costs of these agents and 
will  decreasingly  cover  their  operating  costs.  It  will  also  co-finance  any  required  mean  of 
transportation for the agents; 
  The development of points of services specifically adapted to people with a low degree of 
literacy  (based  on  a  similar  experience  in  an  IFAD-financed  project  in  Swaziland  20).  Points  of 
services  could  take  various  forms:  units  opened  a  few  days  per  week  (generally  during  market 
days)  operated  by  one  bank  staff  and  with  limited  banking  activities  (deposits,  repayments  of 
loans,  submission  of  loan  applications);  units  opened  at  the  level  of  a  model  farm  (operated  by 
agents  or  bank  staff)  with  limited  banking  activities;  automated  teller  machine  with  a  few  key 
banking  functions  (deposits,  cash  withdrawals).  The  type  of  points  of  services  supported  by  the 
project will be based on assessment of the security conditions prevailing in the region. The project 
will co-finance the construction/rehabilitation and equipment of these points of services, as well as 
decreasingly finance their operating costs;    
  The  further  development  of  mobile  money  applications  that  will  ease  access  to  finance. 
This support will mainly be for commercial banks and leading non-bank financial institutions. The 
support will be anchored to the current development of mobile money and will aim at adding new 
applications  aiming  at  facilitating  the  access  to  financial  services.  In  close  collaboration  with 
financial  institutions  and  service  providers,  the  project  will  co-finance  the  development  of  new 
applications (transfer of money from any mobile phone, interconnectivity with agents and points of 
services,  loan  application  submission,  payments  to  third  parties;  transformation  of  goods  into 
money,  deposits  and  loans  …)  as  well  as  co-finance  related  implementation  (adaptation  of  the 
MIS and accounting systems) and operating costs (including users’ training). 
73.  Financial  institutions  met  during  the  design  mission  have  already  expressed  their  interest  in 
partnering  with  the  project  and  most  of  them  have  already  identified  one  or  two  of  the  innovations 
proposed  above  in  their  development  plans.  Most  financial  institutions  would  rather  opt  for  the 
development  of  a  network  of  agents  combined  with  the  development  of  digital  money  applications 
through tablets and interconnectivity with non-bank points of services such as shops or traders.    
20 Rural Finance and Enterprise Development Programme, 
http://operations.ifad.org/web/ifad/operations/country/project/tags/swaziland/1373/project_overview.   
82 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
74.  A  lumpsum  based  on  estimates  provided  by  commercial  banks  and  non-bank  financial 
institutions  has  been  provisioned  in  the  sub-component  budget  to  finance  the  development  of  their 
outreach through agents and through points of services.  A lumpsum has been provisioned in the sub-
component  budget  to  finance  any  support  related  to  mobile/digital  money.  Both  lumpsums  will 
complement  resources  already  earmarked  by  commercial  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions 
for the development of such activities/technologies. 
 Products  and  services.  The  objective  of  the  project  in  assisting  financial  institutions  to  develop 
products  and  services  is  twofold:  (i)  reduction  of  the  time  gap  between  the  flow  of  products  from 
growers  to  end-markets  and  the  related  flow  of  funds  from  the  end-users  back  to  the  growers;      (ii) 
adaptation of current products and services and introduction of innovative, tailor-made products and 
services to meet the needs of project target groups. Because the project targets different groups from 
growers to micro, small, medium entrepreneurs and large companies, the range of financial products 
and  services  to  be  considered  by  the  project  is  as  large  as  required  to  meet  substantially  different 
needs. In addition, for every financial product meeting the needs of a specific target group, the project 
will have to address three related issues: (i) product design; (ii) training of potential beneficiaries and 
of financial institutions staff (as well as the adaptation of the financial institutions’ MIS and accounting 
system), and (iii) the collateral requirement from the financial institutions to minimize their risk. These 
activities are mutually supportive and one cannot be implemented without the others.  
Innovative  products  and  services  meeting  the  needs  of  project  stakeholders  along  the  value 
75. 
chain include the following:   
  Financial instruments to reduce the time gap between flow of goods and  cash flow. While 
growers intend to be paid cash on delivery to fresh produce traders, these are being paid up to 90 
days after supplying the end buyer (generally catering companies or  supermarkets). As a result, 
traders are short of financial resources to ensure regular purchases from growers and supplies to 
end buyers. This results in a lack of incentive for growers to increase production and for traders to 
grow their business and invest into quality equipment, which results in the absence of continuity of 
the  cold  chain,  lack  of  adequate  storage  facilities,  lack  of  adequate  packing  and  packaging 
equipment, lack of adequate means of transportation. The project will support financial institutions 
to  implement  two  products  well  known  in  the  global  financial  sector:  (i)  receivable  financing  (or 
factoring)21, and (ii) non-invoice financing22. These two financial  instruments aim at enabling the 
bank to advance funds to traders on the basis of: (i) invoices (receivable financing), or (ii) bills of 
delivery  signed  by  the  two  parties  (non-invoice  financing),  until  end  buyers  have  effectively 
processed their payment. These two financial instruments will enable traders to access sufficient 
financial  resources  to  timely  pay  their  suppliers,  which  will  in  turn  enable  growers  to  increase 
production  and  sales.  Receivable  financing  and  bills  of  delivery  financing  have  already  been 
tested in other Pacific Island countries by Bank South Pacific (BSP - the largest commercial bank 
in PNG with close to 75% of the market share), which has expressed its willingness to experiment 
it in PNG; 
 
Innovative savings products for education, health and future productive investments. The PNG 
Financial  Inclusion  Policy  and  the  Central  Bank  have  prioritized  the  development  of  savings 
accounts  as  a  way  to  promote  financial  inclusion  especially  among  rural  households.  MVF  will 
support  this  vision  through  the  promotion  of  financial  education  as  part  of  the  Family-based 
approach (see component 1). In addition, CEFI will have the possibility to reinforce its team with 
contracted  international  and  national  consultants  to  identify  and  assist  partnering  financial 
institutions in implementing or experiences elsewhere savings accounts that meet the needs and 
possibilities  of  rural  households  (especially  considering  their  particular  and  irregular  cash  flow). 
Consultants  will  build  upon  existing  experience  in  the  country  such  as  the  Christmas  saving 
account or Education savings account proposed by some financial institutions. It is expected that 
around 80% of the farming households supported under Component 1 would have opened a bank 
account and a savings account by the end of the project.     
  Financial instruments as an alternative to simple loan products such as the following: 
21 Receivable financing is a type of asset-financing arrangement in which a company uses its receivables (outstanding invoices) 
as collateral in a financing agreement. In this agreement, a financial institution gives the original company an amount equal to a 
reduced value of the unpaid invoices or receivables 
22 A similar modality as above, but where the collateral is a bill of delivery, approved and certified by the end buyer. 
83 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
o  Tri-partite financing agreement: this is a mechanism that involves farming households, buyers 
and a financial  institution, whereby the proceeds of a loan extended by a financial institution 
to  a  farmer  for  the  purchase  of  inputs  is  transferred  by  the  financial  institution  to  the  buyer, 
who in turn  will purchase and provide the farmer with inputs in-kind. Upon farmer’s produce 
delivery to the buyer, the latter deducts loan repayment from the final payment to the farmer, 
and  transfers  it  to  the  lending  financial  institution.  The  loan  contract  will  be  signed  between 
the  framer  and  the  financial  institution.  This  mechanism  is  well-known  in  PNG  for  specific 
commodities like cocoa and coffee. It has also been implemented in numerous IFAD projects 
as a way to circumvent financial institutions’ collateral issues; 
o  Suppliers’  credit:  (goods  or  services  received  on  deferred  payment  terms  -  also  called 
supplier financing). Financial education and monitoring of farming households will enable the 
implementation of suppliers’ credit, especially for input suppliers who have no fresh produce 
trading activities. Suppliers’ credit will be promoted by the project for the financing of inputs as 
required  by  growers  (generally  needed  in  small  quantities,  for  which  Savings  and  Credit 
Societies  and  small  non-bank  financial  institutions  offer  adequate  lending  products,  as 
confirmed during design). Suppliers will be assisted on a case-by-case basis by the project to 
develop  such  a  financial  mechanism,  access  better  terms  and  conditions  from  financial 
institutions as well as with technical assistance on credit management. 
76.  Temporary  risk-sharing  mechanism.  The  implementation  of  innovative  products  might 
require the development of a temporary risk-sharing mechanism between the project and the financial 
institutions, especially when the projected financing operations are not covered by existing guarantee 
funds. There are two existing guarantee funds in PNG: one is financed by ADB and managed by CEFI 
for  loans  below  PGK  100,000  and  the  other  is  funded  and  managed  by  IFC  for  larger  loans.  While 
they  are  not  explicitly  excluded  in  the  types  of  financial  operations  that  are  guaranteed  by  these 
schemes,  some  of  the  new  financial  instruments  (suppliers’  credit,  non-invoice  financing,  receivable 
financing) might not be eligible as they are not considered as loans by financial institutions.  
In such cases, unless the guarantee fund managers agree to modify their eligibility criteria, the 
77. 
project  will  finance  a  risk-sharing  mechanism  consisting  of  a  cash  deposit  at  the  level  of  each 
participating  financial  institution  to  cover  possible  losses.  These  cash  deposits  on  interest-bearing 
accounts  will  be  managed  by  CEFI  and  be  based  on  the  outstanding  loan  portfolio,  projected  loan 
disbursements and risk-sharing arrangement. When a loss occurs, the lending financial institution will 
call in the risk-sharing mechanism and submit the necessary documentation to an ad-hoc committee 
consisting  of  a  financial  expert,  an  agriculture/fresh  produces  expert  and  CEFI  Managing  Director. 
The  committee  will  review  the  documentation,  estimate  the  share  of  the  loss  to  be  borne  by  the 
mechanism and submit a request for payment to the PMU.  Upon PMU’s approval, CEFI will transfer 
the related amount to the lending bank in two tranches: one no later than 30 days after the call-in, and 
the  second  and  final  tranche  120  days  after  the  first  tranche.  Recoveries  made  by  the  financial 
institution after the two payments will be treated pari passu. Risk borne by the risk-sharing facility will 
not exceed 50% (the remaining risk will be borne by the lending financial institution). This risk-sharing 
mechanism will not be permanent and will not be accessible more than twice by the same beneficiary. 
It is a kick-start mechanism that will provide the opportunity to financial institutions to implement and 
test innovative financial products without bearing all the risk.  
78.  Capacity  building.  On  the  basis  of  prior  capacity  building  need  assessment,  the  project  will 
build  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions’  staff  through  the  provision  of  various  training  courses 
focusing  on  financing  rural  and  agriculture-related  activities,  risk  and  project  assessment  and 
management,  project  monitoring  and  control.  The  capacity  building  need  assessment  will  be 
undertaken  by  the  same  service  provider  as  above,  after  the  selection  of  the  participating  financial 
institutions  partnering  with  the  project  is  completed.  A  three-year  training  plan  will  be  elaborated  for 
each financial institution, in close collaboration with their training department. Training will be provided 
to  financial  institutions’  staff  in  the  loan  and  savings  departments  as  well  as  to  staff  from  senior 
management, internal control, legal and recovery department. Training will be provided jointly by CEFI 
and by the in-house trainers of the financial institutions (if any).  
84 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Implementation Modalities for Component 2 
79.  Activities  under  Sub-component  2.1  will  be  implemented  under  the  overall  responsibility  of  a 
Road Engineer in the PMU, who will plan, facilitate and oversee implementation. While it is expected 
that  province  and  district  resources  will  be  made  available  as  planned  (see  above  Financing  under 
Sub-component  2.1),  the  implementation  set-up  is  geared  towards  sizing  implementation  support  in 
line  with the actual volume of resources available. The PMU  will  hire a consulting firm to be able to 
draw  on  additional  qualifying  engineers  to  support  the  PMU  Road  Engineer  as  required.  Studies, 
supervision  and  works  will  similarly  be  contracted  out.  All  contracts  will  be  based  on  competitive 
bidding.  
80.  Sub-component 2.2 will be implemented by CEFI, which has developed strong relationship with 
the three different types of target financial institutions with the objective of strengthening the financial 
sector as a whole (a description of CEFI is in Appendix 5). The project will finance the cost of three 
additional staff (salaries and operating costs of a manager and two assistants), a vehicle, attendance 
to  training  courses  in  the  region  (in  liaison  with  the  Asia-Pacific  Rural  and  Agricultural  Credit 
Association (APRACA23), an exposure visit in the region (Vietnam or Thailand) to study the different 
instruments  implemented  to  finance  rural  development  and  agriculture,  and  a  share  of  CEFI’s 
management  overheads.  For  activities  under  sub-component  2.2,  CEFI  will  be  contracted  at  project 
inception  and  for  its  entire  duration.  CEFI  will  submit  an  Annual Work  Plan  and  Budget  to  the  PMU 
and will report on technical and financial progress against it on a quarterly basis.   
COMPONENT 3 – COLLECTIVE GOVERNANCE AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
81.  Component  3  aims  at  promoting  a  favourable  policy  and  institutional  environment  to 
support the development of inclusive fresh produce and galip nut value chains. It will also contribute 
to  DAL  efforts  to  reform  the  agriculture  sector  and  to  facilitate  the  participation  of  village  farmers  in 
agricultural  growth.  The  expected  outcome  is  that  organised  industry  players  contribute  to  policy 
development  and  sector  coordination  for  inclusive  industry  growth.  The  main  outputs  from 
Component  3  will  be:  (i)  two  national,  at  least  3  provincial  and  10  district-based  multi-stakeholders’ 
platforms (MSPs) created and trained; (ii) at least three policy and regulatory measures adopted and 
implemented building on MVF knowledge products; (iii) operational Management Information System 
(MIS) established at FPDA; and (iv) an annual set of evidence-based knowledge products posted on 
FPDA  website  as  of  year  3.  Component  3  is  organised  in  two  sub-components:  (i)  Collective 
Governance; and (ii) Project Management. 
Sub-component 1: Collective Governance 
82.  The  project  will  finance  activities  in  four  areas:  (i)  value  chain  organisation  and  institution 
building;  (ii)  policy  and  business  environment;  (iii)  research;  and  (iv)  knowledge  management  and 
communication.  
Value Chain Organisation and Institution Building  
83.  Fresh  produce.  In  2014,  FPDA  organised  a  national  horticulture  conference  which  brought 
together 300 industry stakeholders. The conference paved the way to developing new marketing and 
business  linkages  between  suppliers  and  modern  market  players,  chiefly  supermarket  chains  and 
catering companies. It also laid the foundation of a value chain-based multi-stakeholder platform that 
would  offer  a  venue  to  develop  dialogue  among  value  chain  players.  Financial  constraints  have  not 
permitted  to  set  up  a  permanent  multi-stakeholder  platform  in  the  fresh  produce  sector.  Meanwhile, 
the Pacific Horticulture and Agriculture Market Access Programme (PHAMA) has set up an Industry 
Working  Group  for  Fresh  Produce,  composed  of  public  sector  (FPDA,  NARI,  National  Agriculture 
Quarantine  and  Inspection  Authority  (NAQIA)  and  private  sector  (major  growers,  aggregators, 
transportation  companies  and  wholesale/retailers).  The  group  has  one  first  meeting  and  aims  at  
determining  priorities  and  providing  orientations  to  the  sector  development.  PHAMA  will  come  to  an 
23 APRACA is a regional association that promotes cooperation and facilitates mutual exchange of information and expertise in 
the field of rural finance. 
85 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
end in 2018. Building on these encouraging first steps, MVF will promote value chain organisation and 
coordination through two main channels: 
  Supporting  the  Industry  Working  Group:  taking  over  from  PHAMA,  it  will  provide  tailor-made 
support to the Industry Working Group for Fresh Produce, so that it can develop its membership, 
expand its network at the local level and develop its capacities to represent  member’s interests. 
Activities would include: (i) a baseline study, which would assess achievements, the potential for 
expanding  membership  (including  an  identification  and  capacity-based  typology  of  farmers’ 
cooperatives  and  groups  involved  in  the  fresh  produce  sector),  members’  expectations, 
sustainability  issues  (especially  with  regard  to  financing);  (ii)  capacity  building  as  required;                
(iii) support for meeting organisation; 
  Structuring  industry  players  at  the  local  levels:  to  further  support  industry  dialogue  and  to 
ensure  that  the  Industry  Working  Group  takes  on  board  the  views  of  larger  panels  of  industry 
stakeholders,  the  project  will  support  the  creation  of  multi-stakeholder  platforms  (MSPs)  at  the 
provincial level and in districts that have significant concentration of production areas. MSPs will 
gather industry players (including VEWs and adequate representation of women growers) as well 
as  other  stakeholders  from  the  public  and  private  sector  engaged  in  supporting  value  chain 
development,  such  as  agri-dealers,  financial  institutions,  transporters  and  logistics  companies, 
FPDA  delegations/Provincial teams, DPIs and district agriculture  departments. MSPs  will  offer a 
venue  to  collectively  address  constraints  affecting  the  industry  such  as  transport  and  handling, 
build  knowledge  on  successful  experiences  (in  particular  knowledge  generated  by  the  project  - 
see below), promote understanding and trust among value chain players, and support advocacy 
and  public-private  policy  dialogue.  These  chain  relationships  can  be  expected  to  grow  as 
commercial marketing activities increase during MVF. In addition, provincial MSPs will have a role 
in  identifying  priority  areas  for  policy  studies  and  applied  research  to  be  financed  by  MVF  (see 
below); 
  Building linkages between value chain players:  downstream chain actors have expressed a 
strong  willingness  to  work  with  highlands  growers  and  produce  aggregators  to  address  existing 
value chains constraints to their mutual benefit. Buyers in formal  end markets, both retailers and 
food service companies, are beginning to develop formal supply arrangements with selected fresh 
produce  suppliers,  largely  due  to  the  impact  of  the  import  ban  in  2015.  These  supply 
arrangements, such as bills of quantities or purchase orders, stipulate volumes to be supplied by 
product line, delivery schedules and predetermined prices (normally aligned to the current market 
price).  Such  business  arrangements  (which  are  required  to  implement  innovative  financial 
products  such  as  receivable  financing  and  non-invoice  financing)  will  be  promoted  through  the 
multi-stakeholder platforms as well as during partnership preparation. 
84.  A detailed strategy to implement these three sets of activities will be prepared by a specialised 
consultant  to  be  recruited  by  the  PMU  in  year  2.  The  strategy  will  specify  the  composition, 
organisation  and  mandate  of  the  various  platforms  and  identify  the  type  of  support  that  should  be 
financed  by the  project, including advisory services,  capacity building and  meeting costs. It  will also 
specify  how  to  develop  linkages  before  the  various  levels,  and  how  to  build  on  the  outcomes  of 
Annual  partnership  meetings  (see  Component  1).  The  strategy  implementation  will  be  under  the 
responsibility  of  the  PMU  Policy  Development  Officer,  with  support  of  specialised  consultants  as 
required. 
85.  Furthermore, MVF will provide assistance to strengthen FPDA  institutional capacity, based on 
FPDA’s upcoming Mid-term Development Plan (2016-2019). Capacity building would support FPDA’s 
ability to: (i) implement the project in an accountable and transparent manner, in line with GoPNG and 
IFAD  procedures,  and  deliver  project  outcomes  and  outputs  according  to  plans;  (ii)  track 
achievements  and  capitalise  on  good  results  to  improve  sector  performance  and  inform  policy 
dialogue;  and  (iii)  promote  inclusive  and  economically  viable  development  of  the  fresh  produce 
industry.  This  would  also  cover  the  provision  of  assistance  to:  explore  the  possibility  of  collecting 
levies to recover part of FPDA operating costs, as suggested by the Functional Expenditure Review, 
as  well  as  ways  to  include  a  more  balanced  representation  of  sector  private  players  (farmers  and 
agribusiness) on FPDA board. Capacity building will be provided on the basis of annual participatory 
capacity  assessments  and  capacity  development  plans,  under  the  responsibility  of  FPDA  Corporate 
Affairs Division.  
86 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
86.  Galip nut. A similar but simpler approach will be adopted in the galip nut sector, which reflects 
the  fact  that  there  is  not  yet  a  value  chain  and  that  activities  will  be  of  a  more  limited  scope,  as 
described above. The approach will build on the Reference Group set up by ACIAR/NARI project but 
will expand the current membership to include other stakeholders involved in the nascent value chain 
(farmers, public stakeholders, end market buyers - retailers and Paradise Food) and build an Industry 
Working  Group.  The  project  will  assist  the  Working  Group  in  designing  a  long-term  (10-15  years) 
strategic  plan  providing  a  roadmap  for  development  of  the  galip  nut  industry  that  could  be  used  to 
attract private sector, government and donor funding support. The project will also assist in clarifying 
the  organisation  and  mandate  of  the  Working  Group  and  provide  support  for  its  legalisation  as 
needed. One meeting per year will be organised to present and discuss the results of the pilot plant. 
Policy Development 
87.  MVF  will  contribute  to  enhancing  the  policy  and  regulatory  environment  in  the  target  value 
chains. Studies and research required to address collectively identified constraints affecting industry 
development will be identified by the Industry Working Groups. Areas jointly pre-identified with FPDA 
during project design  include:  
  Quality  standards  and  certification  for  domestic  and  export  markets:  this  would  include 
policy  and  legal  provisions  for  grades  and  standards;  single  origin,  participatory  guarantee 
systems  and  branding;  food  safety  and  traceability;  and  export  and  certification  for  galip  nut 
(including  with  regard  to  environmental  and  social  standards  such  as  international  labour 
standards) and, if and when there will be market demand, for fresh produce. Progress in this field 
will  facilitate  farmers’  access  to  quality-based  premium  prices,  bring  clarity  to  contractual 
arrangements with end market buyers (supermarkets and catering companies) and support export 
activities, particularly for galip nut. Activities will be developed in close collaboration with National 
Agriculture  Quarantine  and  Inspection  Authority  and  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Industrial Technology as appropriate; 
 
 Fair  contract  standards:  this  would  include  the  provision  of  standards  for  ensuring:  more 
transparent  contractual  arrangements  between  farmers  and  buyers  and  further  down  the  fresh 
produce chain (which will be a requirement to develop receivable financing - see Sub-component 
2.2); fair contracting terms between farmers and buyers that would support a fair distribution both 
of benefits and risks; and fair mechanisms for the settlement of disputes; 
 
Import of quality inputs: this would support the regulation of imports of seeds and chemicals, to 
ensure quality standards and compliance with safety and environmental standards. 
88.  The  project  will  finance:  specialised  technical  assistance;  policy  workshops  with  industry 
stakeholders, either to support the preparation of policy studies or to present and discuss the results 
of such studies; awareness raising and capacity building; and exposure visits in the region. 
89. 
 Policy dialogue. The outcomes of policy studies and workshops, as well as project learnings 
and  documented  successful  models  will  be  disseminated  under  appropriate  formats  to  relevant 
government  policy  making  bodies  and  industry  organisations,  such  as  those  described  above.  It  is 
expected that the majority of policy instruments will be regulations, for which adoption is easier than 
laws  and  is  the  responsibility  of  the  National  Executive  Council  (NEC).  Jointly  with  DAL,  FPDA  will 
prepare  the  documentation  required  and  will  submit  it  for  approval  to  NEC  through  the  Minister  of 
Agriculture. 
Research 
90.  Following the scoping study, the International Technical Assistance available to the project, in 
consultation  with FPDA and other relevant industry stakeholders,  will develop terms of reference for 
an initial study to better pinpoint and quantify the causes, location and extent of postharvest losses in 
the fresh produce sector. This work could be undertaken by NARI and the ITA working collaboratively. 
The  study  will  make  recommendations  as  to  priority  areas  for  applied  research  in  the  field  of  post-
harvest management, for example : commercially viable mechanisms for reducing physical damage, 
such as modified/specialised fresh produce transportation systems and packaging technologies; cool 
chain interventions, such as postharvest cooling to quickly reduce crop field heat and reduce the rate 
87 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
of  product  decay;  upscaling  of  curing  and  drying  technologies  for  applicable  crops  such  as  bulb 
onions. 
91.  Other areas for applied research activities  in support to the development of the fresh produce 
sector will be identified in annual programmes to be developed jointly by FPDA (with support from the 
PMU/international  technical  assistance)  and  NARI,  building  on  recommendations  from  the  Multi-
Stakeholder  Platforms.  Research  outcomes  will  be  made  available  to  programme  stakeholders, 
through  the  value  chain  platforms,  the  MIS  and  specifically  designed  training  programmes  to  be 
delivered by service providers supporting the partnerships.   
Information and Communication 
92.  Fresh  produce.  This  set  of  activities  will  aim  at  strengthening  information  management 
systems  necessary  to  support  policy  development  and  stakeholders’  decisions  in  the  fresh  produce 
industry  and  to  improve  transparency  in  the  sector.  It  will:  (i)  set  up  an  effective  information  system 
within  FPDA  to  ensure  stakeholders’  access  to  technical  and  market  information;  (ii)  support  ICT-
based solutions for facilitating farmers’ access to information; (iii)  set  up  a project-based knowledge 
management  system,  which  will  track  good  practices,  document  successful  business  models  and 
innovative  schemes  for  facilitating  farmers’  access  to  inputs  and  markets  and  the  cost-effective 
organisation  of  village  farmers-based  supply  chains;  and  (iv)  organise  targeted  communication 
campaigns around key policy and farming practice changes.  
93.  MIS. MVF will assist FPDA in enhancing its Management Information System (MIS), so that it 
becomes a cornerstone of industry knowledge management and  provides industry stakeholders with 
technical and market knowledge to support decision-making, inform policy development and support 
the scaling up of good practices and successful business models. The enhanced MIS will include: 
  Market information, building on the Market Information System operated by FPDA in partnership 
with  Digicel,  which  makes  available  weekly  average  prices  for  30  crops  and  5  markets  through 
mobile phones. The system will be improved to increase its relevance to farmers and buyers (who 
are  interested  in  getting  daily  prices)  and  to  make  a  more  strategic  use  of  the  amount  of  data 
collected  (by  issuing  markets  and  trends  analysis).  Market  intelligence  (including  analysis  of 
demand  on  specific markets, market studies,  potential  for  certification  etc.)  would  also  be  made 
accessible through the MIS; 
  Technical  advice,  including  information  on  technologies  and  production  and  postharvest  best 
practices  at  each  link  of  the  value  chain,  on  a  product  or  product  category  basis  as  applicable. 
This  will  allow  partnership  members  (growers  and  buyers),  support  personnel/agencies, 
distributors  and  marketers  to  access  and  utilise  up-to-date,  industry  relevant  information 
applicable to the project value chains; 
  Stakeholder 
information,  or 
information  on  suppliers  and  buyers, 
including  business 
opportunities and networking forums;  
  Weather information and climate change mitigation advice; 
  Transport  information,  such  as  shipping  schedules  and  costs,  road  outages  impacting  on 
delivery  of  fresh  produce  consignments  and  best  practices  for  road,  sea  and  air  freight  of  fresh 
products; 
  MVF performance: the MIS will also provide information on MVF achievements, good practices 
and  successful  business  models.  Focus  areas  for  KM  will  include  public-private  partnerships 
facilitating farmers’ access to services and markets, and innovative financial instruments. Details 
on project M&E and KM are provided in Appendix 6. 
94.  The MIS  will be developed progressively, based  on interaction  with users. This  will include:  a 
preliminary assessment of information needs of industry stakeholders, FPDA and the PMU; a phased 
approach to setting up the MIS, starting small to address priority needs and progressively adding new 
features;  mechanisms  for  getting  users’  feedback  and  adapt  the  system  and  the  procedures  for 
collecting, verifying, storing, processing, analysing and presenting information. 
88 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
95.  The  MIS  will  be  placed  under 
the  responsibility  of  FPDA’s  Research,  Policy  and 
Communication Division, and specifically of the Communication and Information Manager. Short-term 
technical  assistance  will  be  provided  to  develop  the  MIS  framework,  guide  its  implementation,  train 
FPDA  staff  and  prepare  a  communication  plan,  in  collaboration  with  the  PMU  Knowledge 
Management  and  Communication  Officer  and  Senior  PMU  Officer,  and  based  on  the  results  of  the 
scoping  study,  subsequent  investigations  and  identification  of  established  best  practices  in  similar 
production  and  marketing  environments.  The  MIS  Development  and  Content  Manager  and  their 
FPDA  counterparts  will  have  ongoing  responsibility  for  ensuring  MIS  content  is  up-to-date,  user-
friendly  and  that  communication  delivery  channels  as  described  below  are  working  effectively  and 
meeting stakeholder needs. This will involve the MIS Development and Content Manager and his/her 
counterparts  in  FPDA  working  closely  with  persons  and  agencies  responsible  for  developing  and/or 
supplying MIS resources and information. 
96.  Communication. Information and knowledge will be shared through several channels, such as: 
 
ICT:  in  connection  with  the  MIS,  the  project  will  explore  ICT-based  solutions  such  as  radio,  cell 
phones  and  tablets,  for  making  information  available  to  farmers  and  other  value  chain 
stakeholders, building on the IFAD/IFC study on linking farmers to fair trade buyers through ICT 
services  (2014).  Based  on  an  expressed  farmers’  preference  for  getting  information  through 
mobile phones and building on the Market Information System, several ways of making available 
technical  advisory  services  could  be  explored  (including  SMS  alerts  or  bulk  messaging,  hotline, 
extension  reference  library  accessible  through  VEWs’  tablets  etc.).  The  project  will  finance 
studies, a phased and cost-shared implementation plan, and part of development costs, together 
with FPDA and service providers. Assistance will also be provided to FPDA to develop its website 
and make it client-oriented and responsive to the needs of fresh produce stakeholders; 
  Publications, including policy briefs capitalising on project learning, manuals and methodological 
tools, technical briefs, business model analysis, analytical case studies, etc. 
  Communication campaigns around key policy and farming practice changes; 
  Multi-stakeholder  platforms:  MSPs  will  also  be  used  as  a  venue  for  discussing  project 
achievements  and  innovations,  identifying  successes  and  problems  as  well  as  good  practices, 
discussing  possible  solutions,  and  organising  learning  events  on  thematic  issues.  Multi-
stakeholder platforms can strengthen relationships and build trust between value chain actors by 
enhancing understanding of the various roles, activities and challenges of chain participants and 
industry sectors; 
  Study  tours:  study  tours  will  be  organised  to  support  the  exchange  of  knowledge  and  good 
practices,  building  on  the  learning  route  approach,  building  on  the  learning  route  approach 
implemented by IFAD in other countries. Learning Routes are an innovative approach to structure 
peer-to-peer  learning  on  innovative  practices,  by  complementing  field  visits  with  activities 
designed to ensure transfer and implementation of knowledge.  
97.  Galip  nut.  Similar  activities  will  be  organised  to  support  galip  nut  industry  development,  with 
lesser  intensity  given  the  incipient  stage.  Knowledge  management  and  sharing  are  however 
considered to be key to support sector development.  
Implementation arrangements 
The  implementation  of  the  sub-component  will  be  the  responsibility  of  FPDA  Research,  Policy  and 
Communication Manager, in collaboration with the Component 3 Officer, the Knowledge Management 
and Communication Officer, FPDA Value Chain Programme Manager and the Component 1 Officer. 
Short term international technical assistance will be hired by the PMU to develop the MIS framework, 
ICT-based solutions and a communication strategy and guide implementation. Research activities will 
be implemented by NARI, through annual MoUs signed with the PMU. 
Sub-Component 2 – Project Management 
98.  The strategy and activities related to Project Management are described in Appendix 5. 
89 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Annex 1 – Building on the FPDA Model Farm Concept 
The following is a summary of how FPDA has developed the Model Farm concept until now, so as to 
engage  groups  of  smallholders  in  learning  activities  designed  to  increase  their  interest  and 
capabilities  in  growing  fresh  produce  for  commercial  end  markets.  The  Model  Farm  concept  will  be 
further refined for inclusion within MVF, building on the work done by FPDA to date: (i) the awareness 
campaign rolled out at the commencement of the MVF will include an explanation of the Model Farm 
concept and how it will be applied within partnerships developed during the project; (ii)  discussion on 
the concept and how to best utilize the Model Farm within partnership activities will be continued with 
interested  parties  during  the  expression  of  interest  and  business  planning  stages;  (iii)  the  grower-
buyer  relationships  inherent  within  MVF  partnerships  will  be  reflected  in  how  the  Model  Farm  is 
managed  and  the  learning  content  and  inputs  made  available  to  partnerships  will  be  a  reflection  of 
the   specific  production  activities  needed  to  meet  market  requirements,  as  described  in  each 
partnership  business  plan;  (iv)  service  providers  will  undertake  the  training  function  previously  done 
by FPDA extension personnel, with FPDA providing an overall facilitation and advisory role. 
Model  Farms  are  established  for  three  main  reasons;  one,  to  increase  the  outreach  of 
1. 
extension  services  provided  to  farming  communities,  two,  to  collectively  provide  technically  sound 
learning  outcomes  to  a  large  number  of  farming  families  and  three,  to  help  growers  develop  a 
commercial  focus  and  understanding  by  encouraging  and  supporting  them  to  develop  systems  to 
better supply large formal markets. 
2. 
In  2014,  the  FPDA  approach  to  providing  extension  services  changed  from  being  mainly 
“production driven" to “market driven" as FPDA focused on  the  needs of formal markets for the first 
time.  The  Model  Farm  concept  was  recognized  as  an  extension  model  that  focused  on  growers 
gaining  a  better  understanding  of  the  requirements  of  formal  markets  and  was  embraced  as  a  key 
extension methodology accordingly. 
3. 
Model  Farms  promote  learning  rather  than  teaching.  Farmers  are  not  told  what  to  do 
(conventional training), but rather learn production techniques and skills practically by working on the 
Model  Farm  itself.  The  Model  Farm  learning  approach  has  helped  to  overcome  communication 
barriers and recognizes and helps compensate for low literacy levels among rural communities. The 
initial  rate  of  uptake  (that  is  growers  moving  on  to  produce  new  crops  in  their  own  right)  ranged 
between  30-40  %  in  the  first  two  years  but  is  gradually  increasing.  FPDA  has  limited  resources 
available  for  establishing  and  monitoring  Model  Farms  but  has  been  innovative  in  its  delivery  to 
maximize  beneficial  impacts.    With  further  assistance  provided  to  growers  within  the  MVF  project, 
including  financial  literacy  and  a  continued  family  based  approach  it  is  anticipated  that  far  better 
uptake outcomes can be achieved.  
Steps in Implementing a Model Farm Project (current practice) 
  A local project team is formed comprising of FPDA officer/s, local DPI officer/s (provincial/district), 
law enforcement agency (Police) and prominent community leader/s. 
  An  awareness  campaign  is  then  conducted  to  identify  communities  interested  in  participating  in 
the  project.  The  awareness  campaign  is  conducted  in  marketplaces,  at  church  gatherings, 
through  provincial  and  district  DPI  offices,  via  local  government  agencies  and  by  FPDA  officers 
communicating with the broader community at large (word of mouth awareness). 
 
Interested communities are identified  and a screening process commences. These communities 
are visited to discuss the concept in more detail. Consultations are held with local police, church 
leaders, councilors,  village magistrates, DPI  officers  and  local leaders to assess the standing  of 
communities expressing an interest to participate. Communities with a poor standing (for various 
reasons) are eliminated from the process. 
  After  the  first  screening  communities  are  revisited  and  further  discussions  held.  Key  tasks  are 
assigned that must be completed before a second screening is undertaken. These tasks include 
(a) identifying and clearing a suitable piece of land between 0.5-1 hectare in size (the land has to 
be made available for free for the life of project) (b) obtaining fencing timber for the area allocated 
for  the  Model  Farm  (c)  obtaining  timber  and  other  materials  needed  for  construction  of  a  Model 
Farm nursery. 
90 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
  The second round of screening takes place after a month to allow communities sufficient time to 
complete  their  assigned  tasks.  Completion  of  tasks  in  a  timely  manner  is  considered  a  good 
indicator of seriousness and commitment to the project. 
  FPDA  provides  Model  Farm  inputs  such  as  certified  seed,  plant  and  soil  nutrition  inputs,  pest 
control inputs, any simple irrigation components that may be needed and other basic equipment 
and materials. Community members provide free labor, bring their own farming tools and provide 
the  timber  for  fencing  the  Model  Farm  site  and  constructing  the  nursery.  FPDA  and  the 
community share the cost of fencing wire. 
  The  community  also  takes  responsibility  for  hosting  the  officers  providing  training  on  the  Model 
Farm. 
The Model Farm Teaching Process 
Initial Training 
  The purpose and process for running the Model Farm is explained to participants from the start to 
minimize any disruption during implementation. Participants are informed of project expectations, 
their  expected  contribution  and  participation,  processes 
income 
management  and  farm  management,  including  election  of  a  committee  for  that  purpose.    Once 
the committee is formed, they take full responsibility  for managing the Model Farm whilst FPDA 
officer/s provide an advisory role and focus on up-skilling of farmers. Local leaders are invited to 
meetings  to  help  facilitate  discussion  and  take  responsibility  for  managing  social  issues.  At  the 
same  time  a  VEW  candidate  is  selected  amongst  the  learning  group  based  on  VEW  selection 
criteria.  VEWs  are  supported  by  FPDA  to  provide  an  ongoing  extension  service  to  graduating 
farmers and other interested groups at the end of the Model Farm training process. 
for  dispute  resolutions, 
  Training  is  open  to  all  members  of  the  community  who  wish  to  participate.  A  training  team 
comprising two FPDA extension officers moves into the selected community and spends a week 
in  the  village  conducting  on-site  training.  Farmers  learn  basic  agronomy,  plant  care  and 
protection,  soil  management  and  climate  change  mitigation  practices  (amongst  other  topics). 
Practical  sessions  include  construction  of  the  nursery,  land  preparation,  soil  conservation, 
drainage, soil sterilization, pest and disease management and on-farm safety practices.   
  Once the initial training program is completed,  ongoing Model Farm training activities start. One 
officer is able to supervise 5 model farms with 60-70 farmers per Model Farm. The officer ideally 
spends  a  day  each  week  providing  supervision  at  each  Model  Farm  for  which  he  or  she  has 
responsibility.  
The Ongoing Training Process  
  Farmers turn up at the Model Farm on an agreed day of the week with their own tools, whilst the 
FPDA officer provides supervision of learning activities. 
  Training is segmented and delivered corresponding to crop production cycles. Farmers are given 
adequate  time  to  learn  and  demonstrate  their  competency  in  the  field.  It  takes  3  months  to 
complete a training cycle for brassicas and 6 months for longer term crops including bulb onion. A 
farmer is expected to be trained and appropriately skilled after two training cycles. For example, 
one year of training will see farmers graduate with a sound knowledge of bulb onion production. 
Continuing Development and Support   
  Crops harvested from Model Farms are sold to long term formal markets organized by FPDA and 
income  generated  is  kept  in  a  Model  Farm  account.  30%  of  income  per  sale  is  used  for  Model 
Farm  operations,  including  further  purchasing  of  necessary  crop  production  inputs.  A  small 
allowance is also paid to Model Farm committee members. At the end of the project, 10% of the 
account balance is used to support the person/s or family donating their land for the Model Farm 
to allow them to continue farming. The balance of income is kept in the account and distributed to 
graduating  farmers  to  help  in  the  purchase  of  production  inputs  necessary  for  them  to  farm 
independently.  
  At  this  point,  Model  Farms  may  evolve  into  ‘Farmer  Hubs’  which  can  become  a  point  of 
consolidation  and  sales;  quality  checks  and  some  postharvest  handling  and  packing.  Farmer 
91 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Hubs are an appropriate venue for meetings and farmer group development activities as well as 
providing a facility for the further dissemination of information and training for farmers.  
  Trained  VEWS  continue  to  provide  extension  services  among  the  farming  communities  and 
maintain  a  link  with  FPDA.  FPDA  provides  ongoing  technical  and  marketing  support  based  on 
reports provided by VEWs.  
92 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Annex 2 – Sub-Component 1.2 – Galip Nut Supply Chain 
Indicative Timeline for Preparatory Phase 
93 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Annex 3 – Sub-Component 1.2 – Galip Nut Supply Chain 
Indicative Timeline for Preparatory Phase – Financial Details24 
1. 
Based  on  assumptions  detailed  in  annex  1  of  this  paper  and  worked  out  after  interviews  with 
ACIAR,  NARI  and  galip  nut  specialists,  table  1  shows  the  Profit  and  Loss  Statement for  the  current 
NARI’s galip nut processing unit.  
2.  With  assistance  from  a  specialised  consultant,  the  PMU  (under  the  responsibility  of  the  Galip 
Nut Manager) will set up a management operating system whereby NARI will lease the pilot plant to a 
private  manager  selected  through  competitive  bidding,  who  will  agree  to  manage  the  plant  and  its 
operations  over  a  minimum  of  two  seasons.  This  will  enable  the  commercial  operation  of  the  plant 
with adequate resources and skills, for increased buying capacity from farmers, higher efficiency and 
generation of knowledge in view of a possible scaling up. The management agreement will include a 
business plan and will specify the modalities of partnering with the current ACIAR project so that the 
pilot plant can benefit from technical assistance and operate as a pilot, i.e. trial different scenarios for 
processing and marketing and ensure close monitoring and detailed documentation of achievements. 
IFAD will pay the operating costs of the pilot plant over two seasons. 
3. 
At  project  inception,  the  PMU  will  contract  an  international  consultant  who  will  draft  the  lease 
agreement  for  NARI’s  plant  (after  a  rapid  due  diligence  of  NARI’s  plant)  and  prepare  the  relevant 
documentation for the bidding process required to select the manager/management team for NARI’s 
the 
plant.  The  consultant  will  also  draft  a  set  of  reporting  documents 
manager/management team of NARI’s plant as well as s/he will elaborate financial projections based 
on technical and commercial assumptions from the current level of NARI’s plant production. Once the 
lease  agreement  and  management  contract  have  been  signed  (in  due  time  for  the  2018  galip  nut 
harvesting season), the selected manager/management team will manage the plant following private 
sector principles and will organize the galip nut supply chain.  
to  be  used  by 
24 Profit and loss statement and basic financial assumptions are based on detailed projections prepared by the 
University  of  the  Sunshine  Coast,  in  the  framework  of  ACIAR/NARI  project  ‘Enhancing  private  sector-led 
development of the Canarium industry in PNG’, February 2017. 
94 
Profit and Loss Statement2017201820192020RevenuesTesta-on kernel 7%MC packed and delivered307,795       554,031        1,108,062     3,077,951     Total Revenues307,795      554,031        1,108,062     3,077,951     ExpensesPurchase of raw materials75,000         135,000        270,000        750,000        Sub-total production costs75,000         135,000        270,000        750,000        Production staff salaries38,866         62,963           113,334        283,334        Management fees-               -                 -                 -                 Energy and water23,066         41,518           83,037           230,657        Freight44,504         80,107           160,214        445,038        Marketing50,000         50,000           50,000           50,000           Other running costs10,000         10,000           10,000           10,000           Depreciation on 300,000 Equipment60,000         48,000           38,400           30,720           Sub-total other operating costs226,436       292,588        454,984        1,049,750     Total Expenses301,436      427,588        724,984        1,799,750     Net result6,359           126,443        383,078        1,278,201      
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
4. 
The  lease  fees  will  be  calculated  on  (i)  the  estimated  value  of  the  equipment  in  the  current 
NARI’s  processing  unit  (estimated  at  PGK  300,000)  and  (ii)  the  net  profit  after  management  fees.  
Lease  fees  will  be  equal  to  10%  of  the  estimated  value  of  the  investment  and  a  decreasing 
percentage  of  the  net  profit  before management  fees  (20%,  15%  and  10%  respectively  for  the  first, 
second  and  third  years  of  operations).  The  lease  agreement  will  be  made  between  the  project  and 
NARI.  
The management fees will be calculated based on: (i) the turnover of the processing unit; and 
5. 
(ii) the net profit before management fees. Management fees will be equal to 10% of the turnover and 
50%  of  the  profit  before  management  fees  for  the  first  year  of  operations.  For  the  second  year  of 
operations,  the  management  fees  will  be  equal  to  5%  of  the  turnover  and  20%  of  the  profit.  It  is 
expected that at least 50% of the management fees will be paid from the company’s profit and not by 
the project as for the first year.  
6. 
The project will also finance the working capital of the processing unit. During the first year of 
operations, the project will finance 100% of the nuts to be purchased by the processing unit as well as 
80% of the other operating costs. Cash inflows will only happen at the end of the processing season 
and  therefore  all  operating  expenses  need  to  be  financed  by  the  project.  For  the  second  year,  it  is 
expected that the cash flow will enable the financing of 50% of the volume of nuts to be purchased, as 
well  as  50%  of  the  other  operating  costs.  The  remaining  50%  will  still  need  to  be  financed  by  the 
project as the cash-flow generated by the first year of operations will not be sufficient.     
95 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Basic assumptions for the NARI’s current Galip Nut processing unit 
96 
Specifications2017201820192020Processing season daysNuts in pulpkg50,000         90,000           180,000        500,000        Tonnes testa-on 7%MC kernel recovedkg3,300           5,940             11,880           33,000           Production parametersunit2017201820192020unit cost2017201820192020Testa-on kernel 7%MC packed and deliveredkg3,300.00     5,940.00       11,880.00     33,000.00     PGK93.27     93.27     93.27     93.27     Production costsPurchase of Nut in pulp75,000.00   135,000.00   270,000.00   750,000.00   PGK35.00     35.00     35.00     35.00     Wages:PGKDepulp7,631.34     12,362.77     22,252.99     55,632.46     PGK2.88       2.59       2.33       2.10       Cracking17,574.81   28,471.19     51,248.14     128,120.35   PGK6.62       5.96       5.36       4.83       Drying, sorting, packing13,660.02   22,129.24     39,832.63     99,581.57     PGK5.15       4.63       4.17       3.75       Electrictiy12,467.96   22,442.33     44,884.67     124,679.63   PGK4.70       4.70       4.70       4.70       Gas6,233.98     11,221.17     22,442.33     62,339.81     PGK2.35       2.35       2.35       2.35       Water4,363.79     7,854.82       15,709.63     43,637.87     PGK1.64       1.64       1.64       1.64       Freight44,503.80   80,106.84     160,213.68   445,038.00   PGK13.49     13.49     13.49     13.49     Unit cost per kg of testa on product 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4: Detailed description 
Final kernel cost decomposition 
l
l
e
n
r
e
k
e
o
h
w
d
e
r
e
v
i
l
e
d
,
d
e
k
c
a
p
,
d
e
i
r
d
f
o
g
k
/
a
n
K
i
 140.00
 120.00
 100.00
 80.00
 60.00
 40.00
 20.00
 -
Gas
Electricity and gas
Freight
Drying, sorting, packing
Testa removal
Cracking
Depulp
Purchase
Min
2.00
8.37
2.44
1.44
4.22
2.61
28.26
97 
Max
10.00
17.44
15.11
13.82
23.52
8.34
43.52
Average (or
mid-value)
1.89
3.78
13.49
5.72
7.36
3.19
35.00
Breakdown of costs per kg of dried, sorted, packed, testa off kernel MinMaxAverage (or mid-value)Purchase28.26               43.52               35.00              Depulp2.61                 8.34                 3.19                 Cracking4.22                 23.52               7.36                 Testa removal1.44                 13.82               Drying, sorting, packing2.44                 15.11               5.72                 Freight8.37                 17.44               13.49              Electricity and gas2.00                 10.00               3.78                 Gas 1.89Water1.32Total49.34               131.74             71.75              MinMaxAverage (or mid-value)Purchase57%33%49%Depulp5%6%4%Cracking9%18%10%Testa removal3%10%0%Drying, sorting, packing5%11%8%Freight17%13%19%Electricity and gas4%8%5%Overhead0%0%3%Total49.34               131.74             71.75               
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed description 
Annex 4: Options for the Capitalisation of a Commercial Galip Nut Processing Plant 
1. 
Financing. If the independent assessment concludes that there is a viable business model for 
setting up a commercial galip nut processing plant, MVF will support the creation of a limited company 
by shares, which will have the galip nut processing plant (building and equipment) as assets. Ideally, 
the financing of the company should be twofold: equity and long-term financing. However, considering 
the uncertainty around the galip nut industry, its novelty in terms of marketing and commercialization, 
as  well  as  the  limited  experience  with  galip  nut  processing,  accessing  long-term  financing  from 
commercial banks might be a difficult challenge in the first years of operations. As a result, it has been 
considered that the company would be financed exclusively through its equity.  
2. 
Options. Several options for the capitalisation of the galip nut company are possible. In order 
to further promote Private Public Producers Partnerships (4Ps), the design mission has elaborated a 
scenario  that  includes  private  and  public  investors  as  well  as  integrates  galip  nut  producers  in  the 
capitalization  of  the  company.  For  the  latter,  in  the  long  term,  revenues  would  therefore  not  only 
derive  from  the  sale  of  nuts  to  the  processing  plant  but  also  from  the  dividends  distributed  by  the 
company.  Such  an  institutional  set-up  associated  with  a  buy-back  mechanism  for  smallholders  has 
already  been  successfully  implemented  by  IFAD  in  different  countries25.  Other  more  classical 
capitalisation schemes could also be implemented without any participation of galip nut producers.    
Along  the  first  option,  the  company’s  equity  would  be  subscribed  by  three  categories  of 
3. 
investors:  
  East  New  Britain  Development  Corporation:  ENBDC  is  the  commercial  arm  of East  New  Britain 
(ENB)  province  and  the  only  province-created  company  that  is  profitably  operated  and  has 
subsided over the  years. It has developed a range of activities, and is one of ENB major cocoa 
exporters. It is also a Lead Partner  with PPAP.  ENBDC has expressed its interest in supporting 
the  development  of  the  galip  nut  industry  and  in  participating  in  the  company’s  share  capital.  It 
could hold about 15% of the company’s shares; 
  Private  investors:    private  investors  will  be  scouted  through  commercial  banks  through  their 
investment department. For that  purpose,  CEFI, the  PMU  and the management team of NARI’s 
pilot  plant  (see  preparatory  phase)  will  prepare  a  one-page  documentation  with  the  main 
characteristics  of  the  investment  (amount,  potential  products  and  markets,  marketing  study  and 
market  positioning,  financial  projections  and  return  on  investment,  Board  representation, 
company’s social mandate), to be distributed by the banks to potential investors. These could be 
from the private or public sector. Private investors might own up to 51% of the company’s shares;  
  Galip  nut  growers  or  entities  representing  them  such  as  cooperatives:  since  galip  nut  growers 
have  limited  capacity  to  invest  in  the  company’s  equity,  the  project  will  finance  the  company’s 
shares on behalf of the growers. These shares would initially be held in trust by CEFI. Once the 
company would be profitable, dividends would be paid to shareholders. CEFI would keep 10% for 
itself and 90% would be distributed to galip nut growers/cooperatives in proportion of the amount 
of  nuts  supplied  to  the  plant.  A  percentage  of  the  dividends  paid  to  the  growers/cooperatives 
(50%) would be used to buy back shares held in trust by CEFI, until ownership would have been 
fully  transferred  to  growers/cooperatives.  Payments  made  by  growers/cooperatives  under  this 
buy-back  mechanism  would  be  kept  by  CEFI  and  used  to  subscribe  additional  shares  for  later 
recapitalisation.  
4. 
Percentages mentioned above are just estimated and would depend on the capacity of banks 
and investment companies to mobilise investors to capitalise the company.  Should private  investors 
not be interested in participating in the company’s equity up to the percentage considered above, the 
percentage  of  shares  held  by  CEFI/galip  nut  growers  would  be  increased.  In  another  words,  the 
project  would  complement  the  resources  injected  by  other  investors  to  ensure  the  financing  of  the 
entire investment.  
25 Including (not exclusive): Yemen (Economic Opportunities Programme, Fisheries Investment Project, Rural Growth Project 
and  YemenInvest  –  Rural  Employment  Programme),  Moldova  (Agriculture  Revitalization  Project),  Armenia  (North  West 
Agriculture Service Project and Agricultural Services Project), Mozambique (Pro Poor Value Chain Development in the Maputo 
and  Limpopo  Corridors),  Mauritania  (Projet  de  Développement  des  Filières  Inclusives),  Cambodia  (Accelerating  Inclusive 
Markets for Smallholder). 
99 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed description 
5. 
Grower  Support  Services.  The  project  will  inform  galip  nut  farmers  (most  of  whom  are  also 
cocoa  growers)  about  the  projected  venture  and  possible  modalities  of  participation.  MVF  will  then 
provide  assistance  to  best  organise  growers’  participation  in  the  company’s  capital  (as  individual 
shareholders,  or  as  cooperatives,  or  through  a  specifically  created  legal  entity)  and  will  provide 
capacity  building  so  that  growers/their  organisations  can  fully  exert  their  shareholders’  rights  and 
obligations. Capacity building and legal assistance will be provided by CEFI, which will hold shares in 
trust for farmers and will represent their interests for around 5 years. 
Galip  nut  partnerships  would  be  developed  to  provide  extension  services  to  farmers  for 
6. 
harvesting and processing, and for the establishment of a nut collection network, to operate alongside 
existing cocoa collection system, where feasible.  
100 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed description 
Annex 5 - Timeline for Sub-component 2.1 – Spot Improvements of Feeder roads 
101 
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Preparation activitiesPreparing Component 2.1Call 1 1Invitation2Consultation / responses3Field screening / confirmation4Cost / benefit ranking5Maintenance assessment6Recommendation / TEC appr7Negotiate / sign MoUs8Detailed design / bid docs9Procurement process10Award of contractsCall 2Call 3Implementation activitiesCall 11Works construction (28 lots)2Construction supervision3Set up maintenance regimesCall 2 (38 lots)Call 3 (30 lots)Year 1Year 3Year 4Year 5Year 6Year 2 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
Appendix 5:  
arrangements 
Background 
Central and decentralised government institutions  
DAL. The Department of Agriculture and Livestock is responsible for the development of policy 
1. 
and  provides  the  overall  guidance  on  the  development  sustainable  agriculture  and  livestock 
production in the country. Main constraints identified by the 2014 Functional and Expenditure Review 
of  DAL  and  Commodity  Boards  and  Agencies  include:  the  lack  of  statutory  powers  to  oversee  the 
action of the commodity boards and ensure service delivery in the provinces; up to 80% percent of the 
government’s appropriation to DAL and its affiliates goes to the recurrent budget with bulk  of it used 
for  salaries  and  allowances;  the  performance  of  extension  services  is  impaired  by  their  operation 
independently from DAL (under district authorities - see below), confusion over financial responsibility, 
inadequate funding support and long delays in funds reaching districts. 
FER  called  for  a  reorganisation  of  the  agriculture  institutional  framework,  with:  (i)  DAL 
2. 
refocusing on policy development and on the coordination and monitoring of policy implementation by 
commodity boards and provincial agencies; (ii) the creation of an Agriculture Investment Corporation 
to provide a funding  and  governance structure for the commodity  boards  and  agencies;  and (iii) the 
reorganisation  of  the  commodity  boards,  to  become  responsible  for  regulation,  farmer-driven 
research, business facilitation and the promotion of farmer-based SMEs. This includes the creation of 
a Food  and Grains Board  to be established through the merger of the Fresh  Produce Development 
Agency (FPDA) with the National Agriculture Research Institute (NARI), which would become the lead 
agency  for  the  food  and  grains  sector,  including  fresh  produce  as  well  as  alternative  crops  (which 
could cover galip nut). 
3. 
A  FER  Implementation  and  Advisory  Unit  (FIAU)  has  been  established  at  DAL  with  the 
objective  of  preparing  the  policy  and  institutional  framework  for  the  implementation  of  FER 
recommendations.  Two  legislative  bills  giving  the  sector  its  new  configuration  have  been  prepared: 
the  Agriculture  Administration  Adjustment  Act  and  of  the  Agricultural  Investment  Corporation  Act 
(AIC).  AIC  will  provide  a  funding  and  governance  structure  for  the  commodity  boards.  However  the 
recent closing of FIAU and upcoming elections cast vast uncertainty as to whether and one the new 
legislation will be passed and implemented.  
4. 
FPDA.  The  Fresh  Produce  Development  Agency  (FPDA)  provides  technical  and  market 
information  to  smallholder  farmers  and  other  key  players  in  the  horticulture  value  chain.  FPDA  also 
provides  mentoring,  agribusiness  advisory  and  support  services  and  post-harvest  handling  advice. 
The organisation  has  its headquarters  in Goroka with regional offices located  in Port Moresby, Lae, 
Kokopo and Mt. Hagen. FPDA’s vision is “Food and nutrition secure and prosperous communities in 
PNG”.  Its  mission  is  to  “Maximise  the  efficiency  and  productivity  of  female  and  male  farmers  and 
others  in  the  value  chain  to  enhance  development  of  a  commercially  and  economically  viable  and 
sustainable  horticulture  industry”.  FPDA’s  second  medium  term  plan  (2016-2020)  identifies  six 
thematic areas as summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1 – FPDA Programme Areas 
Thematic Programme Area 
Productivity Improvement 
Scaling of Production and Supply 
Marketing Systems 
Information  Management,  Communication  and 
Outreach 
Enabling Legal and Policy Environment 
Institutional Strengthening 
Programmes and Projects 
Research and Technology Development Programme 
Village Extension Worker Programme 
Potato Programme 
Bulb Onion Programme 
Value Chain Innovation Programme 
Information and Communication Programme 
ICT Project 
Policy Unit 
Administration  
Human Resources 
Business Development 
103 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
5. 
The FPDA Board oversees the functioning of the organisation. The management team consists 
of  the  General  Manager  and  three  Divisional  Managers.    FPDA  is  organised  into  three  divisions: 
Production  and  Value  Chains  Innovation  (PVCI),  Research,  Policy  and  Communication  (RPC)  and 
Corporate Affairs (CAD).  
6. 
FPDA’s  2016  budget  is  based  on  the  grants  appropriated  in  the  2016  national  government’s 
annual budget and supplemented by project funds from other external development partners such as 
ACIAR  (Australian  Centre  for  International  Agriculture  Research).  The  estimated  total  revenue  for 
2016 is PGK 9.1 million. The grants comprise PGK 6.7 million for recurrent expenditures and PGK 2.0 
million  for  capital  expenditures  towards  the  development  of  effective  value  chain  systems  and 
increased  supply  of  seed  potatoes.  The  balance  comes  from  other  sources  such  as  ACIAR.  FPDA 
accounts are audited by an international audit firm. The latest audit (2014 financial year) declared that 
the financial accounts fairly presented the agency’s situation and that they complied with International 
Financial Reporting Standards.  
7. 
FPDA  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  providing  market  driven  extension,  supporting  farmers 
throughout  the  country  to  grow  fresh  produce,  supplying  both  the  formal  and  informal  markets. 
Farmers  have  been  trained  to  shift  from  subsistence  to  commercial  farming  and  farming  as  a 
business,  using  innovative  extension  methods  based  on  model  farms  run  by  lead  farmers  or  village 
extension  workers (VEWs). Lead Farmers, farmer-traders and contact farmers are trained. Over the 
last five years FPDA has supported about 13,600 contact farmers. However, the resources available 
to FPDA mean that only a small percentage of farmers participate in these schemes at any one time. 
8. 
NARI.  The  National  Agriculture  Research  Institute  (NARI)  is  a  publicly  funded  research 
organisation  mandated  to  undertake  agriculture  research  and  development  on  food  crops,  alternate 
crops  and  livestock  breeding  and  management.  It  also  provides  services  related  to  resource 
management,  technical,  analytical  and  diagnostic  services  and  serves  as  the  data  and  information 
services hub for the agriculture sector. NARI  works primarily  with smallholder and semi-subsistence 
primary  producers  and  carries  out  adaptive  research  including  pest  and  disease  management  and 
post-harvest technology development and adoption. 
CEFI.  The  Centre  of  Excellence  for  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI)  was  created  under  the 
9. 
Association  Incorporation  Act  and  officially  launched  in  2013.  CEFI  is  endorsed  by  PNG’s  National 
Executive Council as the industry apex body for coordinating, advocating and monitoring all financial 
inclusion activities in PNG, CEFI is an independent entity, founded by the Bank of PNG (BNPG) as a 
spin-off  of  ADB-financed  Microfinance  Expansion  Project  (MEP).  CEFI  established  its  Governing 
Board, with the Governor of the BPNG being the ex-officio Chairman. While the founding members of 
CEFI are the BPNG and the Department of National Planning and Monitoring, the Board also includes 
representatives  from  the  Ministry  of  Community  Development,  the  Ministry  of  Treasury,  the  Savings 
and Loans Societies Federation, the Institute of Bankers, the SME Corporation and a representative 
from the microfinance industry.  
10.  CEFI/MEP  has  developed  a  financial  education  and  literacy  program  now  adopted  by  all 
financial institutions. It has also participated in the drafting of the Financial Inclusion National Policy of 
the GoPNG in close collaboration with UNCDF and it bridges the gap between GoPNG and financial 
institutions  to  ensure  effective  implementation  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  National  Policy.  CEFI  also 
participated  in  the  definition  of  targets  to  measure  progress  made  against  financial  inclusion  policy 
and  activities.  CEFI  currently  has  a  total  of  12  staff  including  long  term  international  technical 
assistance, and 7 certified financial education/literacy trainers located in different provinces.  
11.  A rapid due diligence exercise carried out during project design has confirmed that CEFI has a 
demonstrated  staff  capacity  that  has  been  strengthened  through  different  donors  and  programs, 
which has resulted in an effective capacity to implement and monitor project rural finance activities. All 
of  the  project  activities  planned  to  be  implemented  by  CEFI  are  within  CEFI’s  usual  scope  of  work: 
CEFI  has  already  provided  financial  literacy  and  education  training  courses  to  more  than  150,000 
people, is closely working with all 4 tiers of the PNG financial sector to improve their financial services 
and make them more responsive to clients’ needs, is participating to financial institutions staff training, 
and  is  also  providing  assistance  and  support  to  financial  institutions  in  the  development  of  digital 
money and other mechanisms to increase their outreach. However, the rapid due diligence has also 
identified the necessity for CEFI to recruit additional staff in order to efficiently absorb the additional 
workload  resulting  from  the  implementation  of  project  activities,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
management  and  monitoring  of  the  cash  credit  guarantee  deposits,  and  the  management  and 
104 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
monitoring  of the  incentive grants that  will be extended  within  the project-supported partnerships. In 
that  respect,  the  project  will  finance  the  cost  of  three  additional  staff  (one  manager  and  two 
assistants),  their  operating  costs  and  well  as  the  cost  related  to  their  capacity  building  and  training. 
These additional staff will  come under the  direct management  of CEFI’s Director and  will  be  vested 
with the full responsibility to implement project activities.    
12.  Local  governments.  The  decentralisation  policy  adopted  at  independence  empowered 
provincial  governments  by  transferring  development  functions  and  financial  resources  to  them.  Ever 
since, extension has been shared by provincial governments and national boards/agencies. In 1995, 
the  Organic  Law  on  Provincial  and  Local  Level  Governments  recognised  the  districts  as  the  focal 
point for local development planning and service delivery. According to NADP, institutional capacity to 
deliver services at the local level is generally poor. New perspectives are open with the allocation of 
sizeable  annual  block  grants  to  local  governments  by  the  Provincial,  District  and  Local  Level 
Government Service Improvement Programme (PSIP and DSIP. The transparent and effective use of 
these  resources  and  their  impact  on  rural  livelihoods  is  however  contingent  on  the  existence  of 
sufficient  capacities  at  the  various  levels  of  local  government,  in  an  overall  context  of  ineffective 
delivery  systems,  abuse  and  clientelism,  and  weak  absorption  capacity.  Furthermore,  the  financial 
crisis  that  is  hitting  PNG  as  a  result  of  the  commodity  price  fall  has  affected  the  regular  and  full 
allocation of earmarked resources under PSIP/DSIP. 
Private sector organisations 
13.  Farmers’  organisations.  While  farmers’  clusters  are  a  common  conduit  for  the  provision  of 
extension  services,  most  remain  without  any  formal  structure  or  mandate.  Cooperatives  established 
after  the  colonial  period  were  often  undermined  by  management  problems  and  lacked  the  technical 
skills and resources to support members in interacting with the markets. However recent experience 
with  newly  formed  farmers’  associations  and  cooperatives,  often  benefitting  from  some  sort  of 
external support, shows that they can be successful and gain farmers’ interest where they are able to 
deliver services to members. At the national level, PNG Women in Agriculture (15,000 members), the 
Smallholder  Coffee  Growers’  Association  (14,000)  and  the  PNG  Growers’  Association  channel  the 
views  of  their  members  to  national  stakeholders  and  policy  makers,  through  the  Rural  Industries 
Council  or  more  informally.  Farmer-owned  limited  liability  companies  constitute  a  new  emerging 
model  that  is  well  adapted  to  attract  public  resources  for  the  financing  of  heavy  equipment  such  as 
storage  facilities  through  capitalisation.  Finally,  landowner  companies  are  set  up  to  manage  grant 
resources  from  extractive  industries  and  invest  them in  productive  areas. While  a  few  have  made  it 
into larger, commercially-managed businesses, the majority struggle with mismanagement and a lack 
of capacities. 
14.  Agribusiness. PNG’s economy is dominated by a large informal sector - only about 15% of the 
population has formal employment. In the agriculture sector, aside from 4,500 cooperatives (of which 
the  number  engaged  in  business  is  believed  to  be  considerably  less)  only  1,500  agribusiness  are 
legally registered. Formal business development is constrained by the low productivity of labour and 
limited  education,  particularly  in  the  rural  areas;  poor  communication  networks  and  low  access  to 
costly electricity, contributing to high production costs; difficulties in registering and acquiring land, of 
which 97% is held under customary tenure; and limited access to financing, in particular for start-ups. 
Women seeking to set up and operate formal businesses are further disadvantaged, particularly with 
regard to access to customary land and to finance, although they constitute an untapped population of 
economically  active  micro-entrepreneurs.  Security  concerns  and  poor  law  enforcement  further 
increase the costs and risks of doing business. PNG ranks 113 out of 189 countries in the 2013 Doing 
Business Index. 
15.  Financial sector. The financial sector consists of four tiers: (i) four commercial banks; (ii) eight 
microfinance companies mainly working with the public sector; (iii) four licensed micro-banks; and (iv) 
22  savings  and  loans  societies,  the  majority  of  which  are  institution-based  (employees,  teachers, 
medical  staff…).  It  is  estimated  that  only  15%  of  the  population  have  access  to  any  type  of  formal 
financial  services,  and  numbers  are  even  lower  in  the  rural  areas,  or  for  women  and  youth.  The 
remote  terrain,  lack  of  transport  infrastructure,  insecurity  and  associated  high  transaction  costs 
contribute  to  confining  most  financial  institutions  to  townships.  Furthermore,  inadequate  financial 
products  and  perceived  risks  of  dealing  with  rural  producers  and  businesses  leave  the  rural  sector 
almost unbanked. However, improving technology and regulatory environment open up opportunities 
for  the  development  of  new  services.  In  particular,  with  the  liberalisation  of  telecommunications,  the 
105 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
number  of  mobile  phone  users  dramatically  increased  (reaching  about  46%  in  2013)  and  several 
mobile phone operators partnering with financial institutions offer a range of services, including cash 
deposits  and  micro  loans.  The  PNG  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  (2014-2015)  aims  at  reaching  one 
million  more  unbanked  and  underserved  low-income  people,  50%  of  whom  will  be  women,  through 
financial education and an innovative use of technology for scaling-up access to financial services.  
Overall Organisation 
16.  The  proposed  project  implementation  structure  rests  on  the  current  organisation  of  the 
agriculture  sector,  with  DAL  as  the  project  executing  agency,  delegating  implementation  to  FPDA. 
Key  FER  recommendations/provisions  of  the  draft  Agriculture  Administration  Adjustment  Act  are 
already reflected in project design, including the linkages between commodity boards, provincial and 
district  governments  and  the  development  of  farmer-oriented,  market-driven,  pluralistic  extension 
services.  Another  key  feature  of  the  implementation  framework  is  that  it  is  based  on  public-private 
partnerships:  while  the  government  retains  overall  implementation  responsibility,  private  sector 
players (fresh produce and galip nut buyers, but also financial institutions and business development 
service providers) will have a key role in providing village farmers with support services and access to 
markets. FPDA is already working closely with market players along the value chain as well as private 
service  providers,  with  a  view  to  reach  out  to  larger  numbers  of  farmers.  MVF  will  enable  FPDA  to 
leverage  its  good  relations  with  leading  buyers  by  supporting  partnerships  between  village  farmers 
and  a  wider  range  of  buyers  of  different  sizes  and  capacities  and  by  connecting  them  with  financial 
institutions. 
17.  The  implementation  of  Sub-component  2.2  –  Financial  Inclusion  will  be  entrusted  to  CEFI, 
along a MoU that will be negotiated and signed with the PMU. 
18.  The implementation set-up aims at strengthening the capacities of FPDA to steer the inclusive 
development  of  the  fresh  produce  sector  and  to  provide  technical  advisory  and  market  support 
services in line with its mandate. Therefore, the Project Management Unit (PMU) is not configured as 
a  self-standing  organisation  but  is  embedded  into  FPDA  and  geared  to  work  closely  with  FPDA 
divisions.  
19.  Against  this  background,  the  main  features  of  MVF  implementation  setting  are  currently  as 
follows:  
  DAL is the project executing agency that is responsible for project oversight and coordination; 
  FPDA is the project implementing agent with overall responsibility for project implementation; 
  Provincial teams led by FPDA current staff and staffed with seconded District Agriculture Officers 
will be responsible for field implementation of project activities; 
  Provincial  governments  will  co-finance  project  activities  and  facilitate  project  implementation  at 
the provincial level, through the appointment of fully dedicated Focal Points;  
  District governments will have a similar role at district level; 
  A Project Steering Committee gathering the representatives of main stakeholders involved in MVF 
implementation will provide overall guidance and oversight;  
  An  independent  Technical  Appraisal  Committee  will  be  responsible  for  assessing  partnership 
proposals as well as infrastructure sub-projects, and will bring transparency and objectivity in the 
selection process; 
  Fresh  Produce/Galip  Nut  Multi-Stakeholder  Platforms  will  be  established  at 
the 
national/provincial/district  levels,  and  will  provide  a  venue  to  discuss  sector  challenges  and 
constraints. Multi-stakeholders’ platforms will also be involved in the preparation of Annual Work 
Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPB),  as  well  as  in  the  identification  of  priority  feeder  roads  for  project-
financed spot improvements; 
  A  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  embedded  in  FPDA  will  assist  in  carrying  out  project 
implementation responsibilities; 
  CEFI  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  activities  related  to  financial  inclusion,  by  virtue  of  a 
MoU signed with the PMU. 
106 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
20.  The responsibilities of each of the implementation stakeholders are further described below.  
Key Implementing Institutions 
21.  DAL. As the project executing agency, DAL will be responsible for overall project oversight and 
coordination,  under  the  direct  authority  of  DAL  Secretary.  This  would  include  the  following 
responsibilities:  
 
chair the Project Steering Committee;  
  approve project technical and financial reports prepared by FPDA with PMU support;  
  approve Withdrawal Applications prepared by FPDA with PMU support, for submission to IFAD;  
  ensure  coordination  between  MVF  and  other  relevant  initiatives  in  the  agriculture  sector  and 
facilitate project access to knowledge generated by such initiatives;  
 
facilitate  policy  dialogue  and  support  policy  measures  requested/prepared  by  MVF-related 
structures.  
22.  FPDA.  As  MVF  implementing  agency,  FPDA  will  be  responsible  for  project  management  and 
coordination of government and non-government agencies participating in the project. FPDA General 
Manager  will  have  overall  responsibility  for  project  implementation.  However,  line  responsibility  for 
day-to-day  project implementation  will be delegated to the PMU Coordinator. This would involve the 
following: 
  ensure  the  management  and  timely  implementation  of  project  activities,  with  support  from  the 
PMU (see below);  
  prepare  Annual Work  Programs  and  Budgets  (AWPBs),  jointly  with  the  PMU,  for  submission  to 
the Project Steering Committee; 
  ensure  the  integration  of  project  activities  within  FPDA  overall  programme  of  activities  and  the 
coordination of project activities with other FPDA initiatives; 
 
 
support private sector participation in project activities and in multi-stakeholders’ platforms  
support provincial and district governments’ participation in project implementation, the fulfilment 
of their responsibilities and the channelling of resources as planned; 
 
liaise with DAL. 
23.  Provincial  teams.  Provincial  Teams  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  day-to-day  project 
activities  in  their  respective  provinces.  Each  Provincial  Team  will  be  headed  by  an  FPDA  middle 
manager  and  staffed  with  two  district  extension  staff.  Provincial  Teams  will  be  under  the  direct 
supervision of the PMU Coordinator with regard to the implementation of project activities, and overall 
supervision of the FPDA General Manager. FPDA will open provincial offices in Simbu and Jiwaka to 
accommodate  the  Provincial  Teams,  for  which  MVF  includes  a  small  provision  for  setting  up  and 
refurbishment  of  office.  Every  team  will  have  transport  equipment  (one  4-wheel  drive  car  and  one 
motorcycle per district officer), office equipment and an allocation to cover operational costs, including 
travel  allowances.  District  officers  will  be  selected  based  on  a  competitive  process,  which  will  be 
organised  by  FPDA  with  support  from  the  PMU  and  in  cooperation  with  provincial  and  relevant 
district26  governments.  The  final  selection  of  district  officers  will  be  gender-balanced.  To  expand 
district exposure to project activities and increase the number of district officers that could get hands-
on experience, the team of seconded district officers will be renewed so that by the end of the project, 
all districts within a given target province will have had at least one district officer participating in the 
Provincial  Team.  In  East  New  Britain,  activities  will  be  reduced  and  there  will  therefore  be  only  one 
Galip Nut Manager, who will be placed under the direct authority of the PMU. 
24.  Provincial Teams will in particular be responsible for the following in their respective provinces:  
  organise  information  campaigns,  promote  the  calls  for  expression  of  interest  and  provide 
information on the project; 
 
facilitate the preparation of full partnership proposals, with support from a Business Development 
Service Provider (BDSP);  
26 Districts whose territories include production areas. 
107 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  make  knowledge  available  to  fresh  produce  players  and  partnerships,  including  with  regard  to 
market opportunities, access to inputs, access to financial services;  
 
facilitate the implementation of the family-based approach and the implementation of MVF GESI 
strategy, including by organising and monitoring activities to be  implemented at community level 
by service providers, in collaboration with the GESI Officer; 
  provide M&E training to Lead Partners and VEWs, facilitate Lead Partners’ reporting and monitor 
partnership  implementation,  including  that  all  the  terms  of  the  partnership  agreement  are  being 
complied with;  
 
support the organisation of annual partnership reviews; 
  prepare and facilitate the meetings of the district/provincial MSPs; 
 
liaise  with  provincial  Divisions  of  Primary  Industry  (DPI)  and  with  district  governments  and 
facilitate their participation and resource mobilisation; 
  ensure the M&E of all project activities in the province, in collaboration with partnerships.  
25.  Province and district governments will co-finance project activities with resources from their 
regular  budgets  or  PSIP/DSIP  resources  earmarked  for  economic  activities  (see  Appendix  9),  or  by 
seconding district staff and paying for their salary. DPIs and district agriculture services will facilitate 
project implementation  at  provincial  level and district level. Focal Points will be designated by every 
participating province/district. 
Project Oversight and Advice 
26.  Project  Steering  Committee.  A  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  be  set  up  at  the 
national level to provide overall guidance and oversight, to ensure that MVF programming is aligned 
on  national  sector  priorities,  to  offer  a  venue  for  sharing  MVF  good  practices  and  for  channelling 
policy issues to the appropriate policy making bodies. The PSC will also approve annual AWPBs and 
annual  progress  and  financial  reports.  It  will  be  chaired  by  DAL  Secretary  and  will  include 
representatives  from  (not  exhaustive):  the  Department  of  National  Planning  and  Monitoring,  the 
Department  of  Finance,  the  Department  of  Treasury,  the  Department  of  Implementation  and  Rural 
Development, the SME Corporation, NARI, the Provincial Governments, the Central Bank, the Rural 
Industries  Council,  the  PNG  Fresh  Produce  Association,  the  PNG  Galip  Nut  Association,  the  PNG 
Growers  Association,  representatives  of  co-financing  development  partners,  PPAP,  CEFI  and  ADB-
financed  Business  Investment  Facility.  The  PMU  Liaison  Officer  based  in  DAL  will  provide  the 
Secretariat to the PSC. 
27.  Technical  Appraisal  Committee.  An  independent  Technical  Appraisal  Committee  (TAC)  will 
be  set  up  to  appraise  partnership  proposals,  rank  them  and  provide  a  recommendation  for  their 
financing,  prior  to  their  approval  by  FPDA  Board.  TAC  composition  for  each  round  of  calls  for 
expression of interest  will  include four persons  with competences in technical, economic, social and 
environment  skills.  All  TAC  members  will  be  individuals  with  an  established  reputation  for  their 
knowledge of the sector and their integrity. 
28.  Fresh Produce/Galip Nut Multi-Stakeholder Platforms. Multi-Stakeholder Platforms (MSPs) 
will  gather  fresh  produce/galip  nut  value  chain  stakeholders  (representatives  of  producers,  buyers, 
financial  institutions,  transport  companies,  agri-dealers,  public  and  private  service  providers)  at 
national,  provincial  and  district  level  (see  Component  3.1).  They  will  provide  a  venue  to  develop 
dialogue and linkages within the value chain, discuss MVF achievements, and value chain challenges 
and bottlenecks, agree on measures required to lift them, identify policy gaps and provide guidance to 
Provincial Team/FPDA. Multi-stakeholders’ platforms will also be involved in the preparation of Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), as well as in the identification of policy studies (Component 2). 
Project Management Team 
29.  Responsibilities.  The  PMU  will  assist  FPDA 
implementation 
responsibilities  and  will  be  fully  accountable  for  the  performance  of  project  implementation  and  the 
use of funds. It will have the following responsibilities:  
in  carrying  out  MVF 
108 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  orientation  for  developing  and  implementing  the  project  strategy  to  ensure  that  all  project 
implementation  partners  develop  activities  along  a  common,  coherent  approach  in  line  with  the 
Project Design Report; 
 
financial  and  administrative  management  of  project  resources  in  line  with  the  Loan  Agreement 
and  IFAD  rules.  This  will  also  include:  (i)  the  management  of  project  accounts  and  their  timely 
replenishment; (ii) submission of required financial reports; and (iii) the organisation of annual and 
final independent audits of all project accounts as per IFAD Loan Agreement; 
  planning  of  project  activities  and  the  preparation  of  consolidated  AWPBs,  building  on  a 
participatory process involving MSPs and the Provincial Teams; 
 
contracting  and  procurement  of  project-related  services  and  supplies  in  accordance  with  IFAD 
Loan Agreement and IFAD rules. This will also include: (i) the preparation of annual procurement 
plans, and (ii) the monitoring of the implementation of service providers’ contracts; 
 
coordination of project activities with the various project partners;  
  M&E and KM in relation to all activities; 
  promotion of inclusive approaches and mainstreaming of targeting and gender requirements in all 
of the project activities in accordance with the GESI Strategy and Implementation Plan.  
30.  Composition. The PMU will be based in Goroka at FPDA new premises, with the exception of 
the Liaison Officer, who will be based in Port Moresby, within DAL premises. The PMU will comprise 
the staff indicated in Table 2. Succinct job descriptions are included in Attachment 4.  
Table 2 – PMU Staff  
Goroka 
1 PMU Coordinator 
1 Production and Value Chain System Manager 
1 Infrastructure Engineer 
1 Policy Development Officer  
1 Senior M&E/KM Officer 
1 MIS Content Manager 
1 GESI Officer 
1 Financial and Administration Manager   
1 Procurement Officer 
1 Accountant 
1 Office Assistant  
2 Drivers 
Port Moresby (based at DAL) 
1 MVF Liaison Officer 
1 IFAD Liaison Officer 
Mount Hagen, Kurumul, Kundiawa, Goroka, Lae 
1 Provincial Team Manager (paid by FPDA) 
2 seconded District Agriculture Officers (paid by districts) 
1 M&E Officer 
Kokopo (based at FPDA) 
1 Galip Nut Manager 
31.  Project Expeditor. A Project Expeditor will be fielded for 6 months at project onset to assist the 
PMU  in  setting  up  all  of  the  administrative  and  financial  management  procedures,  assist  in  the 
preparation  of  the  first  AWPB  and  Procurement  Plan,  expedite  compliance  to  pre-conditions  to  the 
release  of  the  first fund  disbursements,  assist  in  the preparation  of  the  PIM  and  to  provide  capacity 
building to the PMU, with a view to support fast project start-up. Terms of reference are in Attachment 
3. 
Service Providers 
32.  Service  providers  will  be  hired  to  implement  specific  packages  of  activities  that  go  beyond 
FPDA  competences  or  capacities.  CEFI  has  already  been  pre-identified  and  will  be  responsible  for 
implementing  project  activities  related  to  Financial  inclusion  under  Component  2.  Implementation 
responsibilities  will  be  detailed  in  an  MoU,  which  will  be  signed  between  the  PMU,  CEFI  and  DAL. 
CEFI  will  also  lead  the  consortium  that  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  the  family-based 
109 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
approach  and  financial  education,  which  it  will  form  together  with  an  international  NGO  with 
experience in household-based methodologies in the PNG context.  
33.  All other service providers will be hired based on competitive bidding processes.  
34.  All service providers’ contracts will stipulate clear deliverables with a timeframe and quantified 
expected  outputs/outcomes,  and  they  will  specify  responsibilities  with  regard  to  monitoring  and 
reporting,  including  the  information  of  progress  indicators  as  set  forth  in  the  contract.  Terms  of 
reference  for  service  providers  will  require  gender-balanced  teams  with  prior  experience  of  gender 
mainstreaming and social inclusion, and that contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target 
and indicators. 
110 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 1 – FPDA Organisational Chart 
111 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 2 – PMU embedded in FPDA 
112 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 3 - Project Expeditor Terms of Reference 
Qualifications  &  Experience:  Preferably  a  higher  degree  in  economics,  agricultural  economics, 
management or business administration; practical experience of at least 10 years in project  financial 
management,  planning,  accounting  procedures,  procurement  and  monitoring  and  evaluation 
procedures  in  internationally  financed  projects;  a  good  knowledge  of  computer  applications 
(especially of accounting software) in the above related matters. Excellent senses of relationship and 
negotiations skills. Fluent in English (reading, writing and speaking). 
Special  Qualifications:  Knowledge  of  IFAD  finances,  procurement  and  accounting  procedures. 
Knowledge  of  the  PNG  legislation  with  regard  to  donor-financed  project  financial  management  and 
procurement legislation would be an advantage. 
Location: At MVF PMU in Goroka, with travels as required to Port Moresby and target provinces. 
Duration: Assignment of up to a maximum of 6 months. 
Reporting: To MVF Project Manager. 
General  Objective:  To  assist  the  PMU  in  securing  an  effective  and  smooth  project  start-up  and  in 
setting up all of the project management procedures and tools.  
Detailed Tasks: The Project Expeditor will be responsible for undertaking the following tasks, in close 
cooperation with the Programme Management Team and FPDA: 
  Prepare  draft advertisements for the recruitment of PMU staff for review and approval by FPDA 
and  IFAD;  prepare  interview  guidelines  to  be  used  by  the  interview  panel,  including  evaluation 
and  selection  criteria  for  each  post,  and  propose  the  composition  of  the  interview  panel,  for 
approval  by  FPDA  and  subsequent  no  objection  by  IFAD;  and  prepare  PMU  recruitment  to  be 
submitted to the GoPNG and IFAD no objection;  
  Organise the selection process for district staff on the Provincial Teams; assist the PMU in setting 
up the Provincial Teams and in devising procedures for communication and supervision; 
 
In  collaboration  with  relevant  PMU  staff,  prepare  all  contracts  and  MoUs  with  main 
implementation project partners and service providers (including CEFI), establish PMU office and 
launch the procurement of office equipment and vehicles for the PMU and the Provincial Teams; 
  Train  the  PMU  staff  and  other  interested  FPDA  staff  dealing  with  contract  management  on: 
various  methods  of  procurement  and  selection  of  service  providers;  technical  and  financial 
evaluation  of  bids;  performance-based  contract  models  to  be  used;  and  monitoring  of  contract 
execution; 
  Assist the PMU in preparing the first AWPB and the revised procurement plan, and train relevant 
PMU staff in the preparation of these documents.  
  Set  up  the  account  management  and  financial  reporting  system  together  with  the  Financial  and 
Administrative  Manager,  using  appropriate  accounting  software  and  in  accordance  with 
established international practices and IFAD and GoPNG requirements. 
  Train PMU and Provincial Team staff in project accounting, disbursement, financial reporting and 
procurement; 
  Assist the Financial  and  Administrative  Manager  in setting up project  accounts  and  in  preparing 
withdrawal applications and SOEs (Statements of Expenditures); 
  Provide  advice  for  the  finalisation  of  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  Finance  and 
Administrative Manual; 
  Assist the PMU in preparing and organising the project start-up workshop; 
  Prepare  the  Framework  for  Good  Governance,  including  an  Internal Code  of  Conduct  to  be 
signed  by  all  PMU  staff,  and a  Code  of  Business  Ethics  to  be  signed  by  all  partners  and 
beneficiaries of MVF investments and activities. 
113 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 4: Terms of Reference for PMU staff 
Project Coordinator (PC) 
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  six  years;  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory. 
Duty  Station:  Based  in  FPDA  Goroka,  with  regular  visits  to  the  project  sites  as  required  for 
monitoring, reporting and coordination. 
Qualifications and Experience 
A higher  degree  in agricultural  economics, economics, business administration, forestry,  agriculture, 
public  administration  or  related  discipline  relevant  to  MVF  with  sound  knowledge  of  contemporary 
issues in the rural economy of PNG and natural resource management.  A minimum of five years at a 
senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution,  the  private  sector  or  an  international  organization,  with 
proven  skills  in  the  management  and  coordination  of  internationally  financed  development 
programmes. 
The  candidate  would  be  expected  to  have  a  creative,  energetic  but  pragmatic  approach  to  problem 
solving and an appreciation of the respective roles of the public and private sectors in rural economic 
development and natural resource management.  Computer literacy is requisite and good command 
of spoken and written English is essential. 
Job  DescriptionThe  Project  Coordinator  will  be  responsible  for  coordinating  and  managing  the 
project  and  for  delivering  project  expected  outcomes,  under  theoversight  of  the  FPDA  General 
Manager.  The  PC  will  lead  the  PMU  and  will  ensure  that  it  works  in  close  collaboration  and 
coordination  with  FPDA  heads  of  departments  and  key  technical  and  administrative  staff.  This  will 
include the following specific duties: 
  Project development: 
- 
- 
providing orientations for the development of the project strategy and methodology, to ensure 
that  all  project  implementation  partners  develop  activities  along  a  common,  coherent 
approach in line with the Project Design Report; 
guiding  the  development  of  the  most  appropriate  implementation  tools  and  management 
methods  to  ensure  project  performance,  in  accordance  with  national  policies  and  with  the 
financing agreement; 
- 
-      ensuring  the  promotion  of  inclusive  approaches  and  mainstreaming  of  targeting  and  gender 
requirements  in  all  of  the  project  activities  in  accordance  with  the  GESI  Strategy  and 
Implementation Plan. 
assisting FPDA in building capacities for project implementation and coordination, monitoring 
value  chain  performance  and  business  model  development  and  communicating  with  value 
chain stakeholders;  
ensuring that project activities are developed in coordination with Multi-stakeholder Platforms 
and ensure that key value chain stakeholders and government institutions fully participate in 
the process;  
ensuring coordination and team working of the PMU staff, local actors and project partners; 
securing synergies between project components to maximise their impact. 
- 
- 
- 
  Project implementation: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
supervising  the  implementation  of  project  activities  in  accordance  with  the  financing 
agreement,  the  decisions  of  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  Technical  Appraisal 
Committee and with the recommendations of supervision and review missions; 
supervising  the  preparation,  negotiation  and  oversight  of  memoranda  of  understanding, 
agreements and other contracts with project partners and services providers; 
ensuring and overseeing the implementation of the GESI Strategy and Action Plan; 
lead the planning of project activities and the preparation of consolidated AWPBs, building on 
a participatory process involving MSPs and the Provincial Teams; 
preparing progress and thematic reports; 
114 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
- 
- 
- 
- 
identifying  areas  which  require  support  from  external  consultants,  and  leading  their 
recruitment 
guiding the efforts of consultants, experts and contractors towards the realisation of planned 
project outputs and evaluating their performance; 
leading the design and operationalisation of the Project Implementation Manual; 
liaising  with  IFAD  on  project  implementation  issues,  and  facilitate  and  participate  in  regular 
supervision of project activities. 
  Project M&E/KM: 
- 
- 
- 
overseeing the setting up process and effective operation of the M&E/KM system;  
ensuring the solid internal use of the M&E/KM system; 
ensuring the timely preparation of progress and financial reports. 
  Project  external  relations,  including  the  coordination  of  activities  with  other  projects  pursuing 
similar objectives within PNG;  
  Project administrative management: 
- 
- 
reviewing  and  approving  pre-selection  of  project  partners,  bidding  documents, 
descriptions and terms of reference for PMU staff and external services providers;  
coordinating  the  contract  administration  of  the  service  providers/specialists  hired  for 
implementation and assess their performance on a regular basis; 
job 
-  managing and motivating PMU staff; 
-  maintaining  internal  transparency  for  the  most  important  technical  and  project  management 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
decisions through regular meetings with PMU staff; 
securing the submission of a detailed expenditure report on quarterly advance payments; 
ensuring timely endorsement of Withdrawal Applications by DAL and submit them to Treasury 
and IFAD; 
coordinating  the  preparation  of  Annual  Procurement  Plans,  in  coordination  with  the 
preparation of AWPBs; 
executing the approved budgets, and ensuring payments; 
ensuring  the  completion  of  the  procurement  process  and  full  compliance  with  GoPNG 
procurement guidelines consistent with FPDA and IFAD procurement guidelines; 
ensuring  proper  use  and  conservation  of  project  assets,  in  line  with  the  national  legislation 
and financial agreements; 
ensuring  transparent  and  efficient  financial  management  of  project  fund  in  compliance  with 
the loan conditions and IFAD rules and procedures 
conducting  project  completion  and  loan  closing  activities  in  compliance  with  the  Loan 
conditions. 
115 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Finance and Administrative Manager (FAM) 
Duration  of  assignment:  Up  to  six  years,  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty station: Based in FPDA Goroka, with visits to project sites as required for monitoring, reporting 
and coordination. 
Qualifications and experience 
An  acceptable  accounting  and  finance  qualification  (BSc,  Association  of  Chartered  Certified 
Accountants or last stage of Association of Accounting Technicians), with at least five year experience 
at  a  senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution  and/or  the  private  sector,  with  proven  skills  in  the 
internationally-financed  development 
financial  management  and  procurement  aspects  of 
programmes. 
The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting practices, finance 
and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting software would be required. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job description 
The FAM is responsible for the management of project accounts in line with GoV financial regulations 
and IFAD disbursement procedures and reporting.  S/he would report directly to the PC. 
With regards to Financial Management, operating within a computerized environment, the FAM would 
perform the following duties: 
  ensure  disbursement  process  and  documentation  in  accordance  with  the  PIM  and  Finance  and 
Administration  Manual,  consistent  with  GoPNG  financial  regulations  and  IFAD  disbursement 
handbook; 
  manage the computerized accounting system and ensure daily backup; 
 
 
report  on  a  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  basis,  identifying  areas  of  divergence  from  projected 
cash flows; 
implement robust internal financial control systems and policies to minimize the risks of fraud or 
errors in the financial statements and any misuse of funds; 
  ensure timely and accurate preparation of Statements of Expenditures; 
 
coordinate and assemble the budgetary information required for the preparation of Annual Work 
Plans & Budgets; 
  ensure timely preparation of financial reports including comparison of actual expenditure against 
AWPB by components and by categories; 
  prepare accounts for external auditors and follow up on any audit queries/management letters; 
  ensure compliance with operating procedures as defined in the project documents, including IFAD 
guidelines; 
 
keep accurate and up-to-date records and documents in respect of all resources received by the 
project and any expenditure incurred with the funds made available; 
  ensure that all expenditures are in conformity with provisions of the project AWPBs. 
With regards to the administrative tasks and responsibilities, the FAM would perform the following: 
  manage  and  handle  staff  matters  including  recruitment,  selection,  contracting  and  performance 
appraisal of staff; 
116 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
 
facilitate the mobilisation and orientation of any new project staff, either short or long-term; 
  establish  and  assist  an  agreed  staff  back-up  system  for  times  of  illness  or  absence  from  the 
office; 
  develop and implement performance appraisal process and formats for the project staff; 
  assist in the identification and contracting of external service providers; 
  ensure  that  the  contracts  of  all  staff  and  service  providers  under  the  project  are  implemented 
properly in accordance with the terms provided therein; 
 
conduct  annual  review  of  the  existing  compensation  and  benefits  package  in  order  to  attract, 
retain and develop qualified and experienced staff; 
  maintain a record of project staff official movements; 
  assist project staff with all travel arrangements; 
  manage, organise and implement training for all project staff at the central level; 
 
contribute to the preparation and timely delivery of AWPBs and Annual Procurement Plans; 
  establish a system that records systematically all training undertaken by the  project.  Maintain a 
library  of  all  training  materials  prepared  under  the  project,  in  collaboration  with  the  M&E/KM 
Officer.  Ensure the filing system is maintained and the protection and security of office files; 
  be responsible for the upkeep of the premises and the availability of office supplies; 
  work with an information technology company to ensure email and internet security protocols are 
established,  and  that  all  electronic  data  relating  to  project  activities  is  securely  managed  under 
central control; 
 
keep  a  fixed  asset  register  with  an  identification  number  affixed  to  each  asset,  description  and 
location of asset and the responsible staff for the asset; and ensure that the receipt of each asset 
is acknowledged; 
  assist  in  carrying  out  procurement  functions  for  the  project  in  line  with  current  regulations,  with 
implementing agencies providing necessary technical specifications, bills of quantities and  terms 
of  reference;  and  coordinate  with  the  Procurement  Officer  for  the  delivery  and  receipt  of  fixed 
assets and supplies and certification of receipt by the Project Coordination and units concerned; 
  assist the Project Coordinator in organizing a national  multi-stakeholder  workshop to launch the 
Project and other training activities in terms of organization, logistics and supplies; 
  maintain vehicles, equipment and furniture and arrange for the insurance of fixed assets; 
  establish and manage a register of incoming and outgoing correspondence for the project; 
  work  with  the  FPDA  human  resource  department  to  establish/update  personnel  policies  and 
regulations for the project. 
  provide  inputs  in  the  preparation  and  updating  of  the  PIM,  Finance  and  Administrative  Manual, 
reports and other documentation; and 
  other tasks that maybe assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
117 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Production and Value Chain System Manager  
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  six  years,  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory. 
Duty  Station:  Based  in  FPDA  Goroka,  with  regular  visits  to  the  project  sites  as  required  for 
monitoring, reporting and coordination. This will include regular visits to end markets within the target 
provinces and greater PNG, as required. 
Qualifications and Experience 
A higher degree in agricultural economics, agricultural science, agribusiness, business administration, 
supply  chain  management  or  related  discipline  relevant  to  MVF  with  extensive  knowledge  of 
contemporary issues in production and value chain systems within the agricultural and food industry 
sectors, particularly in developing countries.  A minimum of five  years at a senior level in a relevant 
public  institution,  the  private  sector  or  an  international  organization,  with  proven  skills  in  the 
management  and  coordination  of  value  chain  enhancement  initiatives  and  programmes  within  the 
agricultural sector. 
The  candidate  would  be  expected  to  have  a  creative,  energetic  but  pragmatic  approach  to  problem 
solving and an appreciation of the respective roles of the public and private sectors in rural economic 
development.    Computer  literacy  is  requisite  and  good  command  of  spoken  and  written  English  is 
essential. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job Description 
The PVCM will report directly to the Project Coordinator and work collaboratively with FPDA and other 
PMU  personnel.  The  PVCM  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  the  overall  and  day  to  day 
implementation of MVF sub-component 1.1. She/he will have the following main responsibilities, with 
support from the International Technical Assistance and in close collaboration with FPDA: 
  Facilitate,  oversee  and  guide  the  implementation  of  activities  in  Component  1,  including  the 
preparation of AWPBs and overall progress reports for Component 1;  
 
In collaboration with the Senior M&E and Knowledge Management Officer, develop the TOR for 
the Scoping Study and the Climate Risk Assessment and monitor implementation to ensure final 
quality;  
  Ensure  that  the  outcomes  and  recommendations  of  the  Scoping  Study  and  the  Climate  Risk 
Assessment  are  reflected  in  the  subsequent  MVF  planning,  pre-investment  and  implementation 
activities; 
  Design  a  detailed  methodology  for  the  six  steps  of  the  partnership  approach  (step  5  in 
collaboration  with  the  GESI  Officer),  including  detailed  modalities  for  service  and  investment 
delivery in the different types of partnerships; 
  Design an approach to support the progressive development of farmer hubs and related farmers’ 
organisation; 
  Design  a  capacity  building  programme  for  PMU,  FPDA,  Provincial  Team  staff  so  that  they  can 
implement/oversee/monitor the partnership approach; 
  Design  capacity  building  programmes  for  non-financial  service  providers,  building  on  the 
recommendations of the Scoping Study, and monitor their performance; 
  Provide  technical  support  and  guidance/training  to  Provincial  Teams;  assist  them  in  the 
preparation  of  partnership  agreements  and  in  overseeing  partnership  implementation;  and 
oversee their activities and performance; 
  Oversee the implementation of the partnership approach, identify bottlenecks and constraints and 
provide technical guidance and capacity building services to make corrections for improvement; 
  Ensure regular update of value chain analysis and relevant data generated by the Scoping Study, 
and  ensure  that  information  is  made  available  to  partnerships  and  multi-stakeholder  platforms 
along adapted modalities and formats; 
118 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Maintain regular contacts with end buyers and monitor market development and opportunities; 
  Liaise with CEFI to ensure smooth access to financial services to partners, in line with partnership 
business plans; 
  Liaise with PPAP to ensure mutual exchange of knowledge and experience; 
  Collaborate with the MIS Content Manager and the Senior M&E/KM Officer so that MIS responds 
to farmers/traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Based  on  a  participatory  process  involving  multi-stakeholder  platforms,  identify  annual  MVF-
supported research activities, develop MoU with NARI, monitor implementation and facilitate the 
use of research outcomes through support services and multi-stakeholder platforms. 
  Provide technical support and guidance to the Galip Nut Manager; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
119 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Infrastructure Engineer (IE) 
Duration of Assignment: Up to four and a half years (56 months); following successful completion of 
a six-month probationary period, with renewable contracts thereafter if performance is satisfactory. 
Duty  Station:  Based  in  FPDA  Goroka,  with  regular  visits  to  the  project  sites  as  required  for 
consultations, liaison, scoping of works, construction supervision and contract monitoring etc. 
Qualifications and Experience 
A  first  degree  in  civil  engineering  with  sound  knowledge  of  project  management  and  the  planning, 
design, asset management and maintenance of low-volume rural road networks.  A minimum of five 
years  at  a  senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution,  the  private  sector  or  an  international 
organization,  with  proven  skills  in  the  implementation  of  internationally  financed  development 
programmes. 
The  candidate  would  be  expected  to  have  a  creative,  energetic  but  pragmatic  approach  to  problem 
solving and an appreciation of the respective roles of the public and private sectors in rural economic 
development,  specifically  in  the  infrastructure  sector.  Computer  literacy  is  requisite  and  good 
command of spoken and written English is essential. 
Job Description 
The  IE  will  be  fully  responsible  for  all  aspects  of  the  development,  day  to  day  management  and 
implementation of Sub-component 2.1 of the MVF Project (Spot Improvements of Feeder Roads) and 
will report to the PMU Project Manager. Detailed tasks and duties as follows: 
Initial sub-component preparation 
  Develop and finalize the document that will be circulated to partnerships inviting each partnership 
to  submit  proposals  for  project  funding  of  infrastructure  improvements  in  its  geographic  area  of 
operation. The document will set out the framework of the sub-project, the detailed process of the 
selection, the eligibility criteria for candidate sub-projects, and will include the application form to 
be submitted by each partnership 
  Develop TORs for consultants - specifically the Technical Support Engineer, Design / Supervision 
Consultants, and Maintenance Specialist  –  and provide technical  assistance  in  the  procurement 
of these consultants and administration of their contracts 
  Three Call cycles – preparation process 
 
Issue  call  for  invitation:  visit  each  established  partnership  to  present  the  sub-component  and 
invite the partnership to consult widely before identifying and finalizing its priority roads or other 
infrastructure before formal submission of the application for funding  
  Field screening and confirmation visits: (with assistance from consultants as required) undertake 
field visits to each partnership to: consult with the stakeholders; confirm the identity, scope and 
cost;  assess  the  likely  benefits  of  each  candidate  sub-project;  and  screen  the  sub-projects  to 
eliminate those that do not meet the project eligibility criteria. 
  Ranking  of  priority  sub-projects:  (with  assistance  from  consultants  as  required)  undertake  a 
careful  cost/benefit  assessment  of  all  confirmed  eligible  candidate  sub-projects  to  establish  a 
transparent ranking list of priority investments for that year’s implementation program; 
  Confirmation of DSIP funds: seek formal written confirmation from the District Administrators in 
all  districts  of  ranked  priority  projects,  that  District  Services  Improvement  Programme  (DSIP) 
funding to the value of at least 50% of the engineer’s estimated cost of works is available and 
has been budgeted in the district budget; 
  Sustainable  maintenance  assessment:  (with  assistance  from  consultants  as  required)  discuss 
the proposed future maintenance framework with the stakeholders of each ranked sub-project to 
assess and obtain the commitment of the public and private parties to undertake the necessary 
routine and periodic/emergency maintenance over the life of the asset; 
120 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Recommendation:  annually  prepare  and  submit  PMU  recommendations  to  the  Technical 
Appraisal  Committee  (TAC)  for  approval  to  implement  the  top-ranked  sub-projects  (subject  to 
available project component funding); 
  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU):  facilitate  the  negotiation  process  leading  to  signing  an 
MoU  by  the  parties  covering  the  scope,  financing,  implementation  and  future  maintenance 
arrangements  of  the  asset.  The  MoU  will  set  out  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  parties: 
partnership  (represented  by  the  Lead  Partner),  district/provincial  administrations,  communities, 
PMU. 
Three Call cycles - implementation 
35.  Each  implementation  phase  can  be  considered  as  three  separate,  repeated  stages,  all 
managed and monitored by the IE, with technical support as required from outside consulting firms: 
  Pre-construction  stage:  site  investigation  leading  to  detailed  design  of  rehabilitation  works, 
preparation of tender invitation documents, bidding and evaluation process, and award of works 
contracts,  bidding  through  public  tender  or  shopping  procedures  under  Provincial  Tenders 
Boards, evaluation process, and award of works contracts; 
  Construction  stage:  contract  administration  and  construction  supervision  of  the  infrastructure 
works;  
  Operation and maintenance stage: introduction of sustainable maintenance regime for completed 
sub-projects. 
Management of consultants 
The  IE  will  be  fully  responsible  for  managing  and  monitoring  the  performance  of  all  consultants, 
including the following actions: 
  Ensuring that consultancy contracts are in place in time for required inputs 
  Oversight  of  consultants’  inputs  and  outputs  to  ensure  that  expected  standards  of  performance 
are being met at all times 
  Carrying out formal review and comment on all reports, drawings, bid documents etc.  
  Reviewing and certifying consultants’ and works contractors’ invoices 
  Regular site visits to monitor quality of construction and supervision, maintenance training etc. 
Liaison with District and Provincial Administrations 
Financing of this sub-component will be largely achieved through securing annual contributions from 
DSIP  and  PSIP  programs  in  the  districts  and  provinces  where  project  partnerships  are  established. 
This  will  require  close  liaison  between  the  PMU  and  the  respective  district  and  provincial 
administrations. It is expected that the IE will lead this process and maintain close communication and 
cooperation with the administrations at all times. 
121 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Policy Development Officer 
Duration of assignment: Up to six years or MVF duration, following successful completion of a six-
month probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty station: Based in FPDA Goroka, with visits to project sites and Port Moresby as required. 
Qualifications and experience 
Advanced degree in Economics, Agriculture Economics, Econometrics or equivalent work experience, 
and approximately ten years of experience in policy advocacy, policy analysis or public management 
in  the  agriculture/rural  sector.  Familiarity  with  the  statistical  surveys,  gathering,  processing,  and 
analysis.  
Good interpersonal and communication skills, computer literate, and able to work without supervision 
and as part of a team. Ability to lead and work in multi-disciplinary teams, including managing national 
and  international  consultants.  Extensive  knowledge  of  national  politics  and  policy,  including 
government development strategies. Experience in the implementation of public policies; 
Ability  to  communicate  and  articulate  effectively  (in  both  writing  and  in  speaking)  the  projects 
approach, objectives and successes. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job Description 
Operating in close collaboration with FPDA Research, Policy and Communication Division, the Policy 
Development Officer will bear overall responsibility for implementing Sub-component 3.1 – Collective 
Governance, which aims at promoting a favourable policy and institutional environment to support the 
development  of  inclusive  fresh  produce  and  galip  nut  value  chains.  Detailed  tasks  and  duties  as 
follows:  
  Facilitating the organisation of value chain governance: 
- 
- 
- 
provide support  to the Industry Working Group for Fresh Produce, so that it can develop its 
membership,  expand  its  network  at  the  local  level  and  develop  its  capacities  to  represent 
member’s interests; 
provide support to the Galip Nut Industry Working Group for Fresh Produce, in particular for 
designing a long-term (10-15 years) roadmap for the development of the galip nut industry; 
support  the  creation  of  multi-stakeholder  platforms  (MSPs)  at  the  provincial  level  and  in 
districts that have significant concentration of production areas; 
in collaboration with the Production and Value Chain Systems Manager,  
- 
-  Help to build capacity at the national level and at intermediate levels (e.g. with multi-
stakeholder platforms) to effectively participate in national policy process  
  Supporting policy development and policy dialogue: 
- 
- 
In  collaboration  with  FPDA  and  DAL,  and  based  on  the  indications  of  the  Project  Design 
Report,  organise  and  implement  a  process  for:  the  annual  identification  of  priority  project 
action  related  to  policy  and  norms  development;  the  participatory  development  of  policy 
instruments  meets  the  needs  of  producers  and  other  value  chain  stakeholders;  and,  in 
collaboration  with  the  Production  and  Value  Chain  System  Manager,  the  dissemination  of 
results, awareness raising and capacity building; 
In  collaboration  with  the  Production  and  Value  Chain  System  Manager,  facilitate  the 
organisation  of  multi-stakeholder  platforms  and  the  identification  of  policy  issues  and 
opportunities for project action; 
122 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
- 
In  collaboration  with  FPDA  and  DAL,  facilitate  the  adoption  of  policy  instruments  developed 
with project support by the National Economic Council and other bodies as appropriate; 
-  Facilitate the understanding of public policies in the areas of the project at the provincial 
levels (in particular with Provincial Teams) and partnership level;  
-  Coordinate and manage consultants charged with undertaking policy formulation and policy 
related knowledge management. 
123 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Senior M&E and Knowledge Management Officer (SMEKMO) 
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  six  years;  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory. 
Duty  Station:  Based  in  FPDA  Goroka  with  regular  visits  to  the  project  sites  as  required  for 
monitoring, reporting and coordination. 
Qualifications and Experience 
 Advanced  degree  in  Project  Management,  Rural  Development,  Development  or  Agricultural 
Economics,  or  Business  Administration.  Proven  knowledge  and  practical  experience  of  at  least  5 
years  in  project  M&E  and  KM.  Computer  literacy  (Microsoft  office  and  statistical  software). 
Communication and result oriented management skills. Fluency in spoken and written English. Ability 
to guide and develop capacities of counterpart staff. Excellent drafting and communications skills. 
The candidate is expected to have a thorough understanding of group dynamics within a rural setting, 
focusing on women and youth. 
Job Description 
The  Senior  M&E  and  Knowledge  Management  Officer  (SMEKMO)  will  be  responsible  for  the 
developing  and  managing  the  MVF  M&E  and  KM  System.    S/he  will  report  directly  to  the  PC  with 
regular  collaboration  with  the  Research  Policy,  Planning  and  Communication  Division  of  FPDA. 
Specific tasks and duties include the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oversee  the  development  of  a  strategy  and  plans  to  ensure  systematic,  continuous  learning, 
improvement and knowledge sharing;  
With  support  from  short-term  technical  assistance,  establish  an  M&E/KM  system  taking  into 
account  FPDA  and  the  GoPNG  monitoring  frameworks,  MVF  logical  framework,  IFAD  RIMs 
and  project  objectives.  This  will  include  the  preparation  of  the  KM  Framework  and 
Implementation Plan; 
In  collaboration  with  the  MIS  Content  Manager,  develop  a  Management  Information  System 
(MIS) for overall project monitoring and capturing of good practices; 
Revise  and  regularly  update  MVF  logical  framework.  Define  participatory  methodologies  and 
tools for assessing project performance and outcomes involving stakeholders. 
In collaboration with the Production and Value Chain System Manager guide scoping studies at 
project inception to ensure that they capture required baseline data; 
In collaboration with partnerships, Provincial Teams and Multi-Stakeholder Platforms, establish 
implementation  targets,  monitor  implementation  processes  and  performance,  assess  outputs 
and outcomes, and analyse successes and failures; 
Facilitate the preparation of annual work plans and budgets; 
Facilitate  the  programme’s  annual  review  workshops,  impact  assessment  studies,  Mid  Term 
Review and completion review; 
Monitor  financial  and  physical  progress,  lead  the  preparation  of  and  finalise  project  progress 
reports and report back to stakeholders to create a better learning environment; 
Improve programme performance by providing relevant analytical information to the PMU on a 
timely basis; 
Develop  and  implement  processes  to  ensure  that  lessons  learned  and  good  practice  are 
captured systematically, shared under formats adapted to different target audiences, and used 
to improve programme implementation; 
Coordinate  the  development  and  implementation  of  capacity  building,  including  coaching  and 
mentoring, to build knowledge management, M&E, communication and other relevant skills and 
competencies of the PMU, FPDA, Provincial Teams, service providers and partnerships; 
124 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
 
 
Ensure  that  successful  innovations,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured,  synthesized, 
documented  and  shared  continuously  within 
in-country 
partners/service providers, multi-stakeholder platforms and partnerships; 
the  PMU/FPDA  and  with 
Commission  short-term  technical  assistance  and  undertake  any  other  duties  that  may  be 
assigned to him/her by the Project Coordinator. 
125 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
MIS Content Manager  
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  six  years,  following  successful  completion  of  as  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory 
Duty Station: Based in FPDA Goroka, with regular visits to the project sites as required  for sourcing 
of MIS material. This may require visits to end markets within the target provinces and greater PNG, 
as required. 
Qualifications and Experience 
A higher degree in agribusiness, communications or a  related discipline relevant to MVF, with sound 
knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in  the  agricultural  and  food  industry  sectors,  particularly  in 
developing  countries.  A  minimum  of  five  years  at  a  senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution,  the 
private sector or an international organization, with proven skills and experience in the coordination of 
content for inclusion in an ICT MIS with an agricultural/agrifood focus. 
A  high  degree  of  computer  literacy  is  requisite  and  an  excellent  command  of  spoken  and  written 
English is essential. Familiarity with MIS development and use within the agricultural sector, including 
initiatives such as the Agricultural Management Information System Standards.  
The  candidate  would  be  expected  to  have  a  creative,  energetic  but  pragmatic  approach  to 
communications  development,  strong  problem  solving  ability  and  an  appreciation  of  the  respective 
roles  of  the  public  and  private  sectors  in  rural  economic  development.  The  candidate  would  be  fully 
aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, marginalised groups, discrimination and 
poverty targeting. 
Job Description 
Reporting  directly  to  the  Project  Coordinator  and  working  collaboratively  with  FPDA  and  PMU 
(especially  Senior  M&/KM  Officer  and  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems  Manager)  and  relevant 
service providers, the MIS Content Manager will be responsible for the overall and day to day sourcing 
and placement of content on the MIS, including reviewing and editing of all material as appropriate to 
best meet end user needs. S/he will have the following main responsibilities: 
  Based on a participatory identification of priority content required by farmers and other value chain 
stakeholders, prepare and implement strategy for developing content, monitor users’ satisfaction, 
and regular update; 
 
 Sourcing and managing content applicable to MVF on the MIS including: 
o  Market information 
o  Technical topics 
o  Stakeholder information, including databases 
o  Weather and climate information 
o  Transport updates 
o  MVF progress, lessons learnt, successful  
  Establishing and maintaining a wide ranging and high calibre network of MIS information sources 
within both the private and public sectors.  
  Developing content for inclusion in the MIS  with consideration of education and literacy levels of 
end  user  groups.  This  will  require  extensive  utilisation  of  graphic  and  audio  content  so  as  to 
maximise MIS accessibility. 
  Ensuring  all  content  is  in  accordance  with  FPDA  and  MVF  policies  and  protocols  and  providing 
reports on same based on predetermined schedules determined by the PC. 
  Collaborate to the ICT-studies on the modalities for developing value chain stakeholders’ access 
to the MIS and reflect outcomes and FPDA/PMU decisions in MIS as appropriate; 
  Training  and  guiding  FPDA  personnel  on  all  aspects  pertaining  to  the  MIS  Content  Manager 
function so as to ensure sustainability of the MIS program beyond the life of MVF. This will extend 
to  the  creation  and  implementation  within  FPDA  of  best  practice  Operating  and  Procedure 
Manuals for MIS content development and management. 
126 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Gender and Social Inclusion (GESI) Officer 
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  six  years,  following  successful  completion  of  as  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory. 
Duty Station: Based in FPDA Goroka, with regular visits to the project sites.  
Qualifications and Experience 
Higher degree in socio-economics, economics, social sciences or other relevant area. At least 5-year 
experience  in  implementing  inclusive  and  gender  balanced  programmes.  Demonstrated  skills  and 
track  record  in  undertaking  gender  and  poverty  analysis  and  in  designing  and  implementing  GESI 
programmes.  Good  knowledge  of  the  Highlands  would  be  an  asset.  Excellent  writing  skills,  strong 
networking  and  relationship  building  skills,  excellent  communication  skills.  Fluency  in  spoken  and 
written English. 
Under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  GESI  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  the 
overall development, implementation and monitoring of MVF GESI Strategy and Action Plan. S/he will 
have the following main responsibilities: 
  providing guidance to reflect inclusion and gender concerns in the Scoping Study and the Climate 
Change Assessment Study to be carried out at project inception; 
  developing  a  GESI  strategy  and  action  plan,  based  on  the  specifications  of  the  Project  Design 
Report (PDR) as well as related practical guidelines and procedures for implementation; 
  developing the family-based approach in partnership with the consortium as described in the PDR 
and  ensure  that  service  provision  to  the  partnerships  reflects  and  is  harmonised  with  this 
approach; 
  providing  guidance  to  PMU  staff  and  project  implementers  to  ensure  that  project  activities  are 
inclusive and gender equitable;  
  providing  guidance  so  that  all  capacity  building  programmes  for  farming  and  other  value  chain 
stakeholders are inclusive and gender equitable and are aligned with the family-based approach. 
This includes the development of guidelines and toolkits as appropriate;  
  working closely with the M&E/KM Officer to develop and implement the M&E/KM System, so that it 
 
allows the monitoring of inclusion and gender aspects; 
support  the  mainstreaming  of  gender  and  inclusion  into  FPDA’s  analytical  and  operational 
systems, including trainings and the development of guidelines and toolkits as appropriate; 
  ensuring that all terms of reference for service providers include the requirement that the latter set 
up  gender-balanced  teams  that  have  prior  experience  with  gender  mainstreaming,  and  that 
contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target and indicators; 
  ensuring  that  implementing  partners  have  relevant  indicators  and  information  relating  to  gender 
 
and targeting in their contracts/terms of reference/memoranda of understanding;  
contributing  to  the  gender  and  targeting  aspects  of  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  and 
progress reporting preparation. 
127 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Galip Nut Manager 
Duration  of  Assignment:  Up  to  30  months,  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-month 
probationary period, with renewable contracts if performance is satisfactory.  
In case of a positive independent assessment at the end of the preparatory phase of Sub-component 
1.2  –  Galip  Nut  Supply  Chain,  the  position  may  be  extended  until  the  end  of  the  project.  Terms  of 
reference will be revised to reflect implementation modalities of the new phase.  
Duty Station: Based in FPDA Kokopo, with regular visits to the project sites. This may include regular 
visits to end markets in Port Moresby and to FPDA Goroka for project coordination meetings. 
Qualifications and Experience 
A higher degree in agricultural economics, agricultural science, agribusiness, business administration, 
supply  chain  management  or  related  discipline  relevant  to  MVF,  with  extensive  knowledge  of 
contemporary issues  in production  and value chain systems within the agricultural and food industry 
sectors,  particularly  in  developing  countries.    A  minimum  of five  years  at  a  senior  level  in  a  relevant 
public  institution,  the  private  sector  or  an  international  organization,  with  proven  skills  in  the 
management  and  coordination  of  value  chain  enhancement  initiatives  and  programmes  within  the 
agricultural sector. 
The  candidate  would  be  expected  to  have  a  creative,  energetic  but  pragmatic  approach  to  problem 
solving and an appreciation of the respective roles of the public and private sectors in rural economic 
development.    Computer  literacy  is  requisite  and  good  command  of  spoken  and  written  English  is 
essential. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job Description 
The Galip Nut Officer will report directly to the Project Coordinator and work collaboratively with FPDA 
and other PMU personnel. The Galip Nut Officer will be responsible for overseeing the overall and day 
to  day 
following  main 
responsibilities,  with  support  from  the  International  Technical  Assistance  and  in  close  collaboration 
with FPDA, NARI and ACIAR: 
implementation  of  MVF  sub-component  1.2.  She/he  will  have 
the 
  Facilitate,  guide,  monitor  and  report  on  the  implementation  of  activities  in  Component  1.2, 
including the preparation of AWPBs and overall progress reports for Component 1.2;  
  Draft a detailed action plan for Component 1.2 preparatory phase;  
 
In collaboration with NARI, prepare terms of reference for the resource assessment, facilitate and 
monitor implementation; 
  Prepare terms of reference for the short-term technical assistance aiming at supporting the setting 
up of the plant management operating system and provide regular monitoring of implementation; 
  Assist  the  plant  manager,  with  support  from  the  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems  Manager 
(see below), to organise the supply of galip nuts; 
 
In  collaboration  with  ACIAR  and  MVF  Policy  Development  Officer,  provide  support  to  the 
expansion  of  the  Galip  Nut  Industry  Working  Group  and  to  the  development  of  an  industry 
roadmap; 
  Liaise  with  ACIAR  and  ensure  coordination  and  harmonisation  of  activities  between  MVF  and 
ACIAR project; 
  Assist ACIAR in designing the second phase of its project to ensure coherence and coordination. 
  Liaise with PPAP to ensure mutual exchange of knowledge and experience; 
  Collaborate with the MIS Content Manager and the Senior M&E/KM Officer so that MIS responds 
to farmers/traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
128 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Accountant 
Duration of assignment: Up to six years, following successful completion of a six-month probationary 
period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty station: Based in FPDA Goroka, with visits to project sites as required for monitoring, reporting 
and coordination. 
Qualifications and experience 
An  acceptable  qualification  (BSc  or  equivalent  business  college  education),  with  at  least  three  year 
experience in a  public institution and/or the private sector, with proven skills in  the procurement and 
administrative aspects of projects and programmes. 
Good interpersonal and communication skills, computer literate, and able to work without supervision 
and as part of a team. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job Description 
Operating within a computerized environment, the accountant will perform the following duties: 
  establish and manage a paper filing system of finance documents for the Project Office finance; 
  establish and manage a petty cash system for the Project; 
  advise Project staff on all travel arrangements, logistics and financial matters; 
  work  with  the  FAM  to  establish/update  financial  management  procedures  and  systems  for  the 
Project; 
  provide inputs in the preparation and updates of the PIM and Finance and Administrative Manual; 
  assist in providing training to Project staff in the operation of finance procedures and systems; 
  assist with the preparation and consolidation of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs); 
  prepare  payment  vouchers,  withdrawal  applications  and  SOEs  for  submission  certification  of  the 
FAM and approval by PC; provide budget allocation and balance after payment in the voucher in 
accordance with the AWPB and financing agreement; and ensure that all supporting documents of 
the approved payment vouchers are stamped paid; 
 
routinely  monitor  the  monthly  receipts  and  payments  statements  of  the  Project,  check  whether 
expenditure is in-line with AWPB approvals and advise the FAM accordingly; 
  assist in the maintenance of financial records and accounts, both paper and electronic; 
  assist in the annual audit; 
  assist in the preparation of financial progress reports according to the specified reporting schedule 
in the PIM; 
 
cooperate  with  and  provide  support  to  supervision,  implementation  support  and  evaluation 
missions as required; and 
  any other tasks that may be required by the FAM and the PC. 
129 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Procurement Officer 
Duration  of  assignment:  Up  to  six  years  MVF  duration  following  successful  completion  of  a  six-
month probationary period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty station: Based in FPDA Goroka and from time to time travel to the field. 
Qualifications and experience 
An acceptable qualification (BSc or equivalent college education), with at least five  years experience 
at  a  senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution  and/or  the  private  sector,  with  proven  skills  in  the 
procurement aspects of internationally-financed development programmes. 
Good interpersonal and communication skills, computer literate, and able to work without supervision 
and as part of a team. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job description 
The  Procurement  Officer  (PO)  is  responsible  for  the  management  of  project  procurement  in  strict 
accordance  with GoPNG regulations  and  IFAD disbursement procedures and reporting.  S/he  would 
report directly to the FAM. 
Operating within a computerized environment, the PO would perform the following duties: 
  establish and manage a paper filing system for the Project procurement files; 
  work with the FO to establish/update procurement procedures and systems for the Project aligned 
to GoPNG procurement regulations and consistent with IFAD procurement guidelines; 
  assist  with  the  preparation  and  consolidation  of  the  Project  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets 
(AWPBs), especially the Annual Procurement Plan (APP); 
 
compile  procurement  documents  for  submission  to  the  Procurement  Committee  and/orTender 
Board; 
  process 
the  procurement  of  all  goods  and  services 
for 
Quotations/Proposals,  advertisements,  bidding  documents,  deliveries,  meetings  of  Procurement 
Committee and Tender Board), in line with Project guidelines; 
the  Project 
(Request 
for 
  ensure  that  the  procurement  contract  register  is  updated  monthly  and  submitted  to  IFAD  sub—
regional office monthly; 
 
cooperate  with  and  provide  support  to  supervision,  implementation  support  and  evaluation 
missions as required; and 
  any other tasks that may be required by the PC. 
130 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
MVF Liaison Officer (LO) 
Duration of assignment: Up to six years, following successful completion of a six-month probationary 
period, with renewable contracts if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty  station:  Based  in  DAL,  Port  Moresby  with  regular  travels  to  Goroka  and  project  sites  as 
required. 
Qualifications and experience 
An acceptable qualification (BSc or equivalent college education), with at least five year experience at 
a  senior  level  in  a  relevant  public  institution  and/or  the  private  sector,  with  proven  skills  in  providing 
support in project coordination of internationally-financed development programmes. 
Good interpersonal and communication skills, computer literate, and able to work without supervision 
and as part of a team. 
The  candidate  would  be  fully  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  crosscutting  issues  of  gender,  youth, 
marginalised groups, discrimination and poverty targeting. 
Job description 
The MVF Liaison Officer will report directly to the Project Coordinator and work collaboratively with 
FPDA and other PMU personnel. S/he will be responsible for liaising between the MVF PMU/the Galip 
Nut Manager in Kokopo on the one hand, and DAL and other stakeholders based in Port Moresby on 
the other hand. This will include but not be limited to the following tasks and duties: 
  Disseminate  important  information  to  stakeholders,  service  providers  and  business  partners  in 
Port Moresby; 
  Assist in organizing project activities and represent MVF in public functions to be determine by the 
Project Coordinator;  
  Ensure that WAs and SOEs and other related financial and procurement documents are endorsed 
and signed in timely manner and submitted to IFAD accordingly; 
  Act as secretariat to the Project Steering Committee; 
  Other tasks that may be required by the Project Coordinator. 
131 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Office Assistant 
Duration of assignment: Up to six years, following successful completion of a six-month probationary 
period, with renewable contracts from time to time if performance is satisfactory.   
Duty station: Based in FPDA Goroka. 
Qualifications and experience 
An acceptable qualification (BSc or equivalent college education), with at least three years experience 
in  a  public  institution  and/or  the  private  sector,  with  proven  skills  office  filing  and  procedures  and 
secretarial  tasks.    Some  knowledge  of  procurement  process  particularly  collection  of  quotations  and 
inspection of delivery and maintenance of assets will be an asset. 
Good interpersonal, and communication skills, computer literate, and able to work without supervision 
and as part of a team. 
Responsibilities 
Operating within a computerized environment, the Office Assistant will perform the following duties: 
  maintain office files; 
  assist Project staff with all travel arrangements; 
  assist in organizing and implementing training;  
  assist in the upkeep of premises and safe keep of office supplies; 
  assist in maintenance of fixed assets and providing tags to each fixed assets; 
  assist in maintenance of project vehicles and ensure that regular maintenance is carried; 
  assist in providing fuel to the project vehicle; 
  assist in the delivery and receipt of fixed assets and supplies and certification of receipt by the PC 
and units concerned; 
  maintain register of incoming and outgoing correspondence for the Project. 
  other tasks that maybe assigned by the FAM and PC. 
132 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  
management 
Planning,  M&E  and 
learning  and  knowledge 
Objectives. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM) 
1. 
system will be developed with three main objectives: 
 
 
 
steer project implementation: it should provide project stakeholders with information and analysis 
required to: measure project outcomes; assess project effects on the livelihoods of target groups, 
and in particular women, poor households and youth; assess the relevance of the project strategy, 
methodologies  and  implementation  processes;  detect  difficulties  and  successes;  and  support 
decision-making to improve project performance;  
support economic decisions and policymaking: it should provide project stakeholders, in particular 
farmers  and  agribusiness  partners,  service  providers,  FPDA  and  the  PMU,  with  the  information 
and  analysis  they  need  to  assess  the  return  brought  by  innovation,  to  develop  profitable  and 
sustainable  activities  and  to  adapt  their  strategies  accordingly.  It  should  also  provide  FPDA  and 
DAL with the information needed to make policy decisions; 
share  knowledge  and  upscale  good  practices:  it  should  develop  lessons  learnt,  capture  good 
practices  and  successful  innovation,  and  share  knowledge,  with  a  view  to  support  project 
performance and policy dialogue.  
Strategic  principles.  The  M&E  and  KM  system  will  be:  (i)  open  and  easily  accessible,  i.e. 
2. 
information and knowledge should be available to all stakeholders and not restricted to PMU or FPDA 
staff; (ii) participatory, i.e. associate project stakeholders in the definition of indicators, data collection, 
analysis  and  dissemination  of  results;  (iii)  focused  on  analysis,  learning  and  sharing  in  support  of 
decision-making and policy dialogue, and not merely  on data production; (iv)  harmonised with FPDA 
information  system  (see  Component  3)  and  GoPNG  relevant  information  systems;    (v)  accountable: 
not  just  upward  (to  IFAD,  GoPNG,  co-financiers)  but  also  downward  (to  project  stakeholders  and 
target  groups);    (vii)  inclusive:  it  should  have  an  inclusive  approach  so  that  women,  poor  and 
marginalised  groups  participate  in  the  system;  and  (viii)  phased,  thus  small  initially  and  develop 
progressively as needs and capacities develop. 
M&E and KM System 
Framework and implementation plans.  The M&E system will be setup and managed by  the 
3. 
PMU, in consultation with FPDA and other project stakeholders, including potential lead partners. The 
system will be harmonised with that of FPDA so that MVF-related data can be easily used by FPDA for 
its own use.  
Short-term international technical assistance will be hired by the PMU to: (i) agree on a shared 
4. 
understanding  of  project  objectives,  approaches  and  planned  activities;  (ii)  agree  on  a  broad 
framework for  M&E  and  KM  and  on  priority  actions  to  implement  it;  and  (iii)  identify  quantitative  and 
qualitative  indicators  on  a  participatory  basis,  building  on  the  logical  framework  and  on  the  set  of 
IFAD’s  Results  and  Impact  Management  System  (RIMS).  The  consultant  will  produce  a  detailed 
M&E/KM  manual, 
including  capacity  development 
arrangements. S/he will also provide orientations: (i) for the baseline survey, mid-term and completion 
surveys (see below), to be carried out by a specialised service provider; and (iii) for the mini-baseline 
surveys to be carried out for each partnership (see below). The PMU will update the implementation 
plan every year and will translate the manual into an easy-to-grasp version specifically targeting Lead 
Partners and VEWs.  The main features of the M&E/KM system are developed below. 
implementation  plan, 
together  with  an 
5. 
Indicators.  Building  on  the  attached  logical  framework,  output  and  outcome  indicators  will  be 
developed  with  MVF  stakeholders.  They  will  be  SMART  (specific,  measurable,  achievable,  relevant, 
time-bound), easy to collect and disaggregated by categories of lead partners and target groups. They 
will  include  relevant  RIMS  indicators  as  well  as  COSOP  indicators.  They  will  cover  both  quantitative 
(production,  margins,  credit  management…)  and  qualitative  results  (clients’  satisfaction).  The  GESI 
Specialist  will  be  consulted  to  ensure  that  the  system  adequately  monitors  inclusion,  poverty  and 
gender aspects.  
133 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
6. 
PPAP  PMUs  will  be  consulted  to  build  on  their  experience  –  reporting  proved  to  be  a 
cumbersome task for Lead partners (who will be collecting most of the implementation data) and one 
they  were not used to carry  out  before entering PPAP-sponsored partnerships.  Mitigation measures, 
to also be discussed with PPAP PMUs, will include: making the M&E system simple and concentrating 
on  key  indicators;  develop  the  system  progressively,  starting  with  a  number  of  core  indicators  and 
expand  if  needed  once  Lead  Partners’  capacities  to  manage  the  core  system  are  in  place;  provide 
training  to  Lead  partners  and  Village  Extension  Workers  (VEWs);  disseminate  guidelines  as  per 
above.  
7. 
Baseline and completion survey. The PMU will carry a baseline study measuring the status of 
main  indicators  at  project  onset,  with  assistance  from  an  outsourced  qualified  consulting  firm.  The 
scope  of  the  survey  and  implementation  modalities  will  be  defined  by  the  PMU  Senior  M&E/KM 
Officer, and with the M&E/KM consultant hired at the beginning of the project. Target indicators in the 
attached logical framework will be reviewed based on actual baseline figures. 
8. 
Additionally,  mini-baseline  surveys  will  be  carried  out  by  Lead  partners  as  part  of  the 
partnership  preparation  process,  along  a  simple  e-format  to  be  prepared  at  project  inception  by  the 
M&E/KM Officer and the specialized consultant, in consultation with PMU and FPDA staff involved in 
the implementation of Components 1 and  2. Partnership reporting  will  also  be based on  an e-format 
prepared by the PMU (see below). 
9. 
An impact assessment and outcome survey  will be carried out at project  mid-term and end, to 
compare  the  impact  generated  by  project  interventions  with  the  baseline  study.  Based  on  these 
results, the PMU, in consultation with FPDA, will prepare a Project Completion Report to be submitted 
to IFAD and the GoPNG within three months of project completion. 
10.  Planning. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the project Annual Work Plan and 
Budget  (AWPB),  which  will  cover  detailed  annual  planning  of  activities  and  implementation 
responsibilities,  physical  results  targeted,  outputs  expected,  budget  and  procurement  plan.  AWPBS 
will build on: 
  AWPBs prepared by Lead partners, in line with the partnership agreement and with support from 
the Provincial teams; 
  AWPBs prepared by CEFI and other service providers; 
  Orientations provided by provincial MSPs, in particular for the identification of policy studies. 
11.  The  project  AWPB  will  be  collated  by  the  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer  and  the  Finance  and 
Administration Manager (for budgeting), under the supervision of the Project Coordinator, and it will be 
submitted  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  for  final  approval.  All  MVF  stakeholders  will  have  an 
active and important role in identifying and reporting data. Provincial teams will make sure that women 
are adequately represented in this process and that they are allowed to voice specific concerns. 
12.  Data collection.  Data  will  be collected  against both qualitative and quantitative indicators  and 
disaggregated  by  gender,  along  forms  to  be  proposed  by  the  M&E/KM  consultant  and  the  following 
levels:  
  partnership  level,  where  information  will  be  gathered  by  Lead  partners  and  Village  Extension 
Workers,  with  support  from  the  Provincial  teams.  Partnership  agreements  signed  with  the  PMU 
will spell data collection (including for the mini-baseline survey) and reporting obligations.  VEWs 
will  receive  a  tablet  to  support  M&E  data  collection  Disbursements  will  only  be  approved  by  the 
PMU if reporting obligations are met.  Indicators should measure two complementary dimensions: 
o  Outcome/output achievement, i.e. the degree of attainment of MVF main expected outputs 
(such as numbers of farming households trained) and outcomes (such as increased yields 
or percentages of farmers applying improved techniques); 
o  Sustainability,  i.e.  partnership  effectiveness  in  building  farmers’  sustainable  access  to 
services  and  markets.  A  set  of  key  indicators  should  be  built  for  every  type  of  service 
(mainly 
technical  advisory  services;  collection/aggregation;  value 
adding/processing;  financial  services)  and  for  market  access.  Indicators  should  also 
measure farmers’ organisations’ management and capacity to deliver services to members;  
input  delivery; 
134 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
  provincial  level,  where  partnership  information  will  be  consolidated,  together  with  data  on 
implementation of service providers’ contracts (including financial institutions) in the province; 
  PMU level, information will encompass overall project performance and will be the responsibility of 
the Senior M&E Officer.  
13.  MIS. MVF will develop a Management Information System (MIS) to support data management. 
The MIS will track and regularly update gender-disaggregated financial and technical data on project 
outputs  and  outcomes,  lessons  learnt,  good  practices,  and  other  important  sector  information  (see 
details in Appendix 4, Component 1).  
14.  Analysis.  Data  will  be  consolidated  and  analysed  so  as  to  provide  information  on  the 
performance  of  the  various  components,  detect  problems,  identify  possible  solutions  and  track  good 
practices to share  through  the knowledge management system.  A monthly  dashboard  will be issued 
by  the  PMU,  which  will  be  electronically  distributed  and  will  disclose  project  performance  and 
achievements to project stakeholders.  
15.  The  system  will  be  modelled  after  the  experience  of  IFAD-financed  Coastal  Community 
Development Project (CCDP) in Indonesia27. The project budget includes a study tour to Indonesia for 
the  Project  Coordinator,  the  M&E/KM  Officer  and  one  FPDA  staff.  The  study  tour  would  also  aim  at 
getting acquainted with other features of the CCDP M&E system that might be adapted in MVF such 
as community-based M&E and knowledge management throughout the project and different locations. 
The study tour will be prepared along the Learning Route methodology (see below), whereby visitors 
and CCDP would jointly identify trip objectives and ways to address them, and visitors would prepare 
a  plan  as  to  how  they  would  envisage  replication  in  MVF  with  CCDP  support  and  prior  to  leaving 
Indonesia.  
16.  Reporting. The PMU will prepare semi-annual progress reports, which will record technical and 
financial achievements,  and include an  analysis as above.  A drat structure of  semi-annual reports is 
presented in Attachment 1. Progress reports will be channelled to the Project Steering Committee and 
to IFAD for discussion and review. Semi-annual progress reports will build on: 
  Partnership  reports:  the  Lead  partner  for  each  partnership  project  supported  by  MVF  will  be 
required to submit brief progress reports using a simple template to be provided by the PMU, and 
with support from the Provincial Team. These reports are to be submitted to support each request 
for  disbursement  of  the  next  tranche  of  funding  from  the  project,  as  described  in  the  specific 
Partnership  Agreement.  The  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems  Manager  and  the  Senior 
M&E/KM Officer will propose a participatory approach (for example building on VEWs) to develop 
a report, and propose a simple format. Progress reports should be  short, but include at least the 
following  information:  financial  summary  (using  a  short  table),  main  activities  against  the 
partnership  plan,  number  and  description  of  beneficiaries.  Partnership  progress  reports  will  be 
signed by the representatives of the partners (Lead Partner and others), submitted to the relevant 
Provincial  Team,  which  will  verify  them,  and  will  channel  them  to  the  PMU  with  their  comments 
and  recommendations.  The  Production  and  Value  Chain  Systems  Manager  and  the  Senior 
M&E/KM Officer will provide capacity building to the Provincial Team to assist partnerships in this 
process; 
  Provincial  Team  Reports:  Provincial  Teams  will  prepare  semi-annual  progress  reports,  along  a 
format  that  will  be  developed  by  the  PMU  and  that  will  be  similar  to  that  of  the  project  progress 
report. 
17.  M&E  capacity  development.  MVF  will  provide  capacity  building  trainings  to  PMU/Provincial 
Teams  and  relevant  FPDA  staff.  The  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer  will  design  a  capacity  building  plan, 
based  on  prior  capacity  assessment,  to  support  the  PMU/FPDA  and  the  Provincial  Teams  on  both 
concepts and practical skills to manage the M&E system, especially data collection, data analysis and 
reporting. Short-term technical assistance could be hired if needed. 
27 https://asia.ifad.org/web/ccdp/resources/-/resource_library/7805/newsletter.  
135 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Inception, Reviews and Surveys 
18. 
Inception. An inception workshop will be organised with project stakeholders and implementing 
partners  to:  (i)  ensure  that  all  partners  understand  and  agree  on  the  scope  and  implementing 
modalities of the project; (ii) introduce key processes, tools, strategies for  M&E and KM; and (iii) build 
relationships for future knowledge sharing. 
19. 
Implementation Support. Annual Implementation Support Missions (ISMs) will be organised by 
IFAD jointly with GoPNG and participating donors, in close collaboration with FPDA, Provincial Teams 
and project stakeholders. ISMs will offer an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to 
review  innovations,  and  to  reflect  on  improvement  measures.  Missions  will  therefore  be  an  integral 
part  of  the  KM  cycle,  with  mission  members  playing  a  supportive  and  coaching  role.  To  ensure 
continuity  in  the  process,  ISMs  will  be  carried  out  by  a  core  team  of  resource  persons  returning 
regularly, joined by specialists to address specific needs of a given year.  
20. 
Interim reviews. Two interim reviews will be organised by IFAD, the GoPNG and participating 
donors, at the end of year three and in year five. The reviews will: (i) assess achievements and interim 
impact,  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  MVF  management,  and  the  continued  validity  of  MVF 
design;  (ii)  identify  key  lessons  learnt  and  good  practices;  and  (iii)  provide  recommendations  for 
improved performance. Specific issues to be addressed include the following: 
  Effectiveness  and  performance  of  partnerships  in  providing  village  farming  households  with 
continued access to services and to markets, including once the partnership is over (and plans in 
this respect); 
  Performance  of  partners  (farmers  and  agribusiness),  in  terms  of  productivity,  quality,  and 
profitability, with special attention to women and disadvantaged groups; 
  Efficiency and effectiveness of the entire partnership project management process; 
  Progress  in  gender  equality  and  social  inclusion,  as  per  the  GESI  strategy,  and  effectiveness  of 
targeting and of the family-based approach; 
  Business  linkages  and  identification  of  most  performing  business  models  and  opportunities  for 
scaling up; 
  Performance  of  financial  institutions  in  delivering  project-supported  financial  instruments  and  in 
improving financial inclusion in the financial sector; 
  Progress and effectiveness of value chain organisation and institution building; 
  Role and impact of the multi-stakeholders’ platforms; 
  Performance  of  the  PMU  and  of  key  implementation  partners,  in  terms  of  required  reporting, 
disbursement targets, implementation schedule and resolving implementation issues.  
21.  Both  interim  reviews  will  make  recommendations  with  regard  to  key  measures  required  to 
secure the sustainability of partnerships and of farmers’ access to services and markets. Furthermore, 
the first interim review will build on the results of the independent assessment of the demonstration of 
a  viable  business  model  for  the  commercial  processing  of  galip  nuts  to  decide  whether  to  go  ahead 
with the financing of a commercial plant (also defining the modalities) or to reallocate resources.  
22. 
Impact  assessment.  Impact  surveys  will  be  carried  out  in  preparation  to  the  second  interim 
review  (end  of  2021)  and  again  prior  to  project  completion  to  measure  changes  at  beneficiary  level, 
compared  to  the  baseline  study.  They  will  be  undertaken  by  the  PMU  with  the  support  of  a  service 
provider, in line with the IFAD’s RIMS Impact Survey Guidelines. Tools such as case studies, the Most 
Significant  Changes  and  photo  stories  will  be  used  to  collect  qualitative  information  through  a 
participatory approach. Survey data and analysis will be shared with the multi-stakeholders’ platforms.  
Knowledge Management 
23.  Objective.  The  objective  of  knowledge  management  is  to  ensure  that  knowledge  generated 
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared, and that it is used to:  
(i)  improve  project  performance  and  delivery;  (ii)  allow  flexibility  to  changing  circumstances;                       
(iii) document and share innovations, best practices and stories of successes and failures to improve 
project intervention;(iv) provide information to support decisions on up-scaling  to be made at mid-term 
review (see above); (v) identify important issues to convey to policy makers.  
136 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
24.  KM  Framework  and  Implementation  Plan.  In  consultation  with  project  stakeholders  and  in 
collaboration  with  the  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer,  the  same consultant  hired  to  design  the  M&E  system 
will  prepare  a  detailed  KM  framework  (as  part  of  the  M&E/KM  manual).  The  framework  will  include 
objectives, responsibilities and methodology, together with an implementation plan for the first year. It 
will also include a communication strategy, which will outline how knowledge will be disseminated and 
will identify most appropriate communication channels according to the target audience. The M&E/KM 
consultant will further provide technical guidance in implementing the system and further improving it 
based on experience, through annual or biannual follow-up missions. The plan will be updated every 
year. 
25.  Areas in which project stakeholders intend detecting good practice and developing exchange of 
knowledge will be identified on an annual basis through multi-stakeholders’ platforms at provincial and 
national  level  and  at  the  Project  Steering  Committee.  Good  practices  will  be  traced  by  Provincial 
Teams,  with  support  from  the  Senior  M&E/KM  Officer  and  along  a  participatory  methodology  to  be 
described  in  the  M&E/KM  Manual.  Knowledge  will  be  disseminated  to  project  stakeholders,  so  that 
they  can  strengthen  their  capacities  and  improve  performance.  Products  will  be  adapted  to  different 
types  of  audiences,  including  illiterate  ones  (see  details  in  Appendix  4,  Component  3).  Particular 
attention will be given to documenting innovative models for: (i) business models for ensuring farmers’ 
access  to  services  and  markets,  in  the  framework  of  MVF-supported  partnerships;  (ii)  innovative 
models for accessing financial services; (iii) Family-based approach. 
26. 
Information and knowledge will be shared at three levels:  
  provincial  level:  provincial  MSPs  will  provide  a  venue  for  discussing  project  achievements  and 
innovations,  identifying  successes  and  problems  as  well  as  good  practices,  discussing  possible 
solutions  including  non-project  based  solutions,  and  identify  policy  issues.  MSPs  meetings  and 
facilitation will be provided by Provincial Teams, with support from the PMU; 
  PMU/FPDA level: the KM Officer will be responsible for developing knowledge and communication 
products  (see  Appendix  4,  Component  3)  and  an  M&E/KM  workshop  will  be  organised  on  an 
annual basis with project stakeholders. Knowledge products will also be presented and discussed 
at the Project Steering Committee, where in particular policy issues will be highlighted; 
 
inter-project:  knowledge  will  be  shared  with  PPAP  PCU  and  PMUs.  A  Community  of  Practice 
could be set up with MVF and PPAP M&E/KM officers to share knowledge. 
137 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Attachment 1 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
CONTENT OF SEMI-ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORTS28 
Executive Summary 
a.  Overall progress with implementation and semester highlights 
b.  Key issues and actions taken 
c.  Key points on which Project Steering Committee and IFAD guidance is sought (as 
needed) 
Progress with component implementation [For each component, discuss progress with 
activities for the period against agreed program of activities and results framework, 
identify problems and possible solutions] 
a.  Component 1 – Activity implemented and results against work plan 
b.  Component 2 – Activity implemented and results against work plan  
c.  Component 3 – Activity implemented and results against work plan 
Progress in meeting legal covenants [Report progress towards legal covenants in 
Financing Agreement] 
Progress with Agreed Action Plan to [date] 
[Discuss progress and include action plan in annex 1] 
Financial Monitoring 
a.  Financial management status [include new commitments disbursement data, audit 
status, etc., and refer to tables in annex 2] 
b.  Procurement status [Discuss procurement status and refer to table in annex 3] 
VI. 
Key Indicators [Discuss general progress and refer to tables in annex 4] 
VII. 
Knowledge Management [Present key KM activities, good practices and important 
lessons learnt] 
VIII.  Work Program for the next 6 months [Discuss key activities for the coming period and 
any adjustment to the Program of Activities; Annex revised MOPs when relevant for the 
semi-annual progress reports] 
IX. 
Annexes 
Annex 1 – Status of Agreed Action Plan 
Annex 2 – Financial Management Report  
Annex 3 – Procurement Status Report 
Annex 4 – Progress against results framework and key indicators 
Annex 5 – Summary status of each partnership  
28 Adapted from PPAP Project Implementation Manual. 
138 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Financial management and disbursement 
Appendix 7:  
arrangements 
Overall system 
27.  DAL  will  have  overall  accountability  for  the  Project,  including  fiduciary  aspects.  The  Project 
Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  approve  the  project's  annual  work  plans  and  budgets  (AWPBs)  and 
Procurement Plans, for IFAD´s no objection. A good governance and mutual accountability framework 
(IFAD  and  GoPNG)  will  be  adopted  to  strengthen  accountabilities  and  transparency,  in  line  with 
international best practices. 
28.  The day to day implementation will be delegated by DAL to the PMU embedded within FPDA, 
which  will  be  responsible  for  day  to  day  financial  management  activities,  including  accounting, 
reporting and coordinating audit processes 
29.  DAL will request DOF to open two Trust Bank Accounts for FPDA/PMU to received funds from 
IFAD and from the government, beneficiaries and partners and one trust bank account for the FPDA 
Provincial Team to receive IFAD funds to cover operations costs. 
30.  MVF  financial  management  will  be  governed  by  the  Department  of  Finance  (DoF)  regulations 
and  will  be  in  line  with  IFAD  Financial  Guidelines  and  Disbursement  Handbook,  as  well  as  FPDA 
financial  policies  and  procedures.  The  financial  management  system  will  be  under  the  overall 
responsibility of MVF PMU Project Coordinator and the Financial and Administrative Manager. Project 
financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used only for the purpose intended 
under  the  Financing  Agreement,  in  an  efficient  and  economical  way  and  in  accordance  with  the 
activities described in the Project Design Report and in the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs) 
and Procurement Plans ; (ii) the disbursement of project funds facilitates the timely implementation of 
activities;  (iii)  funds  are  properly  managed,  disbursed  and  documented  and  flow  rapidly,  smoothly, 
adequately, regularly and predictably; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued on a timely basis; (v) a 
robust  flow  of  reliable  information  on  project  activities  facilitates  accountability,  transparency  and 
disclosure; and (vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded. 
31.  Main  features  of  the  financial  management  system  will  be  as  follows:  (i)  establishment  of  the 
PMU  with  delegated  authority  to  plan,  manage,  disburse  and  control  project  resources  (including 
counterpart financing); (ii) hiring of key financial management and administrative staff from the market 
with  relevant  experience  and  qualifications  and  establishing  PMU  office  with  enough  office  facilities 
and equipment; (iv) establishment of Provincial Team offices; (iii) preparation of AWPBs and 18-month 
Procurement  plan,  for  review  by  DAL  Finance  Branch  and  approval  by  PSC  and  IFAD;  (iv) 
procurement  and  installation  of  an  accounting  software,  and  associated  staff  capacity  building;  (v) 
preparation of a Financial Management Manual and consistent with FPDA financial policies and IFAD 
financial  and  disbursement  guidelines;  (vi)  establishment  of  a  control  framework  integrating  periodic 
internal  audits  and  annual  external  audits,  and  social  safeguards  to  be  adopted  based  on  IFAD 
policies; (vii) adoption of a good governance and mutual (IFAD and GoPNG) accountability framework 
to strengthen accountability and transparency in line with international best practices.  
32.  The  Executing  Agency  is  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  while  the 
Implementing Agency is the Fresh Produce Development Agency (FPDA). A Project Management Unit 
(PMU)  will be embedded  in the organisational structure of FPDA and  work hand in hand  with FPDA 
divisions  :  the  Corporate  Affairs  Division,  the  Policy,  Planning  and  Communication  Division  and  the 
Production  and  Value  Chain  System  Division.  A  Project  Coordination  Unit  will  be  established  within 
DAL to ensure effective coordination and oversight.   
Financial Management Risk Assessment 
33.  PFM assessment. Inherent risks at country level are rated as high. The latest review of Public 
Financial Management (PFM), which was conducted in 2015 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
at the request of the GoPNG. The risk assessment was based on the PEFA framework and its seven 
pillars.   PNG scores well on Pillar I - Credibility of fiscal strategy and budget. This score reflects the 
fact that the variance between the original budget and actual outturn at aggregate level was kept at a 
minimum,  whereas  the  composition  of  expenditure  by  economic  and  administrative  classification  is 
139 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
substantial. PNG’s performance also scores well on Pillar IV – Policy based planning and budgeting – 
and  Pillar  II  –  Comprehensiveness  and  transparency,  which  suggests  that  the  budget  preparation 
process supports the use of the budget as a policy tool and that budget information is available. PNG’s 
performance on other pillars, however, is weaker. There is considerable scope for improvement  with 
regard  to:  accountability,  one  of  the  corner  principles  of  good  PFM  (Pillars  V  and  VII);  the 
management  of  public  assets,  liabilities  and  associated  fiscal  risks  (Pillar  III);  and  the  quality, 
availability, comprehensiveness and timeliness of fiscal accounts (Pillar VI). Detailed excerpts from the 
report are provided hereafter. 
  Credibility  of  fiscal  strategy  and  budget.  The  aggregate  credibility  of  the  budget  appears 
satisfactory as overall deviations from the original budget estimates were relatively small, though 
expenditure composition shows a high level of variance. Spending on wages and salaries, goods 
and  services  and  other  items  of  recurrent  expenditure  tends  to  be  higher  than  the  approved 
budget,  and  spending  on  the  development  budget  to  be  lower  than  the  approved  amounts.  The 
under- spending in development expenditure was mainly due to capacity limitations, weak project 
implementation  and  possibly  a  lack  of  reporting  on  execution  of  donor-funded  projects.  Over-
spending  in  the  recurrent  budget  can  be  attributed  to  weaknesses  in  expenditure  controls, 
including inadequate commitment controls; 
  Budget  comprehensiveness  and  transparency.  The  classification  of  the  budget  is  reasonably 
robust,  but  two  financial  systems  (Integrated  Financial  Management  System -  IFMS  and  Papua 
New Guinea Accounting System - PGAS) used by the departments adopt different classifications, 
which impacts negatively on the comprehensiveness and quality of data in the  budget execution 
reports.  The  extent  of  unreported  government  operations  appears  to  be  large,  but  given  the 
number of entities involved and weaknesses of reporting, it was difficult to quantify;  
  Asset and liability management. This is deemed one of the weakest areas in PNG’s PFM system. 
Many  of  the  government  entities  are  several  years  in  arrears  in  submitting  their  annual  financial 
statements,  and  many  have  received  audit  disclaimers  or  adverse  opinions.  Few  departments 
undertake  rigorous  economic  analysis  of  proposed  public  investment  projects  or  provide 
systematic  reports  on  the  physical  and  financial  progress  of  these  projects.  The  legal  basis  for 
borrowing and the issuance of government guarantees is unclear, fragmented and to some degree 
contradictory. As a result there are gaps in the coverage of reports and some loans might not be 
reflected in the system. No register of the guarantees issued by the government has been set up. 
There are also no mechanisms for recording and monitoring payment arrears; 
  Policy-based planning and budgeting.  PNG’s budget process is orderly and well understood, and 
some progress has been made in embedding the medium-term dimension into fiscal planning. The 
government  prepares  a  broadly  credible  medium-term  fiscal  strategy  (MTFS)  comprising  fiscal 
targets established in law. The MTFS is used to prepare an overall  resource envelope for public 
expenditure  and  individual  ceilings  for  spending  agencies,  but  these  ceilings  are  prepared  for  a 
single year only and do not cover half of the budget representing development/capital expenditure;  
  Predictability  and  control  in  budget  execution.  The  control  of  budget  execution  is  weak.  PNG’s 
main  revenue  collecting  agencies,  the  Internal  Revenue  Commission  (IRC)  and  the  Customs 
Service, collect about 96 percent of PNG’s domestically generated revenues. Bank reconciliations 
are a major problem, with long backlogs for some accounts. A cash flow forecast is prepared for 
the  fiscal  year,  and  is  updated  weekly  on  the  basis  of  actual  inflows  and  outflows.  Departments 
are advised one month in advance of their monthly warrant ceilings, but the information is not fully 
reliable. The current rules allow extensive administrative reallocation  with Treasury  approval and 
are not always respected. Payroll controls are weak, and are compromised by the decentralization 
of responsibility for controls and reconciliations to the spending departments and provinces. Non-
compliance  with  internal  control  regulations,  numerous  reallocation  decisions  and  delays  in 
implementing the IFMS further impede the ability of the government to  implement the budget as 
originally approved; 
  Accounting, recording and reporting; There are concerns regarding the persistent lack of reliability 
of  accounting  records.  Many  bank  reconciliations  are  not  carried  out  in  a  timely  manner,  and 
backlogs  arise  in  the  clearance  of  suspense  accounts  and  advances.  Even  if  reconciliations  are 
completed, there are many significant unresolved items. While the government prepares different 
types of in-year reports, the coverage and classification of data do not allow direct comparison to 
be made with the original  approved budget  and the  information is not up-to-date. No recognized 
140 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
accounting standards are used to prepare central government financial statements. The financial 
statements  are  only  submitted  for  audit  15-16  months  after  the  end  of  the  year  concerned, 
compared to the good practice standard of 3-6 months. The quality and timeliness of the annual 
financial statements have been criticized by the Auditor General.  
  External  scrutiny  and  audit.  There  is  annual  coverage  of  all  government  entities,  using 
professional  standards  and  highlighting  material  issues  and  systemic  risks.  The  Office  of  the 
Auditor  General  (AGO)  undertakes  mainly  financial  and  compliance  audits,  together  with  some 
performance audits. The audits follow a systems- and risk-based approach. The Public Accounts 
Committee  (PAC)  holds 
the  AGO’s  reports,  and  also  makes 
recommendations,  focusing  on  entities  which  have  received  adverse  comments.  There  is  little 
evidence, however, that the findings and recommendations of AGO or  PAC reports are followed 
up systematically. This finding reflects the absence of effective accountability mechanisms in the 
Government, and the absence of legal recourse to impose penalties on non-complying officials for 
breaches of the law and financial misconduct. 
in  depth  hearings  on 
  PFM reform process.  A piecemeal approach is currently taken to the planning and management 
of PFM reforms. Recent efforts have been made to address some of the deficiencies of the current 
systems  and  processes,  but  the  institutional  arrangements  for  planning  and  managing  the  PFM 
reform  process  need  to  be  strengthened.  Nevertheless,  the  authorities  are  keenly  aware  of  the 
need  to  address  underlying  PFM  weaknesses  at  a  pace  allowed  by  the  political  and  economic 
conditions  in  PNG.  The  significant  deficiencies  of  the  existing  PFM  systems  require  a  strategic 
approach  to  developing  and  implementing  a  reform  agenda.  The  assessment  identifies  a  broad 
range of issues that need to be addressed, some urgently, some over the medium-term. Many of 
these reforms are substantial and technically and politically challenging and call for considerable 
dedication and commitment not only from the staff in the Departments of Finance and Treasury, 
but also at the political level and other departments of government. The authorities should prepare 
an  action  plan  that  identifies  the  priority  areas  and  appropriate  sequencing  of  PFM  reforms, 
together  with  measures  to  address  the  accountability  gap  in  PNG.  The  process  of  implementing 
and internalising PFM reform initiatives is constrained by limitations of capacity at all levels in the 
DoF  and  in  the  line  departments,  as  well  as  by  weak  institutions  and  poor  financial  integrity. 
Reform  measures  will  need  to  be  carefully  prioritized  and  sequenced  so  as  not  to  overload  the 
limited  capacity.  The  first  priority  should  be  placed  on  strengthening  core  functions  of  PFM 
systems  which  will  provide  the  platform  for  more  advanced  reforms.  Advanced  reforms  will 
generally not produce any significant results before core functions of the PFM system are in place. 
For instance, performance budgets will not serve any meaningful purpose in the absence of timely 
and reliable budget reports. Issues related to the enforcement of financial regulations also need to 
be addressed. 
34.  Mission  assessment.  A  financial  management  (FM)  risk  assessment  has  been  completed  in 
accordance with IFAD Financial Services Division (CFS) guidelines, in order to ensure that adequate 
FM  arrangements  are  in  place,  that  project  funds  will  be  used  for  the  purposes  intended,  with  due 
consideration to efficiency and economy, that project financial reports will be prepared in an accurate, 
reliable and timely manner, and project assets will be safeguarded. The FM assessment is based on 
discussions  with  officers  and  staff  of  DAL,  FPDA  (headquarters  in  Goroka,  and  provincial  offices  in 
Morobe  and  Rabaul),  DoF,  DoT,  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  and  PPAP  Coordination  and 
Management Units.  
35.  Financial management risk as assessed at the time of design was rated High.  
36.  DAL is currently implementing PPAP, a World Bank (WB) project co-financed by IFAD and EU. 
The project applies the WB procedures. FPDA has experience only in implementing a research project 
funded  by  ACIAR.    Neither  DAL  or  FPDA  have  experience  in  the  direct  implementation  of  an  IFAD- 
funded project.  Potential issues include: 
  Coordination between DAL and FPDA/MVF in terms of staff, procedures and systems: Since DAL 
will  review  the  submission  of  WA  and  SOEs,  it  is  important  that  FPDA/MVF  will  provide  the 
supporting documentation that adheres to the GoPNG financial and procurement regulations.  The 
PMU will be set up to support the FPDA in the financial management of the Project. 
  Coordination between DAL and the FPDA/MVF responsible for administering the Bank Accounts, 
the  authorization  and  submission  Withdrawal  Applications  and  reporting.  There  could  be 
141 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
bottlenecks or delays in the submission with DAL reviewing the documents. However, the PIM will 
provide the detail procedure and timeliness of the process. 
  Strict adherence to the provisions as provided in the GoPNG Public Finance Management Act of 
1995  as  amended  in  2015,  as  well  as  the  financial  policies  and  procedures  of  FPDA  and  IFAD 
financial  and  disbursement  guidelines.    The  PIM  will  cover  provisions  to  align  GoPNG  financial 
regulations  with  IFAD  disbursements  and  reporting  requirements.  Trainings  of  PMU  and  FPDA 
staff will be provided at the start up and will be a continuing process on capacity building. 
  The Imprest Fund arrangement for the disbursements of loan is a new concept for the DAL/FPDA. 
Procedure, documentation and thresholds will be provided in the Letter to the Borrower as well as 
the PIM.   
37.  To mitigate the risks  linked to  the PFM assessment and the  design mission  own assessment, 
the mission advised DAL and FPDA to adopt the following measures for the implementation of MVF: 
  PCU: a Project Coordination Unit will be established within DAL to ensure that the MVF received 
strengthened support and oversight from DAL.  
  PMU:  creation  of  a  PMU  which  will  include  a  Project  Coordinator,  a  Finance  and  Administrative 
Manager,  a  Procurement  Officer,  a  Contract  Management  Officer  and  an  Accountant.  The  PMU 
and FPDA Finance Unit staff will be provided with adequate training by DAL, FPDA and IFAD. In 
case of unforeseen absence, termination or resignation of staff, the FPDA staff could take on the 
work of the PMU staff until a replacement staff has been in place. 
  Accounting  software:  procurement  of  an  accounting  software  such  as  MYOB  (similar  to  what 
FPDA  uses  currently)  for  maintaining  project  accounts  and  generating  the  required  financial 
reports for timely submission to IFAD; 
  Bank  accounts:  in  line  with  IFAD  disbursement  procedures  and  GoPNG  financial  policies,  three 
bank accounts in local currency  will be opened by DoF upon request from DAL/FPDA; (i) one for 
the IFAD loan (the Designated Account – DA); (ii) one for the government contribution (the Project 
Bank Account - PBA). FPDA, as recipient of the loan proceeds and government contributions, will 
have to open two Designated Accounts (DA) in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD to receive 
IFAD funds and government contributions in local currency. Payments for project expenditures will 
be  made  by  checks  processed  by  the  implementing  agency.    The  opening  and  maintenance  of 
separate  accounts is imperative as it  will facilitate  the identification, segregation and reporting of 
project financial transactions and reconciliation of project funds as evidenced by bank statements; 
 
Internal auditors: appointment of an Internal Auditors (from DoF) for periodic compliance audit and 
review of internal control process of the project. 
  External  audit:  The  project  will  be  audited  by  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  General  (AGO)  or  by  a 
private  firm  outsourced  by  AGO,  in  line  with  current  practice  for  the  IFAD  co-financed  project 
administered  by  the  World  Bank  (PPAP).    The  audit  will  carried  out  on  a  yearly  basis  and  in 
compliance with International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. 
  Manuals:  adoption  of  a  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  and  a  Finance  and  Administrative 
Manual  (providing  detailed  procedures  on  financial  management  and  procurement)  in  line  with 
GoPNG financial regulations, Public Management Act, FPDA financial policies and consistent with 
IFAD financial guidelines and disbursement handbook. 
Implementation Arrangements 
38.  The  Executing  Agency  (EA)  is  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock  (DAL)  while  the 
Implementing Agency (IA) is FPDA. The IA is responsible for implementing the Project.  The Secretary 
of  DAL  will  chair  the  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC),  which  will  approve  project  AWPBs  and 
Procurement Plans and submit them to IFAD for no- objection through a PCU. 
39.  DAL will ensure that project activities are in accordance with the approved AWPB, Statements 
of Expenditure (SOEs), Financial Report for Sources and Uses of Funds and  that actual expenditure 
are  in  line  with  the  budget.  DAL  will  also  endorse  Withdrawal  Applications  prepared  by  FPDA/PMU 
together  with SOEs, and submit them  to the Department of Treasury (DoT) for signature and  further 
transmission  to  IFAD  for  funds  release.  Together  with  FPDA/PMU,  DAL  will  ensure  that  the 
142 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
disbursement  of  funds  is  in  accordance  with  the  GoPNG  financial  and  procurement  regulations,  the 
Financing  Agreement,  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook. 
FPDA/PMU  will  submit  the  required  financial  and  progress  reports  through  DAL  to  IFAD  in  a  timely 
manner.  An  internal  auditor  from  the  Department  of  Finance  (DoF)  will  conduct  periodic  compliance 
audit  of  the  Project.    The  project  will  be  audited  by  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  General  (AGO)  or  by  a 
private firm outsourced by AGO... 
40.  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and reporting.   The PMU will be accountable to DAL 
and the PSC, and will maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with the international public sector 
accounting  standards  (IPSAS)  and  IFAD  requirements  on  modified  cash  basis  (with  advances 
recognised  and  acquitted  in  time  with  adequate  documentation).  The  project  will  be  required  to 
maintain  a  full  set  of  accounts  in  accordance  with  the  International  Public  Sector  Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS). 
41.  The PMU will procure an accounting software through a service provider that will be tasked with 
installing  and  operationalising  it.  The  accounting  software  and  chart  of  accounts  will  be  set  up  to 
ensure  separate  project  accounts  to  monitor  implementation  progress,  identify  works,  goods  and 
services,  and  disclose  their  use  in  the  project.  The  PMU  Financial  and  Administration  Manager, 
Accountant  and  Procurement  Officer  will  be  trained  in  using  the  accounting  software  by  the  service 
provider, which will also commit to providing periodic off-site and on-site support as well as training at 
least for the first two year. 
42.  Budgeting.    The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  preparation  of  the  budget  as  part  of  the  AWPB 
exercise.  Annual  budgets  will  be  supported  by  a  narrative  of  proposed  activities  aligned  with  the 
logical framework indicators. The project will be required to prepare its AWPB  as part of the start-up 
activities, including the initial 18- month procurement plan in line with the project design  and budget, 
and  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders.  The  AWPB  will  be  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  PSC 
through  DAL  and  submitted  to  IFAD  for  no-objection.  Subsequent  AWPBs  and  Annual  Procurement 
Plans will be prepared in consultation with stakeholders, implementing partners and service providers 
for  approval  by  the  PSC  through  DAL  and  will  be  submitted  to  IFAD  for  no-objection  at  least  two 
months before the start of the fiscal year. 
43.  Flow of funds and disbursements. In line with the GoPNG and IFAD disbursements procedures, 
funds will be transferred by IFAD to the MVF Designated Account (DA) in local currency, which will be 
maintained  in  a  commercial  bank  acceptable  to  IFAD  as  authorized  by  DoF  (the  bank  will 
automatically convert the foreign exchange remittance of IFAD into the local currency). The DA will be 
used  to  cover  project  expenditure.    Payments  against  the  DA  will  be  by  cheque  signed  by  the  PMU 
Project Coordinator (PC) and countersigned by FPDA General Manager (GM) or the FPDA Corporate 
Affairs Division Manager (CADM).  In case of long absence of the PC, both GM and the CADM could 
sign the check. Another Project Bank Account, as authorised by DoF, will be opened by FPDA/PMU to 
receive  GoPNG  contributions  (including  the  provincial  and  district  contributions),  partners  and 
beneficiaries.  Acquittal will be quarterly or once 70 percent of the funds have been spent whichever 
comes earlier, with appropriate supporting documents and SOEs.  
44. 
 An  Authorized  Allocation  equivalent  to  a  maximum  of  USD1.8  million  to  cover  at  least  six 
months  of eligible expenditure during implementation will be transferred to the DA once the conditions 
for the initial disbursement spelled out in the Financing Agreement are met.  The initial deposits of up 
to  USD1.8  million will  be  considered  as  the  Imprest Fund  Level  and  could  be  replenished  by  way  of 
submission  of WA  and  SoE  every  time  that  at  least  50%  of  the  Imprest  Fund  has  been  spent  or  90 
days  have  elapsed  on  the  date  of  the  fund  transferred  from  the  previous  WA  advance,  whichever 
comes  first.    IFAD  will  open  Loan  Accounts  in  its  books  upon  entry  into  force  of  the  Financing 
Agreement.  Withdrawals from the Loan Account will be made on the basis of Withdrawal Applications 
(WAs)  with  appropriate  supporting  documentation  (such  as  SOEs,  Reconciliation  of  DA,  bank 
statements) prepared by the PMU (signed by the PMU PC and FAM).  The WAs (with initials of PC, 
FAM, FPDA GM) with supporting SOEs and financial documents will be submitted with a cover letter 
signed by the FPDA GM to DAL for review and DoT for approval, and onward submission to IFAD for 
fund release.   
45.  Funds equivalent to USD700,000 will be released to the DA upon entry in force of the Financing 
Agreement and contingent on: opening of the DA; appointment of the PMU PC;  receipt of certification 
from the DAL/FPDA signatories of DoT on the WA and bank accounts.  The funds that will be released 
for the start-up costs will form part of the IFAD initial disbursements of up to USD1.8 million to the DA 
143 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
bank account of FPDA/PMU, to cover an average 6-month budget of the Project and will constitute the 
level of imprest account. 
46.  Once  MVF  Financing  Agreement  is  effective,  the  PMU  will  immediately  apply  to  PNG  tax 
authorities to register as an exempt entity, thereby enabling the project to seek refund of the Goods 
and services Tax (GST).  
47.  Disbursement procedures and documentation supporting the WAs.  Replenishments of the DA 
will  be  effected  through  the  submission  of WAs  and  supporting  documentation  and/or  Statements  of 
Expenditure  (SoE).    SoE  threshold  is  set  up  to  USD 50,000  maximum  single  disbursement  for  all 
expenditure.    Any  expenditure  of  more  than  USD 50,000  will  be  fully  documented  upon  submission 
and  as  attachment  to  the  WA.    All  WAs  will  be  in  line  with  projected  expenditure  as  detailed  in  the 
approved AWPBs.  The PMU will be responsible for the preparation and consolidation of SOEs from 
the  financial  data  outputs  of  the  accounting  software,  the  reconciliation  of  the  DA  and  PBA  against 
bank statements, and completion of appropriate documentation and the WAs, which will be approved 
and  signed  by  respective  signatories  of  PMU  (PC  and  FAM)  and  DoT  for  the  WA,  prior  to  being 
submitted  to  IFAD  for  fund  transfer.    The  IFAD  Disbursement  Handbook  provide  the  details  of 
disbursement  procedures  and  documentation.    Further,  a  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LTB)  detailing 
disbursement  procedure,  documentation,  procurement  and  audit  will  be  issued  by  IFAD  immediately 
upon execution of the FA. 
48.  Disbursement  schedule.    The  proceeds  from  the  IFAD  Loan  will  be  disbursed  over  six  years 
with an indicative completion date of 31 December 2023 and closing date of 30 June 2024. 
49. 
Internal  Control  System  -  Approvals,  acquittals  and  authorisations.    The  FPDA  PMU  will  be 
responsible for completing the documentation for payments.  All transfers from IFAD to the DA must 
be in line  with the current  AWPB and  will  be subject to satisfactory submission  of SOEs (except the 
initial  disbursements  deposits  to  the  DA/PA  will  not  be  supported  with  SoE).    Each  AWPB  must  be 
formally approved by the PSC as endorsed by DAL and submitted to IFAD for no-objection prior to any 
expenditure being incurred against these plans and budgets; and all WAs (and accompanying SOEs 
signed  by  FAM  and  PC)  must  be  submitted  by  a  cover  letter  of  FPDA  GM  to  DAL  for  review  and 
endorsement to DoT for signature, and then submission to IFAD for fund release. 
50.  The FAM will certify while the PC will approve all Requests for Payment (RFP) for issuance of 
cheque  payments  against  the  DA.  The  RFP  with  all  the  appropriate  documentation  (including 
certification of delivery and inspection reports for procurement and certification of submission of report, 
in  case  of  consultancy  and  service  providers  contract)  will  be  submitted  to  the  PMU  Accountant  for 
clearance of budget and funds availability and processing of payment.  The PMU FAM is the certifying 
officer while the PC is the approving officer.  An alternate certifying officer and approving officer will be 
appointed by FPDA.  All payments against PA will be processed subject to completion of a RFP which 
will  provide the  details of the  payments  with reference to the budget category  and component code, 
budget  availability  in  the  AWPB  and  properly  supported  with  appropriate  procurement  documents, 
invoices, delivery receipts,  certification of delivery and inspection or certification  of acceptable report 
submission  and  other  relevant  financial  documentation.  Cheques  will  be  signed  by  the  PC  and 
countersigned by the FPDA GM or CADM.  The disbursements and approval process will be detailed 
in the PIM. 
51.  Contracts  with  service  providers.  A  contract  will  be  established  with  each  service  provider, 
which  should  include:  declaration  by  the  service  provider  to  commit  to  the  objectives  of  MVF  and 
undertake  to  carry  out  the  project  activities  in  accordance  with  the  Financing  Agreement  between 
GoPNG  and  IFAD;  process  for  annual  planning  and  fund  flow  arrangements;  physical  and  financial 
reporting requirements; auditing and submission of Financial Statements to FPDA/PMU; adherence to 
IFAD  and  GoPNG  Financial  and  Procurement  Guidelines  and  approved  Procurement  Plan;  and 
applicability  of  IFAD/GoPNG  Policy  on  Fraud  and  Anti-corruption.  Furthermore,  all  service  providers’ 
contracts will stipulate clear deliverables with a timeframe and quantified expected outputs/outcomes, 
and they will specify responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting, including the information 
of  progress  indicators  as  set  forth  in  the  contract.  One-year  contracts  will  be  renewed  based  on 
satisfactory  performance.    Payments  will  be  made  on  certification  of  the  FPDA/PMU  of  satisfactory 
performance  of  the  service  provider  and  implementing  partners  in  accordance  with  Work  Plan  and 
Budget and deliverables and acceptance of required reports by the PMU. 
144 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
52.  Financial  accounting  and  reporting.  Financial  statements  will  be  prepared  in  line  with 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) for every fiscal year. The PMU will generate 
quarterly  financial  reports  to  be  submitted  to  DAL,  DoF  and  IFAD.  Consolidated  financial  reports  for 
each  source  of  financing  will  include:  (i)  statement  of  sources  and  uses  of  funds  by  category  and 
component  with  information  on  resources  received,  cash  forecasted,  and  analysis  of  actual  vs. 
budgeted  expenditures;  (ii)  vendor  reports  on  contracts,  disbursements  and  progress  against 
milestones; (iii) outstanding advances and unpaid commitments. 
53.  The Auditor General Office (AGO) of PNG will be the auditor to MVF, unless AGO outsources 
an external auditor on behalf of the project.  The External Auditor will be contracted to undertake an 
annual audit of the MVF accounts in line with the Audit terms of reference  to be provided in the PIM 
on the basis of financial statements prepared at the latest two months after the end of the fiscal year, 
and with the No-objection of IFAD.  The audit will: review transactions in the DA and PA on the basis 
of SoEs and related documentation; examine the application of USD exchange rates against PGK so 
as  to  be  consistent  with  IFAD  policy  regarding  the  conversion  of  foreign  currency  to  local  currency; 
review  the  procurement  processes;  analyse  internal  controls;  and  provide  an  opinion  on  whether 
expenditure fully comply with eligible expenditure for IFAD disbursements in line with IFAD’s  Projects 
Audit Guidelines. The report will include an opinion on the financial statements, as well as an opinion 
on the use of the DA and PA and on the documentation kept by the PMU and FPDA provincial offices 
to  support  the  SOEs.  The  external  auditor  will  submit  audited  financial  statements  along  with  the 
related opinions and management letter no later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. The 
management  letter  will  include  audit  observations  with  opinion  on  internal  control  systems  and 
recommendations  for  improvement.  IFAD  will  provide  its  feedback  on  the  quality  of  the  audit  report 
and will ensure follow up on audit observations through supervision missions. 
54.  The GoPNG DoF Internal Audit Office will undertake periodic compliance audit of the Project on 
internal  control,  disbursement  and  procurement  processes  and  documentation  of  the  project  and 
provide audit reports to the PSC. 
55.  The Project FAM will manage the overall accounting system and will be responsible for ensuring 
that the PMU staff maintain records and adequate documentation of all Project expenditure. 
56.  Government  contribution.    Government  will  ensure  that  counterpart  funds  are  budgeted  in 
relevant  national  annual  budgets,  including  province  and  district  budgets  (PSIP  and  DSIP,  or  own 
resources),  and  that  these  resources  are  released  to  the  project  account  on  a  timely  basis.  GoPNG 
will  contribute  to  the  project  in  the  form  of  waived  taxes,  salaries  of  staff  and  contributions  from  the 
provinces  and  districts.  The  proceeds  of  the  IFAD  financing  may  not  be  used  to  pay  taxes.  The 
GoPNG  contribution  will  be  reflected  in  the  terms  of  the  Financing  Agreement  to  be  established 
between  IFAD  and  GoPNG.  The  GoPNG  will  provide  the  project  with  official  tax-exempt  status.  The 
GoPNG contributions  will be accounted by the PMU  every six months and included in the Financial 
Report.   
57.  Conditions  for  disbursement  (initial  disbursements)  from  the    Loan  Account.    An  initial 
Authorized  Allocation  equivalent  to  an  average  of  six-months  of  eligible  expenditure  during  Project 
implementation  (initial  disbursement  of  up  to  USD1.8  million)  is  foreseen,  as  the  Imprest  Account 
authorized allocation (and may be adjusted to the appropriate level based on the AWPB total amount 
and as authorized by IFAD), once the following conditions for disbursement are met: 
  PMU established and the Project Coordinator, Finance and Administration Manager, Procurement 
Officer and Contract Management Officer have been recruited; 
  DA and PA trust bank accounts have been opened in PMU and FPDA five Province Offices;  
  PMU  has  prepared  the  first  AWPB  and  related  18-month  Procurement  Plan,  approved  by  PSC 
and submitted to IFAD for “no objection”; 
  PMU has presented a tax exemption and the Tax Department has provided the project with official 
tax-exempt status; 
  Submission of draft PIM to IFAD for no-objection; 
  No  disbursement  or  fund  transfer  will  be  made  to  Simbu  and  Jiwaka  Provinces  until  the  said 
provincial  offices  with  assigned  FPDA  Field  Manager,  Administrative  Assistant  and  two  district 
officers have been seconded by the PNG Provincial Government.  
145 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
58.  The only  exception to the  pre-conditions on the authorised allocation (initial  disbursement) will 
be for project start-up expenditure of up to USD700,000 (this amount will form part of the 1.8 million 
authorised  allocation) 
the  procurement  of  vehicles,  equipment,  office  repairs  and 
refurbishment, baseline survey, staff training and project launching.  This exception will be indicated in 
the Financing Agreement. 
to  cover 
Supervision and Implementation Missions 
59.  Supervision  and  implementation  missions  will  be  organised  by  IFAD  twice  a  year.  The  first 
Implementation  Support  Mission  will  take  place  on  the  1st  month  after  the  signing  of  the  Financing 
Agreement to facilitate the following: 
 
 
 
finalisation of the first AWPB and 18-month Procurement Plan; 
finalisation of the Project Implementation Manual; and 
training  of  FPDA  staff  on 
financial 
management  and  financial  reporting  including  the  preparation  of WA  and  SoE  and  procurement 
process and documentation. 
IFAD  disbursement  processes  and  documentation, 
Implementation Readiness  
60.  Table 1 shows start-up activities with regard to financial management. 
Table 1: Financial Management Start-Up Activities 
Action 
Opening of two DA/PA accounts in 
local currency in a commercial 
bank acceptable to IFAD 
Responsible parties 
FPDA/DAL/DoF 
Complete staffing of PMU 
FPDA/PMU 
Submission of WA for the fund 
release to cover start-up costs 
Preparation, finalization of Draft 
PIM and submission to IFAD for 
no-objection 
FPDA/PMU/DAL/ DoT 
FPDA/PMU 
Submission of 1st AWPB and 18- 
month Procurement Plan 
FPDA/PMU/DAL/ PSC 
Target date/Covenant 
Within one month after the date of 
entry into force of the Financing 
Agreement; Certification of 
Opening of DA/ PA and authorized 
signatories, required for the 
release of funds for start-up costs 
Upon entry into force of the 
Financing Agreement 
Recruitment of PC, FAM, PO and 
Accountant is a condition 
precedent of the 1st fund 
disbursement (except for funds to 
cover start-up costs). 
Within one month from the date of 
entry into force of the FA 
Within three months after date of 
entry into force as a condition for 
the first fund release (except for 
funds to cover start-up costs) 
Within three months after date 
entry into force as a condition 
precedent to the initial fund 
release (except for funds to cover 
start-up costs) 
61.  An International Expeditor (with TOR in attachment 4) will be recruited by the PMU and cleared 
by IFAD to fast track project implementation. 
146 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 1: Flow of funds chart 
Advances/Imprest Account 
Replenishment based on 
Withdrawal Applications/SOEs 
signed by Treasury 
IFAD 
LOAN ACCOUNT 
TRUST DESIGNATED BANK 
ACCOUNT IN KINA 
PROJECT BANK ACCOUNTs 
IN KINA  
Cheques Payments 
INVESTMENT AND 
RECURRENT COST 
EXPENDITURES 
147 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 2: Financial management risks and mitigating actions 
Risk category 
Initial risk 
rating 
Risk mitigation measures 
Residual 
risk rating 
Inherent risks 
1.  Country level 
2.  Entity level 
Limited experience in 
implementing externally 
funded projects.  No 
experience with IFAD. 
3.  Project level 
Implementation support 
structure still to be set up. 
Control risks  
4.  Staffing 
5.  Budgeting 
Preparation of the MVF 
budget by FPDA/PMU 
budget for submission to 
DAL and PSC for approval 
and endorsement to IFAD 
for No Objection. 
6.  Flow of funds and 
disbursement 
arrangements 
Limited experience in 
managing donor funds or 
understanding of imprest 
account arrangements. 
H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
H 
Refer to paragraphs 5 and 20 above. 
Clear  roles  and  responsibilities  to  be  included  in 
the  project  framework  and  policy,  oversight  and 
implementation  responsibilities  to  be  spelt  out.  
Accounting  Software  with 
customisation  of 
reporting would be installed.   
staff 
shall  be 
Skilled 
financial 
management  and  procurement  procedures  would 
be  incorporated  into  the  Project  Implementation 
Manual (PIM), approved by IFAD.   
recruited; 
Availability of skilled workforce at country level and 
at  DAL  and  FPDA.    FPDA/PMU  would  recruit 
qualified  finance  staff  with  clear  ToRs  from  open 
market or GoPNG staff on deputation.  The tenure 
of  any  government  staff  should  be  for  at  least  a 
two-year  period.    Draft  ToRs  are  provided  in  MVF 
Final  project  design  mission.    The  engaged  staff 
would  be  exposed  to  best  practices  and  the 
procedures  of  externally-aided  projects  through 
orientation by ICO and trainings to be conducted by 
IFAD. 
An  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  would  be 
prepared by FPDA/PMU staff and approved by the 
Project Steering Committee (PSC).  The approved 
AWPB  would  be  used  as  a  management  tool  to 
identify any bottlenecks in implementation.   
Flow  of  funds  arrangements  are  included  in  the 
Final  Design  Report.    FPDA/PMU  staff  will  be 
provided 
by 
DAL/FPDA/IFAD  at  the  start  up  and  continuing 
capacity building during project implementation 
adequate 
training 
with 
7.  Internal controls 
M 
8.  Accounting 
FPDA  has  existing  MYOB 
accounting system 
M 
Internal control function and processes at FPDA is 
well established and in effective.  The PIM with the 
Finance  and  Administrative  manual  will  include 
these  processes  and  documentation  that    will  be 
reference  guide  for  the  discharge  of  finance  and 
administrative functions. 
The  accounting  function  is  well  established  at 
FPDA  level.    Modified  cash  basis  accounting  is 
used.  This would be replicated at project level and 
PMU  will  procure  an  accounting  software 
preferably  MYOB.    Training  would  be  required  to 
ensure compliance  with  IFAD  minimum  standards.  
Relevant provision would be embedded in the PIM 
and Finance and Administrative manual. 
148 
H 
H 
H 
L 
M 
M 
M 
L 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Risk category 
Initial risk 
rating 
Risk mitigation measures 
Residual 
risk rating 
M 
M 
M 
9.  Financial reporting and 
monitoring 
10.  Internal Audit 
No internal audit function is 
established at FPDA 
11.  Audit 
The Auditor General Office 
(AGO) or a contracted 
private external auditor will 
conduct yearly audit of the 
Project 
The  project  would  use  a  standalone  accounting 
software which would need some customization to 
ensure  the  correct  recording  and  reporting  of 
expenditures by category and by component.   
Internal audit activities for MVF are to performed by 
internal auditor appointed by DoF 
The auditor of AGO or a contracted private external 
auditor will carry out the annual audit of the Project 
in  accordance  with  INTOSAI  standards  and  IFAD 
audit  guidelines  with  specific  Audit  TOR.    In 
addition to the audit opinion, a management Letter 
with audit observations will be included in the audit 
report.  The  mission  review  of  the  audit  report  for 
FPDA  by  a  private  external  auditor  showed 
unqualified opinion. There were delays noted in the 
submission of audit report. 
Overall  project  fiduciary 
risk 
M 
H = High, M = Medium, L = Low. 
M 
L 
M 
M 
149 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  
Procurement 
Review of IFAD and GoPNG Procurement Regulations 
1. 
IFAD’s revised “Project  Procurement  Guidelines”  approved in  September 2010  emphasize the 
possibility  of  using  the  borrower/recipient’s  procurement  regulations,  to  the  extent  that  such 
regulations are consistent with IFAD’s Guidelines.  The revised IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines 
focus less on the details of procurement methods and more on the general principles, standards and 
policies that borrowers/recipients must adhere to when implementing IFAD-financed projects. 
2. 
The GoPNG procurement policies and procedures generally conform to the IFAD procurement 
principles.  The  national  procedures  can  be  used  on  IFAD  projects,  without  risk,  provided  the 
procurement  team  is  well  trained  and  qualified.  However,  IFAD’s  procedures  shall  supersede  the 
Borrower’s procedures where there are inconsistencies between the two procedures. 
General principles 
3. 
There are five key principles that are fundamental in GoPNG tendering and contracting:  
 
“Value for Money”   
  Transparency   
  Effective competition, and   
  Fair and ethical dealing.   
4. 
Procurement should consider:  
  The  need  for  economy  and  efficiency  in  the  implementation  of  the  project,  including  the 
procurement of the goods and works involved;  
  Giving all eligible bidders equal opportunity to compete;  
  The development of domestic contracting and manufacturing industries in PNG;  
  The importance of transparency in the procurement process.  
Open  competition  is  the  basis  for  efficient  public  procurement.  Procurement  should  be 
5. 
performed in a manner to ensure all procured items:  
  Are of satisfactory quality and are compatible with the requirements of the project;  
  Will be delivered or completed in timely fashion;   
  Are priced so as not to affect adversely the economic and financial viability of the project. 
6. 
There are rigid procurement procedures and policies in place in GoPNG that are documented in 
the  following  documents:  (i)  Public  Finance  and  Economic  Management  Act  1995,  Part  V,  as 
amended  in  2015;  (ii)  Operations  Manual  version  5,  year  2006,  issued  by  the  GoPNG  DoF  Central 
Supply  and  Tenders  Board  (CSTB);  and  (iii)  Procurement  of  Goods  and  Services  (2005)  issued  by 
CSTB.  These  GoPNG  procurement  procedures  and  policies  will  be  adopted  for  the  procurement 
activities  of  the  project.    However,  IFAD’s  procurement  procedures  shall  supersede  the  Borrower’s 
procedures where there are inconsistencies between the two procedures. 
GoPNG regulations are intended to uphold the principles of open and fair competition, integrity, 
7. 
fairness,  accountability  and  transparency.  These  precepts  match  the  expectations  of  an  appropriate 
procurement atmosphere as envisaged by the IFAD Procurement Guidelines and so are acceptable if 
adopted by projects. 
Pertinent  provisions  on  procurement  in  the  PFM  1995  as  amended  in  2016,  particularly  with 
8. 
regards to thresholds, include the following: 
151 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
 
 The  Central  Supply  and  Tenders  Board  may  invite  tender  of  any  amount  and  enter  into  a 
procurement contract with a value of up to PGK10 million (USD 3.0 million); 
  The  Provincial  Supply  and  Tenders  Board  may  purchase  and  invite  tender  up  to  PGK  5  million 
(USD1.5 million); 
  Procurement shall be by public tender for procurement of more than PGK 500,000 (USD150,000). 
9. 
The  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  from  resources  provided  or 
administered  by  IFAD  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  the  GoPNG  regulations  and  consistent 
with the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (dated September 2010). Goods 
and  services  (non-consulting)  procured  using  International  or  National  Competitive  Bidding,  National 
Shopping  (NS)  and  Direct  Contracting  (DC)  will  follow  the  procedures  and  processes  defined  in  the 
Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  approved  by  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  IFAD.  The 
selection  of  individual  consultants  and  individual  service  providers  will  also  be  defined  in  the  PIM, 
which  shall  include  details  of  the  selection  method  to  be  applied  in  case  of  consultancies  services 
such as Quality and Cost Based Selection, Fixed Budget Selection, Least Cost Selection, Consultants 
Qualification Selection and Single Source Selection.  
10.  The  PMU  will  submit  an  18-month  Procurement  Plan  immediately  after  the  Financing 
Agreement enters into force, with support from the Project Expeditor, and it will be updated annually or 
as required to reflect actual implementation needs.  
Procurement Procedures 
11.  Procurement under the project is to be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement 
and any duly agreed amendments thereto.  An Annual Procurement Plan will be prepared by FPDA in 
consultation with other project stakeholders and submitted for approval to the PSC and to IFAD for no-
objection.  Before commencing implementation, the project will provide, together with the initial AWPB, 
an 18-month Procurement Plan to IFAD for approval as stipulated in IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.  
To the extent possible, the procurement contracts shall be bulked into sizeable bid packages in such a 
manner as to permit the optimal use of competitive bidding. 
12.  The  budget  of  the  project  by  category  of  expenditure  will  be  provided  in  the  Financing 
Agreement.  Before agreeing to any material modification or waiver of the terms and conditions of any 
contract granting an extension of the stipulated time for performance of such a contract or issuing any 
change  order,  (except  in  cases  of  extreme  urgency),  which  increase  the  costs  in  a  category  of 
expenditure  by  more  than  10%  of  the  original  budget,  FPDA/PMU  will  seek  IFAD’s  approval  of  the 
proposed  modification  and  reallocation  of  budget.  The  PIM  will  include  detailed  provisions  on 
procurement procedures and documentation. 
13.  FPDA/PMU  will  be  responsible  for  procurement  involving  staff  recruitment,  contracts  for 
services and staff training activities.  FPDA will undertake recruitment of the PMU PC and FAM, and 
thereafter  the  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  recruitment  of  other  PMU  staff  and  the  Provincial  Project 
staff  in  collaboration  with  FPDA  human  resource  unit.      Procurement  of  goods  and  services  will  be 
carried  out  by  the  PMU Procurement Officer in consultation  with  the FPDA  Procurement Officer and 
supervised by the FAM.  All procurements with a value of USD1,000 to USD500,000 will be through 
local shopping request for quotations. Procurements above USD500,000 will be through public tender. 
These procurement limitations are in line with GoPNG procurement regulations. 
14.  All bidding documents and contracts for the procurement of goods and consulting services will 
include a provision requiring bidders, suppliers, contractors, subcontractors and consultants to permit 
IFAD  to  inspect  their  accounts,  records  and  other  documents  relating  to  the  bid  submission  and 
contract performance, and to have them audited by Fund-appointed auditors and investigators.  This 
provision will require bidders, suppliers, contractors, subcontractors and consultants to: (i) maintain all 
documents and records related to activities performed for three years after completion of the contract; 
and (ii) require the delivery of any document necessary for the investigation of allegations of fraud or 
corruption  (and  the  availability  of  employees  or  agents  of  the  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors, 
subcontractors  or  consultants  with  knowledge  of  the  activities  financed  by  IFAD)  to  respond  to 
questions from IFAD’s personnel or any properly designated Auditor, investigator, agent or consultant 
relating  to  review  or  audit  of  the  document.    If  the  bidder,  supplier,  contractor,  subcontractor  or 
consultant  fails  to  comply  with  IFAD’s  request,  or  otherwise  obstructs  IFAD’s  review  of  the  matter.  
IFAD, at its sole discretion, may take appropriate action against the bidder, supplier, subcontractor or 
152 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
consultant,  including the imposition of sanctions in accordance  with the  administrative procedures of 
the Fund. 
15.  All  service  providers’  contracts  will  stipulate  clear  deliverables  and  will  specify  responsibilities 
with regard to monitoring and reporting. Terms of reference for service providers will require gender-
balanced teams, and that contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target and indicators. 
Annual procurement plan 
16.  The  procurement  regulations  require  the  preparation  of  an  Annual  Procurement  Plan  by  each 
GoPNG  ministry  or  department.  This  matches  the  procurement  requirement  of  IFAD.    An  Annual 
Procurement Plan  will be prepared by the project in consultation  with other project stakeholders and 
submitted for approval to the PSC and to IFAD for no-objection. 
17.  Before commencing implementation, the project will provide, together with the initial AWPB, an 
18-month  Procurement  Plan  to  IFAD  for  approval  as  stipulated  in  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines.  
The  project  will  thereafter  prepare  and  send  to  IFAD  the  PSC-approved  Procurement  Plan  as 
reviewed and endorsed by DAL on an annual basis. The procurement plan prepared by the PMU will 
have the following minimum requirements: 
  a brief description of the procurement; 
  estimated cost; 
  procurement method that will be used; 
  pre- or post-qualification requirements; 
 
 
IFAD prior review requirements;  
the time frame for procurement. 
18.  The Procurement Plan will be prepared for goods, works and consultancy services separately.  
It  will  specify  the  method  of  procurement  for  each  contract  to  be  financed,  including  thresholds, 
ceilings and preferences. During the programme  year, the project may modify the Procurement Plan 
as per the need and all modifications to the Procurement Plan should be approved by IFAD. 
19. 
IFAD  will  provide  a  template  for  a  Procurement  Plan.   The  Procurement  Plan  will  also  specify 
any  additional  requirements  as  set  out  in  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  with  respect  to  certain 
methods of procurement.  The Procurement Plan will be revised and further detailed at the start of the 
project and submitted to IFAD for a no objection. 
20.  Procurement  will  be  undertaken  exclusively  during  the  project  implementation  period.    No 
procurement  will  be  undertaken  if  it  entails  a  payment  to  persons  or  entities  or  an  import  of  goods 
prohibited  by  a  decision  of  the  UN  Security  Council  taken  under  Chapter VII  of  the  Charter  of  the 
United Nations. 
IFAD prior review thresholds 
21.  The  award  of  any  contract  for  goods  and  services  for  goods  costing  over USD150,000  per 
contract will be subject to prior review by IFAD. All related procurement documents will be submitted to 
IFAD  for  prior  review  and  no-objection.  For  goods,  this  will  include:  the  tender,  bidding  documents, 
evaluation of the Project Procurement Committee or Tender Board and draft contract. For services, it 
will include terms of reference, process of selection, evaluation by the Project Procurement Committee 
or Tender Board.   
22.  All  direct  contracts  for  goods  and  civil  works  and  single  source  selection  for  service  providers 
above  the  prescribed  procurement  and  selection  method  thresholds  shall  be  undertaken  in  line  with 
the provisions of IFAD Procurement Guidelines for direct contracting and single source selection and 
subject to IFAD prior review. 
23.  Responsibilities  of  contractors  and  suppliers.  Major  service  providers  will  be  required  to 
maintain all documents and records related to activities performed for three years after completion of 
the  contract.  They  will  also  be  required  to  deliver  any  document  necessary  for  the  investigation  of 
allegations of fraud or corruption, (and the availability of employees or agents of the bidders, suppliers, 
contractors,  subcontractors  or  consultants  with  knowledge  of  the  activities  financed  by  IFAD),  to 
153 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
respond to questions from IFAD’s personnel or any properly designated Auditor, investigator, agent or 
consultant relating to a review or audit of the document. 
24. 
If  the  bidder,  supplier,  contractor,  subcontractor  or  consultant  fails  to  comply  or  otherwise 
obstructs  the  review  process,  IFAD  may  at  its  sole  discretion  take  appropriate  action  against  the 
bidder, supplier, subcontractor or consultant, including the imposition of sanctions in accordance with 
the administrative procedures of the Fund. 
25.  The procurement-awarded services for auditing of the project shall be done at least twice during 
the project implementation period. In the event that the project accounts are audited by private audit 
firms, these will be selected through the quality- and cost-based selection process, with a ratio of 70% 
quality and 30% cost. 
26.  Procurement  documentation.  Supporting  documents,  including  suppliers’  invoices,  evidence 
of  payment,  analysis  of  bids,  contracts,  payment  vouchers  and  receipts,  certification  of  delivery  and 
inspection  report  for  goods  and  materials  and  certification  of  submission  of  report  acceptable  to 
FPDA/PMU  will  be retained in an  organised manner  by  the project for inspection during Supervision 
and Implementation Support Missions and examination by auditors. 
Good Governance Framework 
27.  Fraud  and  corruption  can  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  the  IFAD’s  operations  in  different 
ways.  IFAD  shall  apply  a  zero-tolerance  policy  where  it  has  determined,  through  an  investigation 
performed  by  IFAD,  the  borrower  or  another  competent  entity,  that  fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive  or 
coercive actions have occurred in projects financed through its loans and grants, and it shall enforce a 
range  of  sanctions  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  applicable  IFAD  rules  and  regulations  and 
legal instruments. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope 
of  this  policy  and  that  appropriate  sanctions  will  be  applied  where  the  allegations  are  substantiated. 
This policy applies to IFAD-funded activities. IFAD ensures that it is effective in preventing, detecting 
and investigating fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive practices. The Fund shall take all possible 
actions  to  protect  from  reprisals  individuals  who  help  reveal  corrupt  practices  in  its  project  or  grant 
activities and individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious allegations. This policy is in line with 
the policies adopted by the other international financial institutions. 
28.  Many transactions in the Project will be vulnerable to corruption. Apart from the corruption from 
procurement, including overcharges for honorariums and costs, the Project will also be vulnerable to 
corruption from government employees who expect “thanksgiving money” (bribes) from beneficiaries, 
suppliers, and contractors. 
29. 
Integrated Framework for Good Governance. In order to address the risks and concerns on 
corruption,  the  PMU  will  adopt  an  Integrated  Framework  for  Good  Governance.  The  framework  as 
outlined below will include provisions to ensure that procurement and the selection of enterprises that 
will enter into business partnerships and benefit from MVF support, are carried out in accordance with 
GovPNG and IFAD rules (including IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in Its Activities 
and Operations); and with project design specifications. The framework will be included in the PIM and 
published on MVF website and will be revisited by the PMU annually in order to improve as necessary. 
Main provisions will be as follows: 
  Transparency on information: this will include: (i) the  publication/posting of all procurement, calls 
for proposals, contract awarding and business partnership details on local newspapers, at district 
and  provincial  offices  and  on  MVF  website,  including  assessment  criteria  and  weighing;  (ii)  the 
participation of representatives of end-users in bid assessments; (iii) the prompt communication to 
bidders of bid evaluation outcomes; (iv) standardization of certain communication items/materials 
e.g.  (a)  use  of  standard  wording  in  advertisements;  (b)  agreement  on  the  list  of  newspapers  of 
nation-wide circulation in which specific advertisements will be placed; (c) use of standard bidding 
and  contract  documents  and  request  for  proposals  (for  consultancy  service),  with  no  further 
changes to be made without IFAD’s prior approval; and (d) publication of prices paid for items in 
different locations; 
  Participation and consultation: this will cover the following: (i) annual planning and preparation of 
the  project  budget  will  be  participatory  whereby  the  community  members,  groups  and  business 
partners  will  be  consulted  by  the  project;  (ii)  the  PMU  will  establish  a  complaint  handling 
154 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
mechanism (and the use of sanctions), whereby community members and the general public can 
channel complaints or inquiries e.g. through the use of mobile phone text messaging. Complaints 
and  inquiries  will  be  systematically  recorded  and  answered  and  posted  on  Project’s  website  so 
that case processing will be more transparent. Designated staff at the PMU and FPDA Provincial 
Offices will handle complaints and respond in a timely manner; (iii) Annual assessments of service 
providers and business partners will be undertaken by the PMU and FPDA in consultation with the 
local  communities  with  the  results  contributing  to  improvement  of  performance  of  the  service 
providers, business partners and annual project planning process. 
  Monitoring and oversight: this will include the following:  (i) IFAD will conduct one full supervision 
mission annually, with the participation of relevant project partners and at least one follow up and 
implementation support mission; (ii) the Project will establish an operational M&E system from the 
district,  province  to  the  national  level  to  proactively  monitor  and  report  on  project  activities  and 
performance  across  the  results  chain  (including  financial  and  physical  progress);  (iii)  review  of 
financial management and procurement will be integrated in IFAD annual supervision mission and 
follow up mission,  complemented by yearly desk-based review of Interim Financial Report (IFRs) 
and  audit  reports;  (iv)  the  project  will  prepare  interim  financial  reports  every  three  months  and 
annual financial reports and submit to IFAD within 45 days after end of the year; (v) the financial 
reports will be audited and audit report with audit observations and management responses will be 
submitted to IFAD within six months every after end of the year; (v) procurement: the project will 
be subject to a higher level and expanded scope of ex-post reviews by IFAD to include checks for 
indicators  of  collusion,  end-use  deliveries,  and  procedural  compliance,  among  other  measures; 
(vi)  annual  meetings  will  be  held  to  review  the  Project  performance  as  well  as  the  country 
programme  to  share  lessons  learned  and  best  practices  among  project  staff  and  government 
counterpart agencies and the co-financiers; (vii) annual assessments of service providers by local 
communities  to  feed  into  the  annual  project  planning  process;  (viii)  Multi-Stakeholders  Platforms 
(MSPs) will be established to provide a forum for raising issues affecting value chain development, 
The MSPs will assist the smallholders and their organizations to attain a better access to technical 
and financial services, to develop supportive business environment, and to gain larger share of the 
end  market  price  through  vertical  and  horizontal  linkages  along  the  value  chains.  The  forums 
should involve representatives of smallholders, private sector players, and relevant governments.   
  Capacity  building  and  training:  (i)  the  project  has  an  explicit  responsibility  on  strengthening  the 
capacity of the staff, service providers and business partners to improve the weak implementation 
capacity  and  accountability;  (ii)  the  project  also  provides  on  the  job  training  on  financial 
management  and  procurement  as  part  of  start  up  process  to  enhance  capacities  in  all  critical 
fiduciary areas 
  Code  of  Conduct:  (i)  the  Project  will  provide  internal  conducts  and  code  of  business  ethics  and 
copies  of  relevant  law  and  articles  on  Code  of  Conducts  for  civil  servant  to  all  Project  staff, 
including  contracted  staff,  business  partners  and  service  providers  and  will  be  integrated  to  the 
contracts with staff, service providers and business partners; (ii) the Project will identify and apply 
sanctions  available  under  the  current  law  and  regulations  of  GoPNG.    Sanctions  for  individuals 
may  include  transfer  of  duties,  retailing,  suspension,  dismissal,  regrading,  prosecution  under  the 
GoPNG law.  Sanctions for firms may include: termanation of contract, debarment, blacklisting and 
prosecution under the GoPNG law; (iii) Performance review of staff will be undertaken annually. 
155 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Attachment 1: Eighteen-month procurement plan 
156 
UnitPY1PY2TotalFin. RuleProc. Acct.Proc. MethodA. Inclusive business partnerships1. Fresh produce partnershipsScoping study international service providerconsultancy6060IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Climate change baseline studystudy6161IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Information campaign/calls for expression of interestcampaign262752IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Business Development Service providers for preparation of partnership proposalslumpsum-5353IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Appraisal committeeper year-1111IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Financial education (CEFI modules 1 and 2)person-134134IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Household trainingHH-107107IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Training of partnerstraining-6464IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )International technical assistanceperson/month181123305IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Micro partnershipsCapacity buildinglumpsum1212IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Investment - grant incentivelumpsum44IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Small partnerships Capacity building for leaderslumpsum3838IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Investment for leaders grant incentiveslumpsum2020IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Capacity building for growerslumpsum3030IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Investment - grant incentive for growerslumpsum1919IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Medium partnerships -Capacity building for leaderslumpsum2828IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Investment for leaders grant incentiveslumpsum100100IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Working capital for leaderslumpsum124124IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Capacity building for growerslumpsum1919IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Investment - grant incentive for growerslumpsum100100IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Large partnerships -Working capital for leaderslumpsum1616IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Capacity building for growerslumpsum99IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Investment for growers - grant incentivelumpsum5050IFAD LOAN (100%)GRANT_PAOTHER_PM ( 100% )Equipment for provincial teams-Cars 4x4 /acar229229IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Computer + Docking Station + Tabletset2121IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Photocopier/Printer/Scannerset44IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )GPS, cameras, projectors set1010IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Motorbicycles motorbicycle1212IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Refurbishment offices office4141IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANBF_PM (100%)Recurrent costs -Provincial Teams_Highlands and Morobe-M&E Officer person/month114114IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Operating costsoffice5050IFAD LOAN (100%)OC_PANBF_PM (100%)FPDA provincial field managers allowancesper year639IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)FPDA district officers allowancesper year7411IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)2. Galip nut development-Galip nut resource assessmentassessment46-46IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Financial, operational and legal studies and assistance to PMU lumpsum402161IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )NARI's plant Lease fees per year382563IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Working capital for purchase of nuts lumpsum424486IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Working capital for other operating costs lumpsum622789IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Organization of supply chain's partnerships lumpsum142539IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Management fees - NARI plant management teamlumpsum371148IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% )International market development studylumpsum50-50IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Study tour to the Philippineslumpsum-1616IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Galip nut managerperson/month322255IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Galip Nut Manager Operating Costslumpsum201031IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Car 4x4car46-46IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )GPS, Cameras, Projectorsset2-2IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )B. Supportive Value Chain Investments1. Spots improvements of field roadsTehcnical engineer supportper year2626IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )2. Financial inclusionExerciseper district102-102IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Support to networkslumpsum5075125IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Support to digital moneylumpsum250125375IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Technical Assistance - increasing outreachlumpsum5153105IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Technical Assistance - new products and serviceslumpsum511364IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Risk sharing arrangementslumpsum10075175IFAD LOAN (100%)CREDIT_PAFB_PM ( 100% )Support to CEFIOperating costslumpsum12263184IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Vehiclevehicle38-38IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Management overheadlumpsum241337IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Exposure visitslumpsum15-15IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Trainingslumpsum25-25IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )C. Collective Governance and Project Management1. Collective Governance ITA for Industry Structuring Strategylumpsum-2323IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% ) PNG Fresh Produce Associationlumpsum-1010IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% ) Capacity Buildinglumpsum-1313IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Fresh Produce Multi-Stakeholder Platformslumpsum-1313IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% ) FPDA Capacity Assessmentassessment31-31IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )FPDA Capacity Buildinglumpsum-2727IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Policy Studies Fresh produce/Galip Nutstudy-5252IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Policy Workshopsworkshop-1111IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% ) ITA for KM and Communication Strategyconsultancy301546IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )MIS Development and Capacity Buildinlumpsum511364IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )TA for ICT-Based Applicationslumpsum-4343IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% ) Website Developmentconsultancy15-15IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Website Maintenancelumpsum-55IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Communication Campaignscampaign-88IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Publications and Manualslumpsum201031IFAD LOAN (100%)G&S_PALCB_PM ( 100% )2. Project ManagementProject expeditor (international technical assistance)person/month182-182IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )TA for GESI strategy and follow-uplumpsum30-30IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )International consultant to set-up M&E systemperson/month60-60IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Capacity building activitieslumpsum8816IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Car 4x4 car90-90IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Sedan sedan41-41IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Computer + Docking Station + Tablet set17-17IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Photocopier/Printer/Scanner set1-1IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )GPS, Cameras, Projectors set2-2IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% ) National Launch Workshopworkshop20-20IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% ) Provincial Launch Workshopsworkshop18-18IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Other Meetings and workshopsworkshop-1111IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Financial Management Trainingstraining335IFAD LOAN (100%)W&T_PAQCBS_PM ( 100% )Accounting Software-Multi Usersoftware5-5IFAD LOAN (100%)E&M_PANCB_PM ( 100% )Baseline Surveysurvey5151IFAD LOAN (100%)CONSULTANCIES_PACON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )PMU Recurrent costsProject Coordinatorperson/month412869IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Office Assistantperson/month9615IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Production and Value Chain System Managerperson/month312152IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Infrastructure Engineerperson/month-2828IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Policy Development Officerperson/month-2121IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)MIS Development & Content Manager - IFAD financed person/month312152IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Senior KM/M&E Officerperson/month302050IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)GESI Officerperson/month312152IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Financial and Administrative Officerperson/month382664IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Procurement Officerperson/month312152IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Accountantperson/month231538IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Driversperson/month13921IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)IFAD Liaison Officer - based in POMperson/month482573IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)FPDA staff allowances per year15823IFAD LOAN (100%)S&A_PACQ_PM (100%)Travel Allowanceslumpsum252651IFAD LOAN (100%)OC_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Vehicles operating costsper year7070140IFAD LOAN (100%)OC_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Office costsper year151631IFAD LOAN (100%)OC_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Office extension repairs and refurbishmentlumpsum35-35IFAD LOAN (100%)OC_PALCB_PM ( 100% )Total 3,2432,3845,627Total USD'000 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Attachment 2: Summary of Appropriate Procurement Methods 
I.     Procurement of goods and works 
Method 
Description 
Applicability/Characteristics 
Advertising 
Remarks 
International 
Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) 
Procedure for 
procurement of goods 
and works on the 
international market with 
open competition 
  High value procurement 
 
Interest for international 
business community 
  Equal opportunity to bid 
ICB by direct invitation  
(no open advertisement) 
  Smaller value 
  Limited number of suppliers 
Limited 
International 
Bidding (LIB) 
National 
Competitive 
Bidding (NCB) 
Procedure for public 
procurement in Borrower 
Country 
General 
Procurement 
Notices (GPN) 
Open ITB or 
invitation to pre-
qualify 
UNDB/dgMarket 
International 
press 
Restricted ITB 
Local press 
Internet 
Open ITB 
- Margin of 
preference for 
domestic goods 
and works may be 
applied 
- Domestic 
preference not 
applicable 
- IFAD to establish 
acceptability of 
national procedures 
- Foreign suppliers 
allowed to bid 
Request for 
quotation 
(restricted) 
Request for 
quotation 
(restricted) 
- Purchase order or 
brief contract 
- Purchase order or 
brief contract 
  Small value contracts 
  Geographically scattered, 
labour-intensive or time-
spread works 
  Local prices below 
international market 
  No or limited interest from 
international business 
community 
ICB advan 
tages outweighed by financial 
and administrative costs 
 
 
  Small value procurement 
  Off-the-shelf goods, standard 
specification commodities, 
simple civil works 
  Same as International 
Shopping 
  Goods available locally from 
several sources at 
competitive prices 
International 
Shopping 
National 
Shopping 
Comparison of price 
quotations from at least 
3 suppliers in 2 different 
countries 
Comparison of price 
quotations from at least 
3 suppliers 
Direct 
Contracting 
Single or sole-source 
selection 
  Extension of existing contract 
  Standardization for vehicles, 
No advertising 
No competition 
Procurement 
from 
Commodity 
Markets 
Procurement of goods 
from commodity markets 
Work by Force 
Account 
Use of the Borrower’s 
own personnel and 
equipment to perform 
equipment 
  Proprietary equipment 
obtainable from one source 
only 
  Condition of performance 
guarantee 
  Emergency procurement  
  Grains, animal feed, cooking 
oil, fuel, fertilizers, pesticides, 
metals 
  Multiple award for partial 
quantities to secure supply 
and prices 
  Difficulty in defining work 
quantities 
  Small, scattered works in 
157 
Pre-qualified 
bidders 
Issuance of 
periodic 
invitations 
Short bid validity 
Single (market) 
currency for bid 
and payment 
No advertising 
No competition 
IFAD ensure that  
- force account 
units are properly 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
construction work 
remote locations 
  Risk of unavoidable work 
interruptions 
  No disruption of on-going 
operations 
  Emergency situations 
Procurement 
from UN 
Agencies 
Procurement of specific 
goods from specialized 
UN agencies 
Small quantities of off-the-shelf 
products 
No advertising 
No competition 
staffed, equipped 
and organized 
- costs are 
reasonable 
- Use of UN agency 
rules and 
procedures 
- Indication in loan 
agreement 
158 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
II. Procurement of Consulting Services 
Method 
Description 
Applicability/characteristics 
Advertising 
Remarks 
Quality and 
Cost Based 
Selection 
Selection 
Under a Fixed 
Budget 
Quality Based 
Selection 
Selection 
Based on 
Consultants’ 
Qualifications 
Single Source 
Selection 
Competitive 
selection from 
short-listed firms 
based on quality 
and cost of 
proposal 
Competitive 
selection from 
short-listed firms 
based on best 
technical proposal 
within budget 
Competitive 
selection from 
short-listed firms 
based on quality 
only 
Selection from 
short-listed firms 
based on 
consultant’s 
experience and 
competence 
Selection of a firm 
without any 
competition 
Selection of 
Individual 
Consultants 
Individuals selected 
based on 
qualifications, 
references and 
other relevant 
criteria, with limited 
or no competition 
Two-step evaluation: quality 
(technical proposal) and cost 
(financial proposal) 
  Simple and precisely 
defined assignment 
  Consulting firms requested 
to bid within a fixed budget  
GPN (large 
contracts) 
Request for 
Proposal 
(RFP) 
Request for 
proposal 
Preferred 
selection method 
for most 
consulting 
services 
Rejection of 
proposals above 
fixed budget 
  Complex/highly specialized 
assignments 
  High downstream impact 
  No comparability of 
proposals 
GPN (large 
contracts) 
Request for 
Proposal 
Only technical 
proposals may be 
invited 
  Very small assignments 
  Cost of RFP preparation 
and evaluation not justified 
Request for 
expression of 
interest 
Submission of 
combined 
technical-financial 
proposals 
Must be exceptional: 
  Continuation of previous 
No 
competition 
Clear advantage 
over competition 
or impossibility to 
compete must be 
demonstrated 
work 
  Emergency situation 
  Very small assignments 
  Only one firm is 
qualified/experienced 
  Teams of personnel not 
required 
  No additional professional 
support required 
  Main requirement is 
experience and qualification 
of individual consultant 
Request for 
expression of 
interest or 
Direct contact 
Individuals may 
be selected on a 
single source 
basis 
Refer to the IFAD Procurement Guidelines for the following procurement methods: 
  agents and inspection agents 
  Procurement with community participation 
  Procurement for UN agencies, Civil Society Organizations, Auditors and Service  
159 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  
Project cost and financing 
Main assumptions 
The programme is financed over a six-year period. Costs have been estimated on the basis of 
1. 
prices prevailing at design completion in January 2017. 
Price  contingencies.    Price  contingencies  aim  to  cover  expected  price  increase  between 
2. 
project preparation and project start-up, as well  as throughout the project  implementation period. For 
the purpose of this analysis, annual local inflation rates have been set on an average of 5% from 2017 
to 2022. For foreign inflation, an average inflation of 1.8% has been retained. 
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in this analysis has been set at PGK 3.1 /USD, which 
3. 
is the average exchange rate that prevailed between the months of January 2016 and January 2017.  
4. 
Tax and duties.  Part  of the Government co-financing of the  programme will be  in  the form of 
waiving of all taxes and duties on goods and services procured under the programme. The rates and 
amounts  of  taxes  and  duties  in  project  costs  presented  below  are  defined  only  to  determine  the 
GoPNG contribution and to value the total programme cost. 
5. 
Imported  items  attract  import  and  excise  duties  of  varying  proportions,  and  a  value-added  tax 
(VAT)  of  10%  is  levied  on  all  imported  goods.  Currently,  the  VAT  rate  in  the  country  is  10%  and 
applies  to  all  goods  and  services  used  for  the  project  (including  contractual  services,  training  and 
studies).  The  GoPNG  will  finance  the  cost  of  all  taxes  on  goods  procured  under  the  project,  or  will 
waive tax and duties. 
Project costs 
6. 
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are  estimated at  USD  50.26 
million over the six-year implementation period. Project costs by components are summarised in Table 
1, while a complete set of project summary tables and detailed costs tables are presented in Annexes 
1 and 2 to this appendix. 
Project  costs  by  components.  Project 
7. 
three  major 
components:  (i) Inclusive  business  partnerships  (44.8%  of  total  costs);  (ii) Supportive  Value  Chain 
Investments  (39.6%  of  costs);  (iii)  Collective  governance  and  programme  management  (15.6%  of 
costs). A summary breakdown of project costs by components is shown in Table 1. 
investments  are  organised 
into 
Table 1. Project costs by component 
8. 
Project financing. An IFAD loan will cover USD 25.5 million, or 50.7% of the total project cost. 
The  GoPNG  will  contribute  USD  2.85 million  (5.7%);  beneficiaries  will  contribute  USD  1.21  million 
161 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 8703,4645,6137,6812,10274820,4792. Galip nut development 4302968814287-2,042Subtotal 1,3013,7606,4948,1092,10974822,521B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads -523,7314,7575,0823,36916,9902. Financial inclusion 82983479835781-2,899Subtotal 8298864,5295,1145,1633,36919,889C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 1474645463961701611,8832. Project Management 1,0648521,0339711,0659825,966Subtotal 1,2111,3151,5791,3671,2341,1437,849Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,260 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
(2.4%); financial institutions will finance USD 4.22 million (8.4%) in the form of credits to beneficiaries; 
and provinces and districts will contribute with USD 13 million (25.9%) to spot improvements of access 
roads.  More  precisely,  it  is  expected  that  five  provinces  will  contribute  with  approximately  USD  5 
million in three years and 20 districts will contribute with  USD 8 million in the same period of time. A 
yet  unidentified  financier  is  expected  to  contribute  USD  3.4  million  –  6.9  per  cent  of  the  programme 
cost. The proposed financing plan is summarised in Table 2. 
Table 2. Programme financing 
9. 
The  IFAD  loan  will  finance:  (i)  Component  1  “Inclusive  business  partnerships”  (USD  12.3 
million), (ii) Component 2 “Supportive value chain investments” (USD 6.26 million), (iii) Component 3 
“Collective governance and project management” (USD 6.9 million). 
10.  Financial  institutions  and  beneficiaries’  contributions  are  allocated  in  Component  1.  More 
specifically, micro, small, medium and large partnerships will be established under sub-component 1.1 
“Fresh  produce  partnerships”.  Financial  institutions  will  support  the  project  by  providing  credit  to 
project’s beneficiaries, mainly within the partnerships in sub-component 1.1. 
11.  The Government contribution will mainly consist in exemptions from tax and duties on all project 
inputs that involve funding from the IFAD loan. The estimate of tax and duties was based on the rates 
in effect at the time of the design completion.  
12.  Expenditure and disbursement accounts. The project will be rolled out through the national 
PMU within FPDA, which will manage and coordinate the flow of funds and the expenditure incurred 
on account of the project activities.  A summary of the total costs by expenditure accounts per year is 
shown  in  table  3  and  a  summary  of  the  total  costs  by  disbursement  accounts  and  financier  is 
presented in table 4.  
Table 3. Disbursement accounts by financier ©
162 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersComponents by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 1,1885.811,53456.3--2,32011.31,2145.94,22320.620,47940.72. Galip nut development 1175.777337.9--1,15256.4----2,0424.1Subtotal 1,3055.812,30754.6--3,47215.41,2145.44,22318.822,52144.8B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads 3782.23,61321.313,00076.5------16,99033.82. Financial inclusion 2458.42,65491.6--------2,8995.8Subtotal 6223.16,26731.513,00065.4------19,88939.6C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 29415.61,58984.4--------1,8833.72. Project Management 62910.55,33789.5--------5,96611.9Subtotal 92311.86,92688.2--------7,84915.6Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.0 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Consultancies_DA 75911.35,87287.1--1101.6----6,74113.42. Equipment and Material_DA 18310.01,64390.0--------1,8263.63. Goods and Services_DA 529.642477.7--6912.7----5461.14. GRANT_DA --3,00243.8--3,17046.368210.0--6,85413.65. Workshops_DA 68910.06,01487.3--1221.8630.9--6,88813.76. Works_DA 2861.82,57416.213,00082.0------15,86031.67. Salaries and Allowances_DA 72315.04,08585.0--------4,8089.68. Operating Costs_DA 15910.01,43590.0--------1,5953.29. Credit, Guarantee Funds_DA --4508.8----4699.14,22382.15,14210.2Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.0 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4. Expenditure accounts by financier 
163 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalFor.Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 75911.35,87287.1--1101.6----6,74113.41,892B. Equipment and Material 18310.01,64390.0--------1,8263.6798C. Goods and Services 529.642477.7--6912.7----5461.1266D. Grant & Subsidies --3,00243.8--3,17046.368210.0--6,85413.6-E. Trainings and workshop 68910.06,01487.3--1221.8630.9--6,88813.725F. Works 2861.82,57416.213,00082.0------15,86031.66,344G. Credit, guarantee fund /b --4508.8----4699.14,22382.15,14210.2-Total Investment Costs 1,9684.519,98045.613,00029.63,4727.91,2142.84,2239.643,85787.39,326II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 72315.04,08585.0--------4,8089.6-B. Operating Costs 15910.01,43590.0--------1,5953.2788Total Recurrent Costs 88213.85,52086.2--------6,40212.7788Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.010,114 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Attachment 1: 
Summary cost and financing tables (USD) 
164 
TableDescription1Components by Financier 2Expenditure Accounts by Financier 3Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs4Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies5Components Project Cost Summary 6Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 7Project Components by Year -- Base Costs8Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies9Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs10Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies11Disbursement Accounts by Financiers12Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersComponents by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialLocalThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 1.1885,811.53456,3--2.32011,31.2145,94.22320,620.47940,71.07018.5678422. Galip nut development 1175,777337,9--1.15256,4----2.0424,14751.450117Subtotal 1.3055,812.30754,6--3.47215,41.2145,44.22318,822.52144,81.54520.017959B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads 3782,23.61321,313.00076,5------16.99033,86.7709.8433782. Financial inclusion 2458,42.65491,6--------2.8995,82782.376245Subtotal 6223,16.26731,513.00065,4------19.88939,67.04812.219622C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 29415,61.58984,4--------1.8833,74861.2091882. Project Management 62910,55.33789,5--------5.96611,91.1134.601252Subtotal 92311,86.92688,2--------7.84915,61.6005.810440Total PROJECT COSTS 2.8515,725.50050,713.00025,93.4726,91.2142,44.2238,450.260100,010.19338.0452.022 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalFor.Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 75911.35,87287.1--1101.6----6,74113.41,892B. Equipment and Material 18310.01,64390.0--------1,8263.6798C. Goods and Services 529.642477.7--6912.7----5461.1266D. Grant & Subsidies --3,00243.8--3,17046.368210.0--6,85413.6-E. Trainings and workshop 68910.06,01487.3--1221.8630.9--6,88813.725F. Works 2861.82,57416.213,00082.0------15,86031.66,344G. Credit, guarantee fund /b --4508.8----4699.14,22382.15,14210.2-Total Investment Costs 1,9684.519,98045.613,00029.63,4727.91,2142.84,2239.643,85787.39,326II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 72315.04,08585.0--------4,8089.6-B. Operating Costs 15910.01,43590.0--------1,5953.2788Total Recurrent Costs 88213.85,52086.2--------6,40212.7788Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.010,114 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
165 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs(US$ '000)Supportive Value ChainInclusive businessInvestmentspartnershipsSpotsCollective GovernanceFreshimprovementsand Project ManagementproduceGalip nutof fieldFinancialCollectiveProjectpartnershipsdevelopmentroadsinclusionGovernanceManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 1,0654401,0201,8341,2207206,299B. Equipment and Material 807303-457-1551,723C. Goods and Services -265--246-511D. Grant & Subsidies 6,004850----6,854E. Trainings and workshop 5,795117-802302486,470F. Works --15,860---15,860G. Credit, guarantee fund /b 4,692--450--5,142Total Investment Costs 18,3631,97516,8802,8211,6961,12342,859II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 1,261----3,2004,462B. Operating Costs 300----1,2451,545Total Recurrent Costs 1,561----4,4456,007Total BASELINE COSTS 19,9241,97516,8802,8211,6965,56948,866Physical Contingencies -------Price Contingencies Inflation Local 5155783701643681,256Foreign 40102782429138Subtotal Inflation 55467110781873971,394Devaluation -------Subtotal Price Contingencies 55467110781873971,394Total PROJECT COSTS 20,4792,04216,9902,8991,8835,96650,260  Taxes 8421173782451882522,022Foreign Exchange 1,0704756,6912784861,11310,114 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
166 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Supportive Value ChainInclusive businessInvestmentspartnershipsSpotsCollective GovernanceFreshimprovementsand Project ManagementproduceGalip nutof fieldFinancialCollectiveProjectpartnershipsdevelopmentroadsinclusionGovernanceManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 1,1334681,1301,8851,3447816,741B. Equipment and Material 876312-482-1561,826C. Goods and Services -277--269-546D. Grant & Subsidies 6,004850----6,854E. Trainings and workshop 6,113136-822702876,888F. Works --15,860---15,860G. Credit, guarantee fund /b 4,692--450--5,142Total Investment Costs 18,8182,04216,9902,8991,8831,22443,857II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 1,361----3,4474,808B. Operating Costs 300----1,2951,595Total Recurrent Costs 1,661----4,7426,402Total PROJECT COSTS 20,4792,04216,9902,8991,8835,96650,260  Taxes 8421173782451882522,022Foreign Exchange 1,0704756,6912784861,11310,114 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersComponents Project Cost Summary%% Total(Local '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 58.5723.19461.76618.8941.03019.9245412. Galip nut development 4.6841.4406.1231.5114641.975244Subtotal 63.2564.63367.88920.4051.49521.900745B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads 31.43420.89452.32810.1406.74016.88040352. Financial inclusion 7.9078388.7452.5512702.821106Subtotal 39.34121.73261.07312.6917.01019.7013640C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 3.8241.4345.2581.2344631.6962732. Project Management 13.9023.36117.2634.4851.0845.5691911Subtotal 17.7264.79522.5215.7181.5477.2652115Total BASELINE COSTS 120.32331.160151.48338.81410.05248.86621100Physical Contingencies --------Price Contingencies 3.8854374.3221.2531411.394103Total PROJECT COSTS 124.20831.597155.80540.06710.19350.26020103 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
167 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary%% Total(Local '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 13,9135,61319,5274,4881,8116,2992913B. Equipment and Material 2,9602,3815,3409557681,723454C. Goods and Services 7927921,584255255511501D. Grant & Subsidies 21,247-21,2476,854-6,854-14E. Trainings and workshop 19,9797820,0576,445256,470-13F. Works 29,50019,66649,1669,5166,34415,8604032G. Credit, guarantee fund /b 15,941-15,9415,142-5,142-11Total Investment Costs 104,33228,530132,86233,6569,20342,8592188II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 13,832-13,8324,462-4,462-9B. Operating Costs 2,3952,3954,7907737731,545503Total Recurrent Costs 16,2262,39518,6215,2347736,0071312Total BASELINE COSTS 120,55930,924151,48338,8909,97648,86620100Physical Contingencies --------Price Contingencies 3,8934284,3221,2561381,394103Total PROJECT COSTS 124,45231,353155,80540,14610,11450,26020103 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersProject Components by Year -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base CostPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 8603,4105,4837,4372,02071519,9242. Galip nut development 4252838504126-1,975Subtotal 1,2843,6936,3337,8492,02671521,900B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads -503,7164,7285,0453,34216,8802. Financial inclusion 82181978432275-2,821Subtotal 8218694,5005,0505,1203,34219,701C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 1454404953431431301,6962. Project Management 1,0538299798969568555,569Subtotal 1,1981,2691,4741,2391,0999857,265Total BASELINE COSTS 3,3045,83112,30614,1388,2455,04248,866Physical Contingencies -------Price Contingencies Inflation Local 291182644222222021,256Foreign 71332304016138Subtotal Inflation 361312964522612181,394Devaluation -------Subtotal Price Contingencies 361312964522612181,394Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,260  Taxes 2682824645123171802,022Foreign Exchange 1,1115922,1652,3002,4351,51110,114 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
168 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalA. Inclusive business partnerships 1. Fresh produce partnerships 8703,4645,6137,6812,10274820,4792. Galip nut development 4302968814287-2,042Subtotal 1,3013,7606,4948,1092,10974822,521B. Supportive Value Chain Investments 1. Spots improvements of field roads -523,7314,7575,0823,36916,9902. Financial inclusion 82983479835781-2,899Subtotal 8298864,5295,1145,1633,36919,889C. Collective Governance and Project Management 1. Collective Governance 1474645463961701611,8832. Project Management 1,0648521,0339711,0659825,966Subtotal 1,2111,3151,5791,3671,2341,1437,849Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,260 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base CostForeign ExchangePY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6Total%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 1,4611,2811,5921,0346323006,29928.71,811B. Equipment and Material 793234252252192-1,72344.6768C. Goods and Services 10917213443332051150.0255D. Grant & Subsidies -1,0272,3362,991500-6,854--E. Trainings and workshop 888061,5862,3871,0715326,4700.425F. Works --3,4894,4414,7583,17215,86040.06,344G. Credit, guarantee fund /b 1001,2521,8591,932--5,142--Total Investment Costs 2,5504,77211,24713,0807,1864,02442,85921.59,203II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 5587897897897897484,462--B. Operating Costs 1952702702702702701,54550.0773Total Recurrent Costs 7531,0591,0591,0591,0591,0186,00712.9773Total BASELINE COSTS 3,3045,83112,30614,1388,2455,04248,86620.49,976Physical Contingencies ---------Price Contingencies Inflation Local 291182644222222021,256--Foreign 71332304016138100.0138Subtotal Inflation 361312964522612181,3949.9138Devaluation ---------Subtotal Price Contingencies 361312964522612181,3949.9138Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,26020.110,114  Taxes 2682824645123171802,022--Foreign Exchange 1,1115922,1652,3002,4351,51110,114-- _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
169 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6Total I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 1,4761,3281,6981,1637163596,741B. Equipment and Material 805244272282223-1,826C. Goods and Services 110180145483824546D. Grant & Subsidies -1,0272,3362,991500-6,854E. Trainings and workshop 898441,6942,5971,1065576,888F. Works --3,4894,4414,7583,17215,860G. Credit, guarantee fund /b 1001,2521,8591,932--5,142Total Investment Costs 2,5804,87611,49313,4547,3414,11343,857II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 5648128328578828614,808B. Operating Costs 1962742772802832861,595Total Recurrent Costs 7601,0861,1091,1361,1651,1476,402Total PROJECT COSTS 3,3405,96212,60214,5908,5065,26050,260 _________________________________\a Including studies and technical assistance\b Financial instruments Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)Provinces &UnidentifiedFinancialThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Consultancies_DA 75911.35,87287.1--1101.6----6,74113.42. Equipment and Material_DA 18310.01,64390.0--------1,8263.63. Goods and Services_DA 529.642477.7--6912.7----5461.14. GRANT_DA --3,00243.8--3,17046.368210.0--6,85413.65. Workshops_DA 68910.06,01487.3--1221.8630.9--6,88813.76. Works_DA 2861.82,57416.213,00082.0------15,86031.67. Salaries and Allowances_DA 72315.04,08585.0--------4,8089.68. Operating Costs_DA 15910.01,43590.0--------1,5953.29. Credit, Guarantee Funds_DA --4508.8----4699.14,22382.15,14210.2Total PROJECT COSTS 2,8515.725,50050.713,00025.93,4726.91,2142.44,2238.450,260100.0 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
170 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersDisbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow(US$ '000)Financing AvailableCosts toProvincesbe&UnidentifiedFinancialFinancedThe GovernmentIFAD LoandistrictsfinancierBeneficiariesInstitutionsProjectCumulativeAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountTotalCostsCash FlowCash Flow1 1,488----1,4881,670-182-1822 1,488----1,4881,670-182-3643 1,960-1871274962,7702,981-211-5754 1,960-1871274962,7702,981-211-7865 2,9111,4307071977465,9926,301-309-1,0956 2,9111,4307071977465,9926,301-309-1,4047 3,2811,8207142708696,9547,295-341-1,7458 3,2811,8207142708696,9547,295-341-2,0869 1,9341,9501288-4,0204,253-233-2,31910 1,9341,9501288-4,0204,253-233-2,55211 1,1761,300-5-2,4812,630-149-2,70212 1,1761,300-5-2,4812,630-149-2,851  Total 25,50013,0003,4721,2144,22347,40950,260-2,851-2,851 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Attachment 9.2:  Detailed Project costs 
Table 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Description 
1.1 Fresh produce partnerships investment 
1.2 Galip nut development 
2.1 Spot improvements of field roads 
2.2 Financial inclusion 
3.1 Collective governance 
3.2 Project management 
171 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
172 
Papua New Guinea Market for Village FarmersTable 1.1. Fresh produce partnershipsDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Scoping  study International service provider 60,00060-----6060-----60CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )B. Climate change baseline study 1. Climate change baseline study 60,00060-----6061-----61CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )C. Pre-investment activities Information campaign/calls for expression of interest 25,000252525---75262728---80CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Business Development Service providers for preparation of partnership proposals 100,000-100100100--300-107112118--336CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Appraisal committee 10,000-101010--30-111112--34CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Resource centres/farmer hubs 6,200--112192192-496--121215223-559E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 25135247302192-90126144272345223-1,009D. Consortium for training to households Financial education (CEFI modules 1 and 2) 25-250350500--1,100-267392588--1,247TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Financial education (CEFI modules 3) 12--405580-175--446599-208TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Household training 40-200280400--880-214313470--997TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal -45067095580-2,155-4817501,12399-2,452E. Training of partners Training of partners 60,000-606060--180-646771--202TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )F. Technical assistance International technical assistance 20,0001801201206060-5401811231266566-561CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )G. Partnerships implementation 1. Micro partnerships Capacity building -23581179358350-23581179358350TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Investment - grant incentive -81220--40-81220--40GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment - other financing -121215--39-121215--39CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Subtotal -43821529358429-438215293584292. Small partnerships Capacity building for leaders -761913823061911,147-761913823061911,147TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Investment for leaders - grant incentive -4060100--200-4060100--200GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment for leaders - other financing -6070100--230-6070100--230CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Capacity building for growers -379314993-372-379314993-372TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Investment for growers - grant incentive -200300500--1,000-200300500--1,000GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment for growers - other financing -300350500--1,150-300350500--1,150CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Subtotal -7141,0641,7313991914,099-7141,0641,7313991914,0993. Medium partnerships Capacity building for leaders -56126244167105698-56126244167105698TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 90% ), BENEFICIARIES ( 10% )Investment for leaders - grant incentive -200300500--1,000-200300500--1,000GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment for leaders - other financing -280327467--1,073-280327467--1,073CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Working capital for leaders -248372620--1,240-248372620--1,240GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), BENEFICIARIES ( 50% )Capacity building for growers -3713024224293744-3713024224293744TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Investment for growers - grant incentive -200500800500-2,000-200500800500-2,000GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment for growers - other financing -300650850--1,800-300650850--1,800CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Subtotal -1,3212,4043,7239091988,555-1,3212,4043,7239091988,5554. Large partnerships Working capital for leaders -316231--124-316231--124GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), BENEFICIARIES ( 50% )Capacity building for growers -19565619-149-19565619-149TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Investment for growers - grant incentive -100200100--400-100200100--400GRANTGRANT_DALOAN ( 50% ), UNIDENTIFIED ( 50% )Investment for growers - other financing -150250---400-150250---400CREDITCGBENEFICIARIES ( 10% ), FI ( 90% )Subtotal -30056818719-1,073-30056818719-1,073Subtotal -2,3784,1195,7921,42044714,156-2,3784,1195,7921,42044714,156H. Equipment for provincial teams Cars 4x4 /a 45,000225-----225229-----229E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Computer + Docking Station + Tablet /b 1,30021-----2121-----21E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Photocopier/Printer/Scanner /c 7004-----44-----4E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )GPS, cameras, projectors /d 2,00010-----1010-----10E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Motorbicycles /e 1,20012-----1212-----12E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Refurbishment offices /f 20,00040-----4041-----41E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 311-----311317-----317Total Investment Costs 6363,1435,2157,1701,75344718,3636453,1905,3337,3941,80844718,818 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
173 
Papua New Guinea Market for Village FarmersTable 1.1. Fresh produce partnershipsDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. RuleII. Recurrent Costs A. Provincial Teams_Highlands and Morobe Provincial Managers 450272727272727162272829293031174S&AS&A_DAGOVTDistrict Staff (Districts) 230212828282828159212829303132171S&AS&A_DAGOVTM&E Officer /g 2,500113150150150150150863114155158163168173931S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Operating costs 10,000505050505050300505050505050300OCOC_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 2102552552552552551,4832122612662732792861,576B. FPDA allowances /h Provincial field managers /i 6,1206666663766677740S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )District officers /j 6,9007777774177788845S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 1313131313137813131414151584Total Recurrent Costs 2232682682682682681,5612252742802872943011,661Total 8603,4105,4837,4372,02071519,9248703,4645,6137,6812,10274820,479 _________________________________\a One for each provincial team\b One set for each provincial team member\c One set for each provincial team\d One set for each provincial team\e One for each district officer\f Refurbishment costs for 2 provinces only Simbu and Jiwaka\g One for each provincial team\h Based on 15% increase of salary\i One manager per province (5 provinces in total)\j Two district officers every province (total 10 officers) 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
174 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersTable 1.2. Galip nut developmentDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Preparatory phase 1. Galip nut resource assessment Galip nut resource assessment 45,00045-----4546-----46CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Financial, operational and legal studies and assistance to PMU Financial, operational and legal studies and assistance to PMU /a 4020----604021----61CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )3. NARI's plant management operations Lease fees /b 3848----863850----88G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )Working capital for purchase of nuts /c 4242----844244----86E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Working capital for other operating costs /d 6152----1126254----116E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Organization of supply chain's partnerships /e 1424----381425----39G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 154165----320157173----3294. NARI's plant management team contract Management fees /f 3720----573721----59G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )5. International Market Development Study Study /g 50-----5050-----50CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Study tour /h -15----15-16----16G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 5015----655016----66Subtotal 326221----547330230----561B. Independent Assessment Independent assessment --70---70--76---76CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )C. Investment phase 1. Feasibility study 40,000--40---40--43---43CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )2. Due diligence exercise on potential investors --20---20--22---22CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )3. Support to investment NARI's plant lease (3rd production year only) /i 48,924--49---49--53---53G&SG&S_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Supply chain's partnerships /j --20---20--22---22G&SG&S_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Contribution to investment in plant and supply chain --530320--850--530320--850GRANTGRANT_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Subtotal --599320--919--605320--9254. Consortium for training to households Financial education (CEFI modules 1 and 2) 25--2535--60--2841--69TRAININGSW&T_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Financial education (CEFI modules 3) 12---46-9---57-11TRAININGSW&T_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Household training 40--2028--48--2233--55TRAININGSW&T_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Subtotal --45676-117--50797-1365. Technical assistance 25,000--2525--50--2829--57CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DAUNIDENTIFIED ( 100% )Subtotal --7294126-1,146--7484287-1,183D. Office set up_East New Britain 1. Galip Nut Manager 3,500324232---105324535---112CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Equipment Galip Nut Manager Operating Costs 20,000202020---60202122---63E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Car 4x4 45,00045-----4546-----46E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )GPS, Cameras, Projectors 2,0002-----22-----2E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 672020---107682122---110Subtotal 996252---2121006657---223Total 4252838504126-1,9754302968814287-2,042\a International expert inclusing travel expenses\b Calculated on 10% of current investment realized the NARI's plant and 20%, 15% and 10% of projected net profit before mgmt fees during years 2, 3, and 4 of operations (year 1 being 2017)\c 100% of nuts supplied during Y1. In Y2,MVF will finance 50% of nuts required (the plant's revenues will finance the remaining 50%). In Y3, plant 's revenues finance 100%.\d 80% of costs for Y1 (20% financed by plant's revenues).IN Y2,40% of the total operating costs financed by MVF,60% self-financed from plant's revenues.In Y3, the cashflow of the plant will cover the OC.\e Salaries, operating costs and equipment of supply chain coordinator (1 per partnership and 4 partnerships planned). Equipment $2,000 and operating costs $5,000 per year/per coordinator\f Based on 10% of turnover and 50% of profit in Y1. In Y2, based on 5% of turnover and 20% of profit of which 50% will be financed by the project and 50% by the company\g Inclusive of trial shipments and travel costs to Australia and New Zealand\h To the Philippines.\i Calculated on 10% of current investment realized by the NARI's plant and 20%, 15% and 10% of projected net profit before mgmt fees during years 2,3, and 4 of operations (Y1 being 2017)\j Salaries, operating costs and equipment of supply chain coordinator (1 per partnership and 4 partnerships planned). Equipment $2,000 and operating costs $5,000 per year/per coordinator 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
175 
Papua New Guinea Market for Village FarmersTable 2.1. Spot improvements of fields roadsDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Roads spot improvement Design and supervision --154192192102640--165212218119714CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Civil works_IFAD financed --6298018585722,860--6298018585722,860WORKSWORKS_DALOAN ( 100% )Civil works_Provinces & Districts financed /a --2,8603,6403,9002,60013,000--2,8603,6403,9002,60013,000WORKSWORKS_DAP&D ( 100% )National Road Maintenance specialist --23454568180--24495078201CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Tehcnical engineer support -50505050-200-52535456-215CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Total -503,7164,7285,0453,34216,880-523,7314,7575,0823,36916,990 _________________________________\a Districts' contribution: 20 NOx3 yearsxK0.4/year. Provinces' contribution 5 Nox3 yearsxK1.0/year 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
176 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersTable 2.2. Financial inclusionDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Due Diligence Exercise 10,000100--50--150102--59--161CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )B. Increasing outreach 1. Support to networks 5015015010050-5005015015010050-500CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Support to digital money 250250250---750250250250---750CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )3. Technical Assistance 50100-50--20051107-59--217CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 35050040015050-1,45035150740015950-1,467C. New products and services Technical Assistance 5025-5025-1505127-5931-167CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Risk sharing arrangements 100150200---450100150200---450CREDITCGLOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 1501752005025-6001511772005931-617D. Support to CEFI Operating costs 12012012060--42012212513067--444E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Vehicle 37-----3738-----38E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Management overhead 24242412--8424252614--90CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Exposure visits 15-15---3015-17---32TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Trainings 25-25---5025-25---50TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 22114418472--62122415119881--654Total 82181978432275-2,82182983479835781-2,899 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
177 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersTable 3.1. Collective GovernanceDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Value Chain Organisation and Institution Building 1. ITA for Industry Structuring Strategy 45,000-45----45-46----46CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. PNG Fresh Produce Association -2020105-55-2122116-60G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )3. Capacity Building 25,000-252525--75-272829--84CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )4. Fresh Produce Multi-Stakeholder Platforms -2525138-71-2627159-77G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )5. FPDA Capacity Assessment 30,00030-----3031-----31CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )6. FPDA Capacity Building 50,000-505050--150-535659--168CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )7. PNG Galip Nut Association --10105530--11126636CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )8. TA for Roadmap for Galip Nut Industry --30---30--34---34CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 3016516010818548631173177126216535B. Policy Development 1. Policy Studies Fresh produce/Galip Nut 50,000-5050505050250-5254565860280CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Policy Workshops 5,000-101010101050-111112121359TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )3. Exposure visits 50,000--5050--100--5659--115TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal -601101106060400-631211277073454C. Knowledge Management and Communication 1. ITA for KM and Communication Strategy 30,0003030----603031----61CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. MIS Development and Capacity Building /a 50252525--12551262728--132CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )3. TA for ICT-Based Applications -8050---130-8556---141CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )4. Website Development 15,00015-----1515-----15CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )5. Website Maintenance 10,000-101010101050-101111121256CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )6. Communication Campaigns 15,000-151515151575-161718191988CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )7. Publications and Manuals 20,000202020202020120202122222324132G&SG&S_DALOAN ( 100% )8. Methodology for Study Tours/Learning Routes 50,000--50---50--54---54CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )9. Learning Route/Study Tours 20,000--2020202080--2224252696TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 1151801909065657051161902091037881777D. Research 1. Research 35,000-353535--105-373941--118CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DAGOVTTotal 1454404953431431301,6961474645463961701611,883 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
178 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersTable 3.2. Project ManagementDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. TA and Capacity Building for PMU, Provincial Teams, Liaison Office 1. Technical Assistance Project expeditor (international) /a 30,000180-----180182-----182CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )TA for GESI strategy and follow-up 30-2020--7030-2122--73CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )International consultant to set-up M&E system 30,00060-----6060-----60CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 270-2020--310272-2122--3152. Capacity building Capacity building activities 15,00081515151515838161718191996TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 27815353515153932801638391919411B. Equipment for PMU and Liaison Office Car 4x4 /b 45,00090-----9090-----90E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Sedan /c 20,00040-----4041-----41E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Computer + Docking Station + Tablet /d 1,30017-----1717-----17E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Photocopier/Printer/Scanner /e 7001-----11-----1E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )GPS, Cameras, Projectors /f 2,0002-----22-----2E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 150-----150151-----151C. Project Planning and Oversight 1. National Launch Workshop 20,00020-----2020-----20TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Provincial Launch Workshops 3,00018-----1818-----18TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )3. Final National Workshop 20,000-----2020-----2626TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )4. Other Meetings and workshops 20,000-2020202020100-2122242526118TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 382020202040158392122242552183D. Financial Management 1. Financial Management Trainings 2,500333---8333---8TRAININGSW&T_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Accounting Software-Multi User /g 5,0005-----55-----5E&ME&M_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 833---13833---13E. Studies and Surveys 1. Baseline Survey 50,00050-----5051-----51CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )2. Impact Assessment and Outcome Survey 50,000---50--50---59--59CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )3. Final Impact Assessment and Outcome Survey 50,000-----5050-----6565CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )4. Interim Reviews 130,000--130-130-260--141-151-291CONSULTANCIESCONSULTANCIES_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 50-130501305041051-1415915165466Total Investment Costs 523381881051651051,123529402041221941361,224 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
179 
 Papua New GuineaMarket for Village FarmersTable 3.2. Project ManagementDetailed CostsSummary DivisionsUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther Accounts(US$)PY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalPY1PY2PY2PY4PY3PY6PY4PY8PY5PY10PY6TotalAccountDisb. Acct.Fin. RuleII. Recurrent Costs A. Staff Salaries 1. PMU Project Coordinator 4,500415454545454311415657596062335S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Office Assistant 95091111111111669121212131371S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Production and Value Chain System Manager 3,400314141414141235314243444647253S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Infrastructure Engineer 4,500-5454545454270-5657596062294S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Policy Development Officer 3,400-4141414141204-4243444647222S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )MIS Development & Content Manager - IFAD financed /h 3,4003141312010-1333142322211-139S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )MIS Development & Content Manager - GoPNG financed /i 3,400--102031-61--112234-67S&AS&A_DAGOVTSenior KM/M&E Officer 3,300304040404040228304142434446246S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )GESI Officer 3,400314141414141235314243444647253S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Financial and Administrative Officer 4,200385050505050290385253555658313S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Procurement Officer 3,400314141414141235314243444647253S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Accountant 2,500233030303030173233132333435186S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Drivers 70013171717171797131718181919104S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 2744604604604604192,5342774744865015164842,7372. Liaison Office MVF Liaison Officer - based in DAL 4,000484848484848288484951525455310S&AS&A_DAGOVTIFAD Liaison Officer - based in POM 4,000484848484848288484951525455310S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 96969696969657697991011041081116203. FPDA FPDA staff allowances /j 15,0361515151515159015151515151590S&AS&A_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 3855715715715715303,2003895886026206386103,447B. Office Operating Costs Travel Allowances 50,000255050505050275255254565860306OCOC_DALOAN ( 100% )Vehicles operating costs 140,0007014014014014014077070140140140140140770OCOC_DALOAN ( 100% )Office costs 30,000153030303030165153132343536183OCOC_DALOAN ( 100% )Office extension repairs and refurbishment 35,00035-----3535-----35OCOC_DALOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 1452202202202202201,2451462242272302332361,295Total Recurrent Costs 5307917917917917504,4455358128298508718464,742Total 1,0538299798969568555,5691,0648521,0339711,0659825,966 _________________________________\a Consultant to be hired at project inception to assist in setting up management procedures and in building related capacities in the PMU.\b Two cars for PMU\c One for PMU and one for liaison unit in Port Moresby.\d One set for each PMU member\e One set for PMU and one for Liaison Unit in Port Moresby.\f One set for PMU\g Customization, training and support services\h This position is financed by IFAD as follows: year 1 and 2 = 100%, year 3= 75%, year 4= 50%, year  5= 25%\i This budget line complement the line above and is financed by the GoPNG as follows: year 3= 25%, year 4= 50%, year  5= 75%\j Allowances for: Value Chain Business Development Manager, Bulb Onion Development Manager, Technical Programme Manager, Senior Extension Advisor 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
A  financial  and  economic  analysis  was  undertaken  to  assess  the  financial  and  economic 
1. 
impacts of the Markets for Village Farmers (MVF) project on smallholder farmers, and on the society 
as  a  whole.  The  programme  objective  is  to  achieve  sustainable  increased  returns  to  small  farmers 
from  increased  fresh  vegetables  production  and  quality  improved  market  linkages,  efficient  farmers’ 
organisation,  reduced  post-harvest  management  and  higher  farmers’  share  over  the  final  added. 
Benefits will derive from: (i) improving small farmers’ access to markets, technologies and services in 
the target value chains; (ii) developing different types of business partnerships involving small farmers 
and  agribusiness;  (iii)  improving  value  chain  environment  to  facilitate  smallholder  farmers’  inclusion; 
and  (iv)  supporting  policies  and  institutional  capacities  required  to  ensure  sustainability.  In  order  to 
represent  the  programme  financial  benefits,  six  crop  models,  two  farm  models,  and  three 
consolidators models have been developed. The models have also been used as building blocks for 
the economic analysis.  
2. 
The  programme  will  be  implemented  in  six  target  provinces,  of  which  five  -  Morobe,  Eastern 
Highlands,  Simbu,  Jiwaka  and  Western  Highlands  -  have  been  targeted  for  supporting  fresh 
vegetables value chain partnerships and activities and one - East New Britain - is the target province 
for the development of a commercial galip nut industry.  
3. 
Number of beneficiaries. As summarised in the table below, the project is expected to benefit 
about  23,20029  households.  This  would  represent  46,400  primary  beneficiaries  in  application  of  the 
household  approach,  where  two  members  of  the  same  family  (generally  husband  and  wife)  will 
receive  project  support  (see  Component  1).  Women  will  constitute  50%  of  beneficiaries.  Around 
116,000 people would directly benefit from project activities based on a household of five members. 
Moreover,  based  on  FPDA’s  experience  whereby,  for  every  trained  farmer,  four  people  indirectly 
benefit (by spontaneously adopting improved practices introduced by training beneficiaries), the total 
number of indirect beneficiaries expected is 185,600 individuals.   
Table 1 - Crop models summary 
29 Indicative figure based on the number of estimated number of farmer groups supported by each partnership and the number 
of farmers per group. Actual numbers will depend on the number and content of actual partnerships. 
181 
No. of partnerships No. of HH per partnershipTotal HHTotal farmers directly accessing project services*Total direct beneficiaries**Total indirect beneficiaries***HighlandsLarge partnerships                       2                 1,000                 2,000 4,000               10,000           16,000Medium partnerships                     50                    200               10,000 20,000             50,000           80,000Small partnerships                   100                      50                 5,000 10,000             25,000           40,000Micro partnerships                   100                      50                 5,000 10,000             25,000           40,000Galip nut farmers                1,200 2,400               6,000             9,600Total                   252               23,200               46,400           116,000 185,600*based on the household approach where two members of the same family receive trainings** Based on 5 members per HH***Based on FPDA's experience, from every farmer trained 4 farmers will also benefits from the same training MVF beneficiariesEast New Britain 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Financial Analysis 
4. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  financial  analysis  is  to  determine  the  financial  viability  and 
incentives of the target group for engaging in the project activities, by examining the impact of project 
interventions on family labour, cash flow and net incomes. Based on field research and  target value 
chain  studies,  a  number  of  economic  models  were  identified  during  project  design.  Eleven  financial 
models  were  prepared  to  demonstrate  the  financial  viability  of  project  investments.  Five  crop 
models30, representing both  perishable and hardy crops having a comparative advantage to grow in 
the selected provinces31, were prepared to be used as bases for the farm models. These include: (i) 
broccoli crop model, (ii) sweet potato crop model, (iii) cabbage crop model, (iv) bulb onion crop model, 
(v)  potato  crop  model.  Two  indicative  farm  models,  based  on  the  possible  combinations  of  the 
selected crops per farm, were developed on 0.5 ha: (i) farm 1 – where 0.2 ha is cropped with sweet 
potato, 0.1 ha with broccoli, 0.1 ha with cabbage and 0.1 ha with bulb onion, (ii) farm 2 - where 0.2 ha 
is cropped  with sweet potato, 0.1  ha  with broccoli,  0.1 ha  with  bulb onion  and  0.1 ha  with  potato.  A 
galip nut intercropped  with cocoa model was also developed in order to show the additional  income 
that a smallholder cocoa producer can earn by harvesting nuts from galip trees,  where they are used 
as  shade  trees  for  cocoa  trees.  Finally,  three  models  representing  the  micro,  small  and  medium32 
consolidators have been developed to also show the benefits accruing to other value chain’s actors. 
The farm models, the galip nut intercropped with cocoa model, and the consolidator’s models form the 
building blocks for the economic analysis. Finally, a cash-flow analysis was carried out to present the 
“with” and “without” project analysis.  
Key  assumptions.  The  following  information  gathered  during  the  design  process  has  been 
5. 
used to develop the analysis: mission estimates, documents and surveys from: (i) the Fresh Produce 
Development Agency, which will be MVF’ implementing agency; ii) IFAD PPAP on-going project; (iii) 
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR); and (iv) PNG National Agriculture 
Research  Institute  (NARI).  In  particular,  information  on  labour  and  input  requirements  for  various 
operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, yields, farm gate and market prices of commodities, and 
transport costs  were collected. Conservative  assumptions  were made both for inputs and outputs in 
order to take account of possible risks. Key assumptions are as follows: 
  Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at  USD 1 = PGK 3.1  and is an 
average of the exchange rate prevailing between January 2016 and January 2017; 
  Prices.  The  financial  prices  for  project  inputs  and  products  were  collected  in  the  field  by  the 
design team and FPDA. Prices used represent estimates of the average seasonal prices and the 
analysis is carried out using constant prices; 
  Labour.  Family  labour  has  been  valued  both  in  the  financial  and  economic  analysis.  Family 
labour  and  hired  unskilled  labour  are  priced  at  PGK  30  per  day,  which  is  the  prevailing  market 
rate; 
  Opportunity cost of capital. A discount rate of 10% has been used in this analysis to assess the 
viability and robustness of  the proposed investments. The selected value is calculated by taking 
into account actual market interest rates on loans33.  
6. 
Vegetable crop models. The five vegetable crop models have been developed on 1 ha of land 
to  be  used  as  bases  for  the  two  farm models  described  in  the  next  paragraphs34.  The  crop  models 
represent hardy and perishable crops that are cultivated in the target provinces and that, according to 
the  value  chain  analysis,  have  growing  market  potential.  Each  crop  model  presents  a  situation  with 
project  (WP)  and  a  situation  without  project  intervention  (WOP).  For  all  models,  one  of  the  main 
differences between the with and without project scenarios is the investment in inputs, which is very 
minimal or inexistent in the WOP while is included on a regular yearly basis in the WP. Moreover, the 
models show that with project interventions – e.g. feeder roads improvements, or technical assistance 
30 Crop models are developed on 1 ha of plot size 
31 Value chain analysis 
32 These categories are based on the partnerships developed in component 1.  
33 Economist Intelligence Unit, Papua New Guinea Country Report, 2016. 
34 The credit analysis is carried out in the farm models, as the crop models are only used to show the profitability of each crop in 
the project area. 
182 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
on  how  to  package  and  transport  the  different  types  of  fresh  produce,  the  reduction  in  post-harvest 
losses is expected to decrease from an average of 15-20% to 5-7%35. 
7. 
As summarized in the table below, where all profitability indicators are positive, the crop models 
show  that  with  improved  access  to  specific  inputs,  together  with  trainings  on  how  to  use  them, 
technical  assistance  and  infrastructure  improvement,  production  and  farmers’  income  can  increase 
significantly. 
Table 2. Crop models summary 
Farm models.  Based  on the crop models, two farm models have been  developed on 0.5 ha. 
8. 
The  farms’  crop  combinations  will  mainly  be  determined  by  market  demand,  however,  the 
assumptions  on  the  possible  crop  combinations  of  this  analysis  are  based  on  consultations  with 
FPDA’s technical experts and on the information collected during the focus groups with farmers and 
consolidators. 
9. 
Both  models  compare  a  situation  with  project  and  a  situation  without  project.  In  the  without 
project scenarios, the smallholders’ capacity  to become commercial farmers is constrained by  a low 
access to the market and to inputs, lack of support services and low outreach of financial institutions 
in the rural areas, combined with a lack of financial education. Market access is further affected by the 
lack  of  collaboration  between  smallholders,  inadequate  post-harvest  management,  and  long  travel 
distances to urban markets through deteriorated or inexistent infrastructure systems. Sweet potato is 
generally cultivated as a staple crop and mainly used for self-consumption and animal feed. A small 
portion  of  cropped  land  –  0.1  ha  -  is  cultivated  with  vegetables,  which  are  generally  used  for  self-
consumption or sold on the local market whenever the farmer is in need of liquidity.  
10. 
In  the  with  project  situation,  small  farmers  will  be  supported  to  increase  the  vegetables 
production  so  to  be  able  to  gain  a  sustainable  income.  This  will  happen  mainly  through  the 
establishment of partnerships between smallholder farmers and traders for the production, collection, 
transport,  processing  and  marketing  of  fresh  produce,  improved  access  to  financial  institutions  and 
enhanced  financial  education.  As  already  shown  in  the  crop  models,  thanks  to  the  partnerships, 
farmers will sustainably increase access to inputs and support services. Farms 1 and 2 assume that, 
with project support, farmers will become commercially oriented and therefore will reduce the land plot 
for sweet potatoes – from 0.4 ha to 0.2 ha – and will increase the vegetable production from 0.1 ha to 
0.3 ha on average. 
11.  As summarised in the table below, both farm models show to be profitable and to contribute to 
a significant increase in the smallholder farmer’s net income. Moreover, in both models the family rate 
of  return  is  between  PGK  110  and  PGK  115  per  day.  The  cost  of  seasonal  labour  in  PNG  is  30 
PGK/day, which is significantly lower than the return to family labour shown in the farm models. 
12. 
 At  the  end  of  each  farm  model,  a  credit  analysis  is  also  performed  in  order  to  show  the 
financial services that farmers will receive through the project. In fact, in order to buy inputs and have 
still enough cash to invest in farming activities, farmers will be able to access a total financing of PGK 
1,600,  of  which  40%  will  be  a  grant  and  60%  will  be  a  credit,  which  the  farmer  will  obtain  with  the 
support of the project (see detailed description of components 1 and 2)36. 
35 Post-harvest losses are lower for hardy crops and higher for perishable crops. 
36 Loan interest rate is 20% and repayment period is 2 years. 
183 
IncrementalIncome (%)WOPWPBroccolikg23,00030,00030%11,77716,95044%66%21,991Sweet potatoKg8,00012,00050%1,9123,47882%45%4,280Cabbagekg23,00030,00030%9,01713,87554%77%22,393Bulb onionkg12,00016,00033%10,06916,07060%85%19,190Potatokg22,00028,00027%10,03614,69346%41%11,674NPV @ 10% (PGK)Activity Models - 1 haIncome (after labour costs)IRR (%) UnitWOPWP (5th year)PGKIncremental yields %Increases (units) 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 3. Farm models summary
13.  Consolidator business models. Three models have been developed to represent the benefits 
that will accrue to the  activities run by micro, small and medium  traders37, also called lead partners. 
Traders usually sell all kinds of vegetables and fruits. Therefore, the models use average quantities 
and prices of all kinds of products purchased and sold during the year. Quantities and prices used are 
averages collected directly from traders.  
14.  The main common constraints for micro, small and medium lead partners in the WOP are: (i) 
limited access to market, (ii) limited access to timely and good quality fresh produce, (iii) post-harvest 
losses38,  and  (iv)  lack  of  access  to  financial  services.  With  project  support  and  the  development  of 
partnerships  with growers, lead partners’ access to the market will improve, and they will be able to 
increase  the  volume  of  fresh  produce  supplied  on  a  regular  basis.  In  fact,  as  shown  in  the  farm 
models, farmers are expected to increase the quantity of vegetable production  sold to lead partners. 
The  project  will  also  support  lead  partners  to  access  financial  services  in  order  to  obtain  credits  to 
further  invest  in  their  businesses.  Furthermore,  traders  will  benefit  from  improved  market  access 
infrastructure, such as feeder roads, that at the moment represent a key constraint to the post-harvest 
losses  reduction.  In  fact,  the  models  assume  that  with  improved  feeder  roads  and  improved  post-
harvest management practices, post-harvest losses, from depot to the markets, will decrease from an 
average of 15% to 7% for medium partners and from 20% to 10% for small partners. 
15.  The  type  of  investment  included  in  each  model  is  indicative.  Lead  partners  will  be  able  to 
specifically  decide  what  kind  of  investment  best  suits  their  needs.  Small  partners  will  be  able  to 
access a capped amount  of about  PGK  15,00039, to invest in post-harvest equipment or nursery, in 
the form of 40% grant and 60% loan. Similarly, medium partners will access a capped amount of PGK 
150,000, which in the model is indicatively used to finance a truck, and micro partners will access a 
capped  amount  of  about  PGK  3,000,  which  in  the  model  is  indicatively  used  to  purchase  business 
management tools and handling/storage equipment. 
16.  At the end of each business model, a credit analysis is presented in order to show  access to 
financial  services  for  each  category  by  the  project.  As  summarised  in  the  table  below,  the  three 
business  models  show  positive  profitability  indicators  and  the  cash  flows  after  financing  become 
positive from the first year. 
Table 4. Consolidators business models summary
37  There  is  no  model  representing  a  large  consolidator  for  two  main  reasons:  (i)  only  two  large  companies  are 
envisaged  to  be  involved  in  project  activities;  (ii)  there  are  no  grant  incentives  budgeted  for  equipment  for  large 
companies,  but  only  for  micro,  small  and  medium  companies.  This  is  mainly  because  large  companies  are  able  to 
finance their own equipment. They will only access project support to deliver advisory services and technical assistance 
to their farmers/suppliers. 
38 Only for small and medium partners, as micro partners by directly at the market and 
39 Interest rate is 20%. Repayment period is 3 years, 
184 
WOPWPFARM 11,8555,327-16,649114FARM 21,8555,543-17,844120NPV @ 10% (PGK)Return to family labour per day (PGK)Activity ModelsPGKIncome after labour costsIRR (%) WOPWPMicro68,44089,7801.2086,553Small93,310215,9841.39540,420Medium216,200479,5001.11653,562Business ModelsIncome after labour costsB/C ratioNPV @ 10% (PGK)PGK 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
17.  Galip nut intercropped with cocoa model.  In cooperation with ACIAR and NARI, the PPAP 
project  has  invested  in  galip  trees,  to  be  used  as  shade  trees  for  cocoa  trees.  Since  2009,  PPAP 
beneficiaries  have  started  to  plant  galip  nut  trees;  however,  because  they  do  not  have  access  to  a 
galip nut processing facility, farmers have not seen any benefits in harvesting the nuts, of which only a 
negligible  portion  is  sold  on  local  wet  markets.  This  model  aims  to  show  that,  with  a  galip  nut 
processing facility in place, farmers are encouraged to harvest the galip nuts, which may represent an 
additional  source  of  income.  In  fact,  an  additional  income,  of  about  PGK  500  per  year40,  may  be 
significant for farmers in order to mitigate the impact of the cocoa price fluctuations and improve their 
livelihoods. 
18.  The  model  assumes  that  galip  nut  trees  are  planted  in  both  the  with  and  without  project 
scenarios41;  the  main  difference  is  that,  in  the  without  project,  galip  nuts  are  not  harvested  and 
therefore  do  not  represent  an  additional  source  of  income.  In  the  with  project  situation,  galip  nuts 
generate an additional income for farmers, with minimal additional costs. Additional income from galip 
nuts is calculated conservatively, considering tree mortality rate of  40% per household42 and yield of 
up to 8,650 kg per year. The project will mainly deal with farmers who already own galip trees from 2-
4 years; therefore,  the model shows yields from project year 1 (40% of full production in year 1, 60% 
in  year  2,  70%  in  year  3  and  80%  in  year  4).  Considering  that  not  all  galip  trees  planted  have  the 
same age and productive characteristics, the model assumes that, from year 5 on, the yield is 90% of 
full production. The cocoa production remains the same in both scenarios, mainly because MVF will 
not have any impact on cocoa43. 
19.  Overall,  the  financial  analysis  of  all  proposed  models  shows  profitable  results.  This  would 
ensure target beneficiaries that the risk of engaging in new activities is worthwhile. 
Economic Analysis 
20.  The  objectives  of  the  economic  analysis  are:  i)  to  examine  the  overall  project  viability;  (ii)  to 
assess project impact and overall economic rate of return; and  (iii) to perform sensitivity analyses to 
assess the benefits from a broad welfare perspective. 
21.  Key  assumptions.  The  physical  inputs  and  productions  established  in  the  financial  analysis 
provided the basis to determine the viability of the project investment in terms of opportunity costs and 
quantifiable  benefits  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The  estimate  of  the  likely  economic  returns  from 
project interventions are based on the following assumptions:  
  Project life has been assumed at 20 years;  
  Project inputs and outputs traded are valued at their respective economic prices, and goods are 
expected to move freely within the project area in response to market demand;  
  The average between the deposit interest rate in Papua New Guinea44 (0.5%), the market interest 
rate (10%) and the Wall Street Journal interest rate (3.5%) is 5%. However, in order to 
conservatively calculate the economic benefits generated by the project, the social discount rate 
adopted for this analysis will be 7%. 
22.  Project  economic  costs  and  benefits.  The  economic  analysis  includes  the  investment  and 
incremental  recurrent  costs  of  the  project  components.  The  project  financial  costs  have  been 
converted  to  economic  values  by  removal  of  price  contingencies,  tax  and  duties.  In  order  to  avoid 
double  counting,  the  final  aggregation  considered  only  those  costs  that  were  not  included  in  the 
financial models.  
23.  Benefits  Estimation.  The incremental  benefits  stream  comprises  the  economic  net  values  of 
all  farm  models,  the  galip  nut  crop  model  and  business  models  developed  in  the  financial  analysis. 
These  benefits  are  then  aggregated  by  the  number  of  households  and  consolidators  that  are 
estimated to uptake each activity. The analysis conservatively considers a benefit rate of 70% for the 
farm models and an adoption rate of 90% for the consolidators’ business models, in order to take into 
40 Income before family labour. Income after family labour is PGK 165. 
41 . 
42 On 0.5 ha of land, 20 trees per farmers have been distributed. However, the mortality rate to be considered is of 40%. 
43 Data on cocoa have been taken from the PPAP project. 
44  Average deposit rate, between 2011 and 2015, is 0.5%. Source: WBI - Deposit interest rate (%) http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.DPST 
185 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
account that: (i) farmers’ project uptake may be lower than expected; and (ii) farmers supplying micro 
partners will not receive any input packages.  
Table 4. Estimated households’ phasing in by activity (used in the final economic 
aggregation) 
24.  Economic Pricing. Economic pricing has been based on the following assumptions:  
 
 
 
The opportunity cost of labour is set at PGK 29/day, or 97.5% of financial cost of labour, which 
is justified given rural unemployment rate at 2.5%45; 
The shadow exchange rate (SER) has been calculated at 1 USD = 3.2 PGK;  
The Shadow Exchange Ratio Factor (SERF), used to obtain economic costs, has been 
calculated at 1.02. 
25.  Economic Rate of Return. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is 
estimated  at  39%  for  the  base  case.  The  net  present  value  (NPV)  of  the  net  benefit  stream, 
discounted at 7%, is USD 140.4 million. 
26.  Sensitivity Analysis. In order to test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis 
has  been  carried  out.  Outcomes  of  which  are  presented  in  table  5.  The  sensitivity  analysis 
investigates the effect of fluctuations in  project costs, project benefits, and delays  in  implementation 
on the NPV and ERR. It shows the economic impacts that a decrease in project benefits – up to -50% 
– will have on the project viability. Similarly, it shows how the economic viability of the project will be 
affected  by  an  increase  of  up  to  50%  in  project  costs;  and  by  a  one  to  three-year  delay  in  project 
implementation. The analysis confirms that the economic viability of the  project remains attractive as 
a positive NPV and ERR above 7% are preserved in each case analysed. 
45 Source: http://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Papua-New-Guinea/Unemployment_rate/ 
186 
PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total HHsPhasing in %0%20%30%50%0%0%100%*Full benefits rate 70%0%14%21%35%0%0%70%Farm 101,5402,3103,850007,700Farm 201,5402,3103,850007,700Gulip Nut05007000001,200Total03,5805,3207,7000016,600PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total HHsPhasing in %0%20%30%50%0%0%100%Adoption rate 90%0%18%27%45%0%0%90%Micro01827450090Small01827450090Medium0914230045Total0456811300225*This rate takes into consideration that growers of micro partnerships will not receive a inputs package from the project and therefore their benefits may be lower compared to farmers receving the full package.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Farmers that decide not to take up the investment are also included in this rate.Farmers that decide not to take up the investment are also included in this rate.Households' phasing in by activityPartnerships consolidators' phasing in  
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: 
Draft Project Implementation Manual 
Table of contents 
Abbreviations & acronyms 
I. Introduction 
1. Presentation of the project 
2. Objectives of the project 
3. Description of the project components 
4. Cost and financing 
5. Organization and management 
6. Institutional and implementation arrangements 
7. Organizational chart 
II. Administrative procedures 
1. Human resources management 
1.1. Job descriptions 
1.2. Recruitment procedures 
1.3. Contract management 
1.4. Internal rules for personnel 
2. Correspondance organisation 
3. Communication organisation 
4. Logistics 
5. Asset management 
6. Stock management 
III. Financial and disbursements procedures 
1. Financial arrangements and flow of funds 
2. IFAD disbursement procedures 
3. MVF disbursement procedures 
4. Accounting systems and procedures 
5. Planning and budgeting 
IV. Procurement procedures 
1. IFAD basic procurement principles 
2. National rules and regulations 
3. Main methods of procurement for goods and works 
4. Main methods of selection of consultants and services providers 
5. Specific procurement arrangements 
1.1. Declaration of bid security 
1.2. Bonds for insurances companies 
V. Monitoring & evaluation and knowledge management  
1. Planning of M&E 
2. AWPB preparation, including annual targets  
3. Follow-up of outputs 
4. Evaluation of results 
5. Evaluation of impact 
6. Elaboration of progress reports 
VI. Governance and Anti-Corruption Framework 
187 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
The PNG Country Strategy Note details IFAD’s three strategic objectives (SO) in PNG: 
SO-1: 
SO-2: 
SO-3: 
Sustainable and Resilient Farmer Enterprises 
Business Alliances for Farmers’ Access to Markets and Services 
Women and Youth Access to Income and Employment 
MVF directly addresses the first two strategic objectives and is thus consistent with IFAD’s country 
strategy for PNG. It is furthermore consistent with the relevant IFAD policies, strategies and 
guidelines, notably: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025; 
Targeting Policy: Reaching the rural poor; 
Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment Policy; 
Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples; 
Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; 
Rural Finance Policy; 
Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption; 
Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support; 
Loan and Grant Administration Operational Manual; 
Guidelines for Project Design. 
189 
Papua New Guinea 
PNG MVF Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 13: 
Contents of the Project Life File 
1)  PPAP Design Document 
2)  PPAP Supervision Reports 
3)  PPAP MTR 
4)  MVF Concept Note 
5)  MVF Detailed Design 
6)  MVF QE docs 
7)  MVF QA docs 
191 
