Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AFR
AGRA
AH
AIDS
AIF
AMIR
AWPB
BDF
BDS
BDSP
BNR
BRD
Access to Finance Rwanda
Alliance for a Green Africa
Animal Husbandry
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Africa Improved Foods
Rwanda Microfinance Association
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Business Development Fund
Business Development Services
Business Development Service Provider
National Bank of Rwanda
Rwanda Development Bank
CAADP
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme
CBFI
CESB
CEO
CFSVA
CGIAR
CIP
CPM
CPP
CSA
CoEB
CPO
DDP
DFID
EB
Community-Based Financing Institution
Rwanda Capacity Development and Employment Services Board
Chief Executive Officer
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
Crop Intensification Programme
Country Programme Manager
Constant Purchase Power Parity
Climate Smart Agriculture
Center of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management
Country Programme Officer
District Development Plan
Department for International Development
Executive Board
EDPRS
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
EFA
EIRR
EICV
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
FaaB
FAO
FE
FFS
FIRR
FMA
FMD
FPIC
FS
FtMA
FO
GALS
GAP
Economic and Financial Analysis
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Farming as a Business
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Exchange
Farmer Field School
Financial Internal Rate of Return
Financial Management Assessment
Financial Management Division
Free, Prior and Informed Consent
Feasibility Study
Farm to Market Alliance
Farmers’ Organization
Gender Action Learning System
Good Agricultural Practices
GC
GDP
GHG
GIS
GoR
GoS
General Conditions
Gross Domestic Product
Greenhouse Gas
Geographic Information System
Government of Rwanda
Government of Spain
KWAMP
Kirehe community-based Watershed Management Project
HBC
HDI
HH
HIV
Hydrographic Basin Committees
Human Development Index
Household
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HoReCO
Horticulture in Reality Cooperative
ICP
IFAD Client Portal
ICRISAT
International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
ICT
IFAD
IFC
IFMIS
IMF
IMTA
INDC
IPM
IPRM
ITCZ
IWUO
KIIWP
KM
Information and Communication Technology
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
the Integrated Financial Management Information Systems
International Monetary Fund
Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
Integrated Pest Management
Integrated Project Risk Matrix
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone
Irrigation Water User Organization
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project
Knowledge Management
KWAMP
Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project
LTB
LTR
LUCP
LWH
M&E
Letter to The Borrower
Land Tenure Regularization
Land Use Consolidation Policy
Land husbandry, Water harvesting and Hillside irrigation project
Monitoring and Evaluation
MDD-W
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women
MES
MFI
MG
Monitoring and Evaluation System
Micro Finance Institution
Matching Grant
MIDIMAR
Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs
MINAGRI
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources
MINECOFIN
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MINALOC
Ministry of Local Government
MINICOM
Ministry of Trade and Industry
MINIRENA
Ministry of Lands, Environment, Forestry, Water and Mines
MIS
MoU
MPCI
MPI
MT
Management Information System
Memorandum of Understanding
Multi-Peril Crop Insurance
Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index
Metric Ton
MTR
MUV
Mid Term Review
Manufactures Unit Value
NCCLCDS
National Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development Strategy
NAEB
National Agriculture Export development Board
NAIS
NGO
NISR
NO
NPV
NRM
NST
NsWP
OAG
O&M
ORMS
p.a.
PA
PASP
PBG
PBGF
PDR
PEFA
PFI
PICSA
PPP
PRICE
PRM
PSC
PSTA
4P
RAB
RAP
National Agriculture Insurance Scheme
Non-Governmental Organization
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda
No Objection
Net Present Value
Natural Resources Management
National Strategy for Transformation
Nutrition Sensitive Water Productivity
Office of the Auditor General
Operation and Maintenance
Operational Results Management System
Per Annum
Priority Area
Climate-resilient Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme
Performance-based Grant
Performance-based Grant Facility
Project Design Report
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Participating Financial Institution
Participatory Climate Services for Agriculture
Purchasing Power Parity
Project for Rural Income through Exports
Procurement Risk Matrix
Project Steering Committee
Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in Rwanda
Public Private Producers Partnership
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board
Resettlement Action Plan
RB-COSOP
Results-Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
RCA
RDDP
REMA
RGB
RPHC
RNRA
RPPA
RSSP
RWF
RWFA
RYAF
Rwanda Cooperative Agency
Rwanda Dairy Development Project
Rwanda Environment Management Authority
Rwanda Governance Board
Rwanda Population and Housing Census
Rwanda National Resources Authority
Rwanda Public Procurement Authority
Rural Sector Support Programme
Rwandan Franc
Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority
Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness Forum
SACCO
Savings and Credit Cooperative
SCC
SC
SDC
Sub-Catchment Committee
Steering Committee
Sector Development Committee
SDG
SOE
SPIU
SSIT
SSTC
Sustainable Development Goal
Statement of Expenditure
Single Project Implementation Unit
Small-Scale Irrigation Technology
South-south and Triangular Cooperation
STARLIT
Strengthening Agricultural Resilience through Learning and Innovation
STARS
Strengthening African Rural Smallholders
SWC
TA
TAF
TBD
TLST
ToC
ToT
UNDAP
UNEP
US$
VC
WA
WBG
WEAI
WFP
WHO
WoP
WP
WRSI
WLUO
WUO
Soil and Water Conservation
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance Facility
To Be Determined
Time and Labour Saving Technology
Theory of Change
Training of Trainers
United Nations Development Assistance Plan for Rwanda
United Nations Environment Programme
United States Dollar
Value Chain
Withdrawal Application
World Bank Group
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index
World Food Programme
World Health Organization
Without Project
With Project
Water Requirement Satisfaction Index
Water for Livestock User Organization
Water User Organization
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/28
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$4,718,000
$0
$4,718,000
I. Context
The Eastern province was hit by a severe drought in 2016, followed by two years of poor rains. GoR and IFAD started preparing in
late 2018 the “Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIWP)” to restore the livelihoods among the local
communities and boosting their economy. As the proposed KIIWP envisaged environmental Category A interventions, GoR and IFAD
agreed to design and implement KIIWP in two phases. Phase one (KIIWP1) was approved by the Executive Board (EB) of IFAD on 2
May 2019 and became effective on 10 December 2019. It will be closed on 31 December 2022.
The Project Design Report (PDR) of KIIWP1 presented the overall rationale and objective of the whole project, even if approval was
only requested for the first phase. In order to proceed from KIIWP1 to KIIWP2, specific triggers had been identified and included in the
PDR of KIIWP1[1].
The design process of KIIWP2 allowed to closely review the results of the work done during the implementation of KIIWP1 and
confirmed that all the triggers to move to KIIWP2 have been met successfully. KIIWP1 has been conducting the Feasibility Studies
(FS) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for the large irrigation schemes to be implemented under Phase 2
(KIIWP2). The ESIA was published on IFAD website in November 2020 after a National Validation Workshop was held in Kigali.
The design of KIIWP2 therefore builds on the results of KIIWP1 and its content informed by findings of the ESIAs and the related FS,
as well as additional analysis, field work and interactions with partners and co-financiers. Some activities initiated under KIIWP1 will
be continued and further strengthened by KIIWP2.
 II. Project description
A. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
The goal of KIIWP is to “Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought-prone Eastern Province of Rwanda”. The Project Development
Objective is to “Improve food security and incomes of at least 40,000 rural households on a sustainable basis and build their climate
resilience”.
The Project intervention area comprises nine drought-prone sectors of the twelve sectors in Kayonza District, namely Gahini, Kabare,
Kabarondo, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego, Ruramira and Rwinkwavu. The area has been selected on the basis of its high
vulnerability to drought and high poverty and food insecurity levels. The National Strategic Food Reserve supported its population
during past droughts. However, the area has a high untapped potential of water resources that, if fully mobilized, would significantly
improve crop production, climate resilience, food security and nutrition. The Project will reach out to 40,000 rural households (180,000
members). Women will account for 50 percent of the beneficiaries, youth and young adults for 30 percent.
B. Components/outcomes
Component A: Strengthening Resilience to Droughts. The expected outcome would be “Farmers’ drought resistance
strengthened”. KIIWP2 will build on and complete the achievements of KIIWP1. Under Sub-component A1, 1950 ha of catchment
areas will be protected and developed, in addition to the reforestation of 2,000 ha with trees. In addition, the Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) identified in the ESIAs will be implemented. Under Sub-component A2, on the basis of the development
costs and feasibility assessment of irrigation schemes conducted under KIIWP1, KIIWP2 aims to implement 2,285 ha of irrigation
command area. The Infrastructure Management Institutions will be enhanced, including the Sector Steering Committees,
Hydrographic Basin Committees, and Irrigation Water User Organizations. Under Sub-component A3, climate smart agriculture
practices and technologies would be promoted in the irrigated and catchment areas, using the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach.
The Project would also support the Farmer Promoters, and promote adapted farm mechanisation, and Climate- and Nutrition Smart
Technologies.
Component B: Support to Farm Business Development. Expected outputs of Sub-component B1 include: (i) 8,000 smallholder
farmers in FFS received FaaB training, (ii) 500 FFS members and 50 Agriculture Cooperatives received business development
coaching and have bankable business plans. Based on these business plans, the Project will co-finance privately-owned and
managed investments of individual smallholders, cooperatives and/or private sector companies through a Performance-based
Matching Grant Scheme. Sub-component B2 would link farmers and cooperatives to markets using agribusiness linkages and public-
private partnerships. Expected outputs will include: (i) 8,000 smallholders have improved access to markets, (ii) 10,000 smallholders
have improved access to financial services with support from the Inter Church Organisation for Development Cooperation (ICCO) 
and other partners, and (iii) 2,500 smallholders use agricultural insurance products. In addition, the targeted groups would be given
access to inclusive financial services, provided by local financial institutions. Finally, smallholders would be supported to access
agriculture insurance products offered under the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS).
Component C: Institutional Development and Project Coordination. Sub-component C1 will support the formulation of policies,
laws and regulations related to intervention areas of the Project. In addition, based on a needs assessment, institutional support
would be provided to implementing entities at national and district levels. Sub-component C2 will finance project coordination,
monitoring and valuation (M&E), knowledge management (KM) and communication. Sub-component C3 would be a zero-budget,
designed to provide swift response in the event of an eligible emergency event such as the global COVID-19 pandemic.
C. Project costs and financing
2/28
The total cost of KIIWP2 has been estimated at US$ 61.0 million. IFAD will contribute US$ 21.7 million and the Government of Spain
is expected to co-finance US$ 28 million. The Government of Rwanda will contribute US$ 8.0 million, mainly in the form of exemption
of tax and duties. The contributions from beneficiaries to the irrigation schemes and catchment protection works (Component A) and
matching grants (Component B), both in-kind and in-cash, are estimated at US$ 2.1 million. ICCO will contribute US$ 0.65 million,
which will allow to scale-up Component B. ICCO’s partners are organized to support SMEs and MFIs, respectively, through loans with
a tentative value of US$ 372,000. Partnerships with private sector investors and other projects are expected to convey additional
financial resources to the Project, including access of KIIWP2 beneficiaries to existing credit lines.
D. Project benefits
The beneficiaries are expected to experience increase in income as a direct result of the: (i) increased water availability for
productive use; (ii) diversification of productive activities and sources of income thanks to greater access to technical assistance and
inputs; (iii) increased food availability for rural poor, (iv) increased value-added of agricultural outputs; (v) enhanced productivity
through improved infrastructure; (vi) improved quality of processed products, thus attracting higher prices at local market; (vii)
increased employment opportunity either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities.
The Project is a technical and economically viable investment to the economy as a whole. The Project economic NPV of the net
benefit stream over the 20-year timeframe, discounted at 8 percent, is USD 12.5 million. This value yields an EIRR of 14 percent and
BCR of 1.19 for the base case scenario and it results in a payback period of nine years. Profitability results were tested in the
sensitivity analysis to measure variations due to unforeseen factors, hence identifying those variables affecting final results the most.
The Project appears to be more sensitive to a decline in benefits rather than an increase in costs. The EFA includes economic
benefits related to carbon sequestration directly linked to the adoption of Climate-Smart Agriculture practices
E. Exit strategy and sustainability
The Project Exit Strategy is embedded in the intervention approach through: (i) the strategic approach of working directly with
administrative structures and community leaders at District, sector and irrigation scheme/catchment levels; (ii) the empowerment of
Infrastructure Management Institutions that will assume full responsibility for planning and implementation of watershed interventions
and operation and maintenance of post-harvest infrastructure; (iii) the strengthening of FFS, Farmer Promoters and Cooperatives,
including their back and forward linkages and access to markets, financial services and agriculture insurance.
III. Risks
A. Environment and social category
The Project has been classified as Environmental and Social Category A, because of its focus on irrigation schemes with command
areas of more than 100 ha each. During KIIWP1, an ESIA and Feasibility Study (FS) were prepared for Ndego and Kabare sectors. In
November 2020, both reports were shared with IFAD and approved for disclosure, after revisions to incorporate third party reviews. In
addition, the remaining FS and ESIAs for the Kanyeganyege and Gishanda schemes, hydro-geological surveys for boreholes drilling
and valley ponds, water permit requests and ESIA procedures were initiated and will be finalized in July 2021. The additional ESIAs
must be shared with IFAD for no-objection and disclosed 120 days prior to the construction of the irrigation infrastructures. The
already developed FS and ESIAs have identified that no physical involuntary resettlements are expected. An abbreviated RAP was
included in the ESIA prepared for the Ndego and Kabare schemes and associated costs were integrated in the cost-table. The
abbreviated RAP will be implemented and all compensation measures provided prior to the construction works or partial land take.
B. Climate risk classification
Because of recent droughts events and the vulnerability of the Eastern Province to extreme events, the Climate Risk classification is
high. Adequate adaptation and mitigation measures have been included such as climate-smart agriculture practices and other
technologies, afforestation/reforestation measures.
IV. Implementation
Organizational framework
Project management and coordination. In line with the practice for other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, a National Project
Steering Committee (SC) established for KIIWP1 shall continue for KIIWP2. The Lead Project Agency will be the Rwanda Agriculture
and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB), an implementing agency of MINAGRI, which will have the overall responsibility for
the coordination and execution of the Project. KIIWP2 will be integrated within the Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) of IFAD
projects that are under RAB. KIIWP1 already existing personnel will be the same for KIIWP2, plus some additional staff that is needed
at central and at district unit level.
Financial management arrangements have been designed on the basis of the KIIWP1. Financial management staff for the Project
both at SPIU and Kayonza District is already in place which would contribute to guarantee quick start-up of project activities.
Procurement arrangements have been designed on the basis of KIIWP1. A procurement risk matrix was completed and identifies
weaknesses in the current legal and regulatory framework and recommends mitigating actions to address those weaknesses.
Pursuant to paragraph 42 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, procurement shall be carried out according to the Borrower’s
procurement regulations to the extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
Implementation plans
As KIIWP1 is already operational and preparing the KIIWP2 management structures, Feasibility Studies and ESIAs, no major start-up
challenges have been anticipated.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
3/28
a. National Context
Socio-economic context. Between 2000 and 2016, the Republic of Rwandan's (herewith referred to as Rwanda) economy grew by
an impressive average of 7.9 percent per annum and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita increased from US$242 to
US$729.[2][3] COVID-19, combined with heavy rains in Q1 2020, as well as subsequent measures to contain the spread of the
pandemic, deepened the country’s economic slowdown such that real GDP growth was slightly negative at -0.2 percent in 2020.
Although the outlook remains highly uncertain, the IMF projects a rebound in real GDP growth to 5.7 percent in 2021, albeit below
potential.[4] The positive 2021 real GDP projection is supported by continued diversification of the export base, public investment to
crowd in private sector investments and greater resilience in the agriculture sector.
Rwanda remains, however, a low-income country (LIC) with a highly-dense population of 12.7 million people[5], on an area of 26,338
km2. Its population is expected to grow to 22 million by 2050. With an index of 0.543, the country ranked 160 out of 189 countries in
the 2020 Human Development Index (HDI), placing it in the lower human development category[6]. About 83 percent of the
population is living in rural areas[7], putting increasing pressure on limited availability of farm land. This notwithstanding, in 2020
Rwanda was ranked 16 out of  52 African countries towards achieving the Sustainable development goals (SDGs)[8], with progress in
particular regarding SDG13 (combating climate change) and achieving gender equality (SDG5), while challenges remain in achieving
SDG2 (Hunger and Agriculture) and SDG4 (Quality Education).
Impact of COVID-19 and Government response. As at 19 April 2021, Rwanda had 23,866 confirmed cases of COVID-19 with
322 deaths, reported to the World Health Organisation (WHO). Since the start of the vaccination campaign on 3 March 2021, and as
at 19 April 2021, a total of 350,926 anti-COVID-19 vaccine doses have been administered[9]. Rwanda put in place decisive measures
such as partial/total lockdown, closure of borders and schools, restriction of movements and ban on large gatherings to contain
COVID-19, which positively impacted the health crisis, but the significant economic disruptions increased food insecurity and
poverty[10], particularly for households living from daily labour and in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The restriction of
in-country movement disrupted the market and business interactions along the value chains, resulting in increased food prices and
smallholder farmers being unable to sell their produce at the right time. In addition, many farmers have had to rely on their own
production for household consumption.
In response to the impact of COVID-19, the Economic Recovery Fund (ERF) was established by the Government of Rwanda (GoR),
since June 2020, to support the recovery of businesses hardest hit by COVID-19 so that they can survive, resume operations and
safeguard employment, thereby cushioning the economic effects of the pandemic.[11] In addition, GoR has been a recipient of IFAD’s
Rural Poor Stimulus Facility (RPSF), and the project focuses on two areas: (i) provision of agricultural inputs and basic assets needed
to production; and (ii) facilitated access to markets. The latter is supporting the expansion of the National Strategic Food Reserve
(NSFR), which has dual functions as a supplier of grains to food insecure families and a purchaser of produce from farmers and
cooperatives. In order to continue essential activities, MINAGRI has put in place special guidelines allowing farmers to continue
agricultural activities even during lockdowns, including access to agricultural inputs and facilitation of transporting the produce to local
markets. Finally, all members of the Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) for IFAD-supported projects have been vaccinated
against the COVID-19 so that they can continue their implementation tasks with limited risks.
Political and business environment. Rwanda continues to boast a notable political stability. Presidential elections took place in
August 2017 and the incumbent President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, was re-elected for a third seven-year term. The next legislative
and presidential elections are due in 2023 and 2024 respectively. Rwanda also has an enabling policy and business environment.
Financial inclusion increased from 48 percent in 2008 to 89 percent by 2016[12], while mobile phone ownership rose from 6 percent in
2006 to 71 percent by 2017[13].
Rural poverty. Rwanda made significant progress with national poverty[14] reduction that dropped from 60 percent of the population
in 2000 to 38 percent by 2017; extreme poverty from 36 percent to 16 percent[15]. Rural poverty is 1 percent compared to 15.8
percent urban poverty; extreme poverty is 18.1 percent in rural areas while only 5.9 percent in urban areas. Rural poverty is even
76.6 percent among households with little or no land or seasonal labourers.
Agriculture sector. The Rwandan economy relies heavily on agriculture, which contributes 37.2 percent to GDP and 70 percent to
export revenues, employs 70 percent of the active population, and supplies 91 percent of food. Eighty percent of rural households are
smallholders, who cultivate on average of 0.33 ha of land in rainfed farming systems, which reflects the strong pressure on farm land.
Increases in sustainable food production and productivity will be essential to reduce rural poverty and convert this still largely
subsistence sector into a market-oriented one. Despite past Government efforts, local food supply lags behind domestic demand. The
opportunities for the sector, which are reflected in KIIWP's architecture, are primarily situated in the intensification of land and water
use; efficient mobilization and use of agriculture water; value addition and enhancing linkages to input and output markets.
National development strategies. The Rwanda Vision 2050 aims at transforming the country from a low-income agriculture-based
economy into a knowledge-based, service-oriented middle-income The National Strategy for Transformation (NST 1) integrates
Rwanda’s commitments to the SDGs), the African Union's Agenda 2063, East African Community's Vision 2050, and Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Rwanda’s fourth Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture 2018-2024 (PSTA 4) defines priority investments and policy
agenda. The private sector, including farmers and cooperatives, are identified as drivers of change, and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Animal Resources (MINAGRI) and public sector as enablers. PSTA 4 commits to the African Union’s Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and the 2014 Malabo Declaration[16] that sets targets for the contribution of the
agriculture sector to economic growth, nutrition and food security, and resilience. According to the 2019 Second Biennial Review of
the African Union Commission of the Malabo Declaration, Rwanda was the best performing country in implementing the seven (7)
commitments[17] of the Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared prosperity and Improved
Livelihoods.[18]
4/28
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
Gender. Rwanda has closed 79.1 percent of its gender gap, being the best performer in Sub-Saharan Africa and ranking 9th out of
157 countries in 2020, according to the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report. The 2015 revised Constitution
enshrines gender equality, women's rights and sets a 30 percent quota for women in all decision-making positions. More than 50
percent of Rwandan parliamentarians are women. Yet, gender disparities still persist, especially in rural areas. Ninety percent of rural
women rely on agriculture as only source of income[19]. They are more constrained to subsistence farming and marketing small
volumes of food crops, while men control larger transactions and cash crops. Rural women have lower levels of schooling and higher
illiteracy rates (23 percent)[20], lower access to finance, assets, land, markets, and services. Approximately 27 percent of rural
households is headed by women, and 1/3 of them are extremely poor. Seven percent of heads of household have a disability[21] and
these households tend to be more food insecure. Rwanda has taken significant steps in addressing gender-based violence (GBV),
including the passage of laws and policies. However, GBV remains a widespread problem, with women remaining the primary people
affected.
Youth. Youth is defined in Rwanda as aged 16 to 30 years[22] and makes up 26.6 percent of the population. About 80 percent of the
youth lives in rural areas and more than 60 percent work in agriculture, as independent farmer (45 percent) or as farm labourer (15
percent). More rural males (38.5 percent) than females (18.6 percent) have non-farm jobs[23]. Rural youth entrepreneurship is
constrained by low earnings and precarious working conditions, low education and technical skills, limited access to land, information,
financial and business development services. The lack of opportunities leads to a rural exodus of youth, with Eastern Province having
a 21 percent youth migration[24].
Food Security and Nutrition. The Rwanda National Food and Nutrition Policy[25] reaffirms a strong commitment to achieving food
security, eliminating malnutrition and preventing stunting in children under 5 years of age. Nineteen percent of Rwandan households
is food insecure, of which 17 percent moderately and two (2) percent severely food insecure[26]. The easing of COVID-19 prevention
measures and vaccine rollout is expected to gradually increase income-earning opportunities and maintain area-level Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) Phase 1 outcomes (minimal)[27].
Rural malnutrition is due to an inter-related set of underlying causes including food insecurity from subsistence farming on small plots
of land; poor diet diversification leading to micronutrient deficiencies (especially Vitamin A and iron); poor access to safe and clean
water health services and sanitation facilities (WASH), as well as seasonal and chronic obstacles and climate shocks limiting access
to mostly market-sourced food items. Furthermore, post-harvest management, storage and small-scale processing technologies are
not fully effective and hampering food’s availability throughout the year. In Kayonza District, 33 percent of the population is food
insecure and food insecurity has increased by 21 percent from 2015 to 2018[28], mainly as a consequence of successive droughts
and decreased household resilience.
While chronic malnutrition has decreased significantly over the last decade, stunting is still above the WHO high severity threshold
and remains a public health concern. Both a mother’s level of education and wealth quintile have a clear inverse relationship with
prevalence of stunting, being higher among children living in the poorest households (49 percent) than among children in the richest
households (21 percent)[29]. In Kayonza District, prevalence of stunting of children under five age was 42.4 percent in 2018[30],
compared to 35 percent nationally.
Climate change. The National Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development Strategy (NCCLCDS) underlines the need to deal with
climate variability in pursuit of social, environmental and economic development. Rwanda’s Nationally Determined Contribution[31]
aims at achieving category 2 energy security. The country will support green industries and services, sustainable land and water
management, urban development, biodiversity and ecosystem services. On the CAADP Africa Agricultural Transformation Scorecard,
Rwanda is one of the top performers in terms of progress with respect to enhanced climate and livelihood resilience (Commitment
6.1).
Climate change has brought recurrent mid-season droughts[32] and shorter, but erratic rainy seasons of higher intensity. The
droughts have caused agricultural production to decrease, especially in the Eastern Province[33]. Regarding Kayonza District, located
in the Eastern Province, time series of rainfall, minimum temperature and maximum temperature at Lake Ihema meteorological station
from 1980 to 2017 show an increment of extreme events with higher peaks of precipitation during the wet season and with long
periods of drought. Given the flat topography with little or no wind breaks, the District is exposed to heavy windstorms.
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☐ Gender transformational
5/28
☒ Nutrition sensitive
☒ Youth sensitive
☒ Climate finance
☒ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
Situation
analysis
☒ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☒ Key livelihood problems and
opportunities, by gender
☒ National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
☒ Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
☒ Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☒ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Main youth groups
☒ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
☒ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
Theory of
change
☒ Gender transformative
pathways
☐ Policy engagement on
GEWE[34]
☒ Nutrition pathways
☒ Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☒ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic empowerment
☒ Youth employment included
in project objectives/activities
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
sex
Logframe
indicators
☒ Women are >40% of outreach
beneficiaries
·          IFAD empowerment index
(IE2.1)
☒ Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, indigenous
peoples (if appropriate)
·          Output level Cis
o    CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
·          Outcome level Cis
(at least one of below)
o    CI 1.2.8
o    CI 1.2.9
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
sex and youth
Human
and
financial
resources
☒ Staff with gender TORs
☒ Funds for gender activities
☐ Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
☒ Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
☒ Funds for nutrition
activities
☒ Staff with youth TORs
☒ Funds for youth activities
Based on the initial
estimates KIIWP has
25% climate finance.
The actual amount of
climate finance is being
calculated.
1.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
Rwanda has abundant untapped water resources in the form of natural lakes, rivers, ground water, marshlands and runoff, but this
potential has not been fully reached. The Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan (2010) has identified 589,000 ha of potential irrigable
land[35]. With support from its development partners, the GoR has increased the area under irrigation from 48,508 ha in 2017 to a
target of 102,284 ha in 2024 (NST1).
The Eastern Province[36] was hit by a severe drought in 2016, followed by two years of poor rains. This severely impacted local
communities, mainly in Kayonza District, with more than 47,000 households becoming food insecure and the GoR, in partnership
with WFP[37], providing food relief. Farmers in these drought-prone areas were also affected by pressure of farm land and loss of soil
fertility due to unsustainable environmental management. This notwithstanding, Kayonza District has a high untapped potential of
water resources that, if fully mobilized, would significantly improve crop production, climate resilience, food security and nutrition.
In light of the above, and along with its strategy to mitigate the drought-induced calamities through improved use of untapped water
resources, the GoR requested IFAD to formulate a new integrated irrigation and watershed development project, revolving around the
most seriously affected district of Kayonza, and building on the experience of the IFAD-supported KWAMP, the successful
Community-based Watershed Management Project, implemented in the neighbouring Kirehe District, which completed in June
2016.[38] In order to make the best use of available land and water resources in Kayonza District, and to reduce the structural
vulnerability and food insecurity of the population, GoR and IFAD prepared, in 2018, the “Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated
6/28
Watershed Management Project (KIIWP)”. As the KIIWP design proposed Environmental Category A interventions, GoR and IFAD
agreed to design and implement KIIWP in two phases. KIIWP has a total duration of 8.5 years, with 2.5 years for Phase 1 (KIIWP1)
and 6 years for Phase 2 (KIIWP2). KIIWP1 was approved by the IFAD Executive Board (EB) on 2 May 2019[39], became effective on
10 December 2019 and will be closed on 31 December 2022.
KIIWP1 and KIIWP2
The Project Design Report (PDR) of KIIWP1 presented the rationale and objective of the whole project, while approval from IFAD’s
Executive Board was only requested for the first phase. KIIWP1’s objectives has been to: (i) conduct the Feasibility Studies (FS) and
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for the irrigation schemes to be implemented under KIIWP2; (ii) implement the
major part of catchment rehabilitation and protection, including 35 water points for humans and animals; (iii) undertake the initial
training of the Infrastructure Management Institutions; and (iv) develop a pipeline of 5,000 ha of bankable irrigation schemes.
Building on KIIWP1, the structure of the KIIWP2, will be as follows:
Component A: “Strengthening Resilience to Drought”. KIIWP2 will complete the catchment protection works[40], and
implement the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) (Sub-component A1), finance the irrigation works for
which FS and ESIAs are available, while further strengthening the Infrastructure Management Institutions[41] (Sub-component
A2). In addition, KIIWP2 will promote climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices and technologies (Sub-component A3).
Component B: “Support to Farm Business Development” will be launched and implemented entirely by KIIWP2. Farmers in
the irrigation schemes and catchment areas and their cooperatives will receive business development training and coaching; in
addition, investment support will be provided, using a performance-based matching grant system. Innovative linkages with
markets, finances services and agricultural insurance will be promoted to ensure post-project sustainability and the commercial
orientation of the investments.
Component C: “Institutional Development and Project Coordination” will be financed by KIIWP1 and KIIWP2. Sub-component
C1 will support institutional capacity building and policy dialogue. The zero-budget Sub-component C3 that would allow GoR
and IFAD to reallocate funding in case of emergencies.
Key milestones achieved for moving to KIIWP2
In order to proceed with KIIWP2, verifiable triggers had been defined under KWIIP1, as presented in Table 2. The KIIWP2 design
process carefully reviewed the results of the work done during the ongoing implementation of KIIWP1 and confirmed that the triggers
to proceed with KIIWP2 have been successfully met. The KIIWP2 design process carefully reviewed the results of the work done
during the ongoing implementation of KIIWP1 and confirmed that the triggers to proceed with KIIWP2 have been successfully met.
Table 2: Summary of status of triggers to move to KIIWP2
Trigger
Status
i.        FS identify irrigation schemes that are
financially, economically, environmentally and
socially viable and sustainable.
FS were prepared for the large scale irrigation schemes in the Ndego and Kabare
sectors.
Findings confirmed that 2,010 ha are suitable for irrigation schemes that are
financially, economically, environmentally and socially viable and sustainable.
ii.      Third party satisfactory review of FS, ESIAs
and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
The FS applied avoidance principles and irrigation schemes are proposed in a
way that avoids any physical resettlement.
FS and ESIAs, for the Ndego and Kabare sectors, were approved after revisions
to incorporate third party reviews. No physical resettlement is expected therefore
an abbreviated RAP (ARAP) was included in the ESIA.
During the inception phase, the ARAP will be further refined with the detailed
design of the irrigation scheme.
iii.     ESIAs and RAPs are disclosed at local
community level, national and IFAD website for a
minimum 120 days
The ESIA for the Ndego and Kabare sectors, including the ARAP, was published
on the IFAD website in November 2020 after a National Validation Workshop was
held in Kigali, with participation of representatives of various line ministries,
institutions and districts.
iv.     Provision of a budget and commitment by
Government of Rwanda to implement the RAP
and other ESMP activities
GoR accepted to cover all costs related to the execution of the RAPs.
Collaboration with Rwanda Centre of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural
Resource Management was agreed, which will provide technical backstopping to
monitor the implementation of ESP activities.
v.       Revision of the PDR and PIM to incorporate
the findings of KIIWP1.
The KIIWP2 PDR and PIM have been amended. The design builds on the results
of KIIWP1 as it is informed by findings of ESIA, FS and additional analysis.
During the implementation of KIIWP1, Feasibility Studies (FS) for large irrigation schemes covering an area of 2,500 ha were
conducted in the Ndego and Kabare sectors to ensure that the Project is implemented in an environmentally and socially sustainable
7/28
manner and in full compliance with national environmental regulations as well as best international polices and practices. Findings
confirmed that 2,010 ha are suitable for irrigation schemes that are financially, economically, environmentally and socially viable and
sustainable.
Given the nature and location of the Ndego and Kabare irrigation schemes and considering the identified potential impacts, proposed
management and monitoring plans, the ESIA report also concluded that the Project is feasible. There are no major negative
environmental and social impacts that may result from its implementation, which cannot be mitigated. Furthermore, an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was elaborated for monitoring Project interventions and their potential impact on the
ecosystem. The ESMP presents all mitigations measures and estimated costs, mandatory procedures and responsible institutions.
The findings were integrated throughout KIIWP2 components and cost and financing.
Recommended mitigations measures for the Ndego and Kabare irrigation schemes were integrated throughout the Project
components through: i) the catchment rehabilitation and protection; ii) promotion of climate smart agriculture practices and
technologies; and iii) capacity building of local community to ensure increased resilience to climatic shocks, better management or
their natural resource and enhancement of their livelihoods.
The ESIA also identifies positive social and environmental including biodiversity impacts expected from the proposed activities. These
include: a) increased productivity and income with possibility of having more cropping seasons; b) temporary and permanent
employment opportunity; c) 2,000 ha afforested and reforested as part of upstream catchment rehabilitation using endemic and fruit
tree species and promotion of agro-biodiversity within the buffer zones; d) adaptation to climate change through provision of water in
drought seasons and climate smart agricultural practices; e) crop diversification and increased value of production in hillside areas; f)
enhanced food security; g) increased value of agricultural production; h) reduced post-harvest losses; i) increased sales in output
markets; and j) improved access to water for livestock and humans.
The FS and surveys for the additional two smaller schemes, Gishanda (125 ha) and Kanyeganyege (150 ha), with lower ecological
sensitivity, were also initiated within the KIIWP1 AWPB 2020-2021 (re. Annex 11). The project will consider investment in these or
any other additional schemes if the findings of the studies are positive and after compliance with the SECAP disclosure procedures
(120 days) and national regulations (RDB_EIA certificate).
B. Lessons learned
KIIWP2 will benefit from various lessons from the IFAD Country Programme and from the ongoing KIIWP1, which were integrated in
the design, in particular the following:
Geographical targeting.The focus on a single district in KWAMP[42] enabled strong local ownership of local government at Cell,
Sector, District levels and sustainability of interventions. KIIWP (1 and 2) also focuses on a single district, namely Kayonza.
Irrigation Water User Organizations (IWUOs). Early formation, capacity building and empowerment of IWUOs in KWAMP allowed
them to take responsibility for operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes, which was formalized in an innovative Infrastructure
Management Transfer Agreement (IMTA) between farmers and authorities. This innovative approach was integrated in the KIIWP
design.
Capacity building of cooperatives. Whilst several cooperatives were either formed or rehabilitated, and supported under KWAMP,
they continued to face organizational and governance issues, and further comprehensive and tailored capacity building was required.
KIIWP2 would establish a partnership with ICCO to mobilize this specialized support.
Technical design of hillside irrigation schemesby competent service providers is essential. KWAMP experienced high cost variations
for hillside irrigation infrastructure and inadequate water availability as result of poor estimates at the design stage. The technical
design and cost of the irrigation schemes were carefully reviewed, together with SPIU, and adjusted where needed.
Community competition (Inteko y’Imihigo) was successfully used under KWAMP to reach out to vulnerable groups in the catchment
areas and involve them in the sustainable development and management of watersheds. Potential micro-projects would be climate-
smart and nutrition-sensitive, e.g. beekeeping, energy-saving stoves, rainwater harvesting, sustainable production of charcoal, eco-
tourism, and biodiversity conservation through plantation of endemic trees species. KIIWP will scale up this tool as part of the
participatory watershed management plans.
Agricultural extension services. The district and sector agronomists are on the payroll of district authorities, who are in turn are under
the aegis of the Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC). Yet all IFAD projects in Rwanda fall under MINAGRI. The resources
allocated by projects to MINALOC for district and sector agronomists remain very scarce, mostly motorcycles and operating costs.
The KIIWP2 design has recognized the important role of MINALOC in ensuring close coordination and delivery of agricultural
extension services.
Fruit tree survival.The survey at the end of PRICE shows alarming mortality rates, between 33 and 53 percent, of mango, avocado
and citrus trees planted throughout the country. The drought-prone Eastern Province and Kayonza District in particular have been
among the most affected[43]. Two lessons emerge: (i) when fruit trees are distributed for free, ownership is very low; it is advisable to
charge a minimal fee to increase ownership; (ii) seedling distribution needs to be accompanied by proper follow-up. Given that
KIIWP1 has engaged in planting 900ha of fruit trees, KIIWP2 should optimize tree survival rates.
Access to markets.PASP[44] and RDDP[45] demonstrated that when commercial linkages between farmers and buyers are formalized
and trust is built, off-takers can become co-investors with farmers and help them to access financial services and markets. KIIWP2 will
build on the joint-venture models developed under PASP and RDDP.
Financial services would benefit from PASP, PRICE and RDDP experience. In order to ensure an efficient use of public resources,
KIIWP2 would have a sustained focus on supporting linkages of the beneficiaries to the financial sector. This would be done to
mitigate risks for the financial institutions by providing capacity building support both on demand and supply sides and structuring of
the value chains. The use of matching grants would be restricted to facilitate access to finance for high-risk borrowers, either because
of lack of business track record or lack of collateral, and to incentivize development of public good-related investment by private
sector.
Performance-based grants facilities (PBGFs) should be designed with appropriate ceilings and mechanisms to lifting barriers for
smallholders. The 2nd PRICE-supported[46] PBGF has reduced ceiling for primary production (US$10,000 compared to US$50,000
in PRICE’s first PBGF). As a result, SACCOs have responded tremendously well: 306 or 98 percent of the FIs participated in the
second PBGF, against 35 in the first PBGF. Many SACCOs financed smallholders for the first time, in particular horticulture
smallholders, who became clients for repeat loans without any grant. KIIWP2 will build on the matching grant models and procedures
developed under PASP and PRICE.
8/28
PASP has shown that matching grants facilities to support business development should include support along three stages: (i) pre-
financing support aimed at filling potential business gaps, including governance; (ii) finance and business launch facilitation to assist
applicants in developing realistic business plans; and (iii) post-finance support consisting in business coaching for successful
applicants. KIIWP2 will thus make extensive use of Business Development Service Providers (BDSPs) to support across its various
interventions smallholders grouped under Farmer Field Schools (FFS) and cooperatives.
The design of grant facilities should make provision for grant management fees to follow up beyond the mere grant disbursement. In
addition, experience in PASP and PRICE has shown the need to terminate grants at least 12 months before project completion, as to
allow proper follow up of grant beneficiaries. KIIWP2 design of grant facilities made provision for grant management fee that will
include appropriate monitoring and follow up beyond the mere grant disbursement.
Agricultural insurance. GoR launched the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) for crops and livestock in 2019 to de-risk
these sectors. NAIS has also recognized the importance of insurance awareness at all levels, which has informed KIIWP2
design.KWIIP2 also builds on insurance lessons from RDDP, which has experience with crowding-in insurance stakeholders,
providing insurance education, and connecting insurance offerings with farmers’ groups and distribution channels offering other
services.
Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU)’s capacity strengthening. During the second half of implementation. PRICE encountered
challenges related to weak M&E, gender and KM. This can be correlated with the increased workload at SPIU level, whereby the
same persons became tasked with the implementation of three projects (PRICE, PASP and RDDP). These weaknesses can affect
the overall performance of IFAD-Country Programme, even when field activities are going on well. The SPIU is recommended to
assess its needs and assign dedicated staff for M&E, gender and KM for each project.
Procurement. IFAD is currently financing four projects in Rwanda (KIIWP1, PASP, PRISM and RDDP). Applicable lessons learned
include: (i) It is of paramount importance for IFAD and the SPIU to closely monitor procurement activities delegated to third parties on
the basis of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). This includes requiring that each MoU contains mandatory references to the
IFAD policies[47] and reviewing procurement carried out by third parties on the basis of a MoU, so as to ensure that value for money
is achieved and avoid the incurrence of ineligible expenditures; (ii) Procurement delays can be mitigated by increasing the
procurement thresholds applied to the use of the shopping method for procurements of goods, works and related non-consulting
services; (iii) IFAD can enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of procurement processes by providing procurement support (both
in-country and remotely) and trainings tailored to the specific needs of the projects and by encouraging both communication between
the SPIU staff, IFAD Country Director, ESA Senior Procurement Officer and IFAD Procurement Consultants.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
The goal of KIIWP (1 and 2) is to “contribute to poverty reduction in the drought-prone Eastern Province of Rwanda”. Its Project
Development Objective is to “improve food security and incomes of at least 40,000 rural households on a sustainable basis and build
their climate resilience”.
Geographic area of intervention and value chains
The KIIWP (1 and 2) intervention area comprises nine drought-prone sectors of the twelve sectors in Kayonza District[48], namely
Gahini, Kabare, Kabarondo, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego, Ruramira and Rwinkwavu. The area has been selected on the basis of
its high vulnerability to drought and high poverty and food insecurity levels. It is to be recalled that the National Strategic Food Reserve
supported its population during past droughts.
The nine targeted sectors account for 63,177 households or 283,370 individuals, of which 51.5 percent women[49] and 31 percent
female-headed households. About 63 percent[50] of the population is under 25 years old, while youth, between 16 and 30 years old,
represent 30 percent. Only 58 percent of the population received primary education and 10 percent attained secondary education[51].
Agriculture is the livelihood of 80 percent of the active population in Kayonza, based on rainfed systems with maize, beans, cassava
and banana; 58 percent of households also raise livestock. Fishing is practiced in lakes and rivers, especially in the Ndego and
Kabare sectors. Forty percent of farms have less than 0.2 ha of land, 62 percent less than 0.5 ha, and almost all farms less than 1
ha[52].
Kayonza District hosts a considerable part of the biodiversity of Eastern Province, including Akagera National Park, vast swamps,
many small lakes and Lake Muhazi. Because of the strong pressure on land, deforestation in Kayonza District has by far surpassed
afforestation and grazing areas are shrinking. The District is characterized by high frequency of rainfall deficit, late rainfall onsets,
early rainfall cessations, and is prone to drought. Droughts have indeed been the cause of famine and food shortages, a reduction in
plant species and displacement of people in search of food and pasture.
Priority Value Chains of KIIWP (1 and 2) include rice, maize, horticulture, soybeans, Irish potato and beans. Other value chains in
the rainfed catchment areas also include cassava and sorghum.
Project beneficiaries and targeting strategy
Target groups and outreach. KIIWP2 is expected to reach 40,000 rural households (180,000 members) in Kayonza District, of
which 7,100 households will participate in irrigation schemes and 11,800 households in protection of catchment areas. In addition,
many rural households will benefit from a broad range of interventions, including Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) technologies, job
opportunities in irrigation schemes and catchment areas, afforestation and reforestation, water points for livestock and humans, solar
energy, cooperative services to access inputs and markets, Farmer Field Schools (FFS), Farming-as-a-Business (FaaB) training,
matching grants for equipment and investments, financial services and agricultural insurance, participation in public-private-
partnerships along value chains.
9/28
Socio-economic profile of the target group. KIIWP will focus on poor and food-insecure rural households with economic potential.
In line with the Ubudehe[53] wealth-ranking system, the Project will target three categories of beneficiaries[54] in the area:
Near landless and extremely vulnerable households(Ubudehe Category 1) represent 13 percent of households. They have very
limited productive assets, those in agriculture have less than 0.25 ha and are less likely to have vegetable gardens. About 20 percent
have at least one member with a mental or physical disability.
Subsistence and vulnerable poor(Ubudehe Category 2), represent 35 percent of households. They have limited access to resources
and less than 0.5 ha of land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support. In the proposed irrigation schemes,
28 percent has less than 0.25 ha; 38 percent less than 0.5 ha.
Market-oriented producers(UbudeheCategory 3), account for 52 percent of households. They are less vulnerable and go beyond
subsistence farming. These farmers have on average 0.5 ha or more, are engaged in a more entrepreneurial logic. In the proposed
irrigation schemes, more than 50 percent owns more than 0.5 ha with at least a quarter owning more than 1.0 ha.
Priority target groups of KIIWP2 include women, youth and vulnerable households:
Rural women in agriculture are more exposed to vulnerability than men. Cultural practices leave low-value subsistence crops to
women where they provide the bulk of labour. Women have less control over agriculture resources and less access to financial
services, knowledge and assets to transform subsistence to market-oriented farming. Adolescent girls are more vulnerable due to
early pregnancy (teenage pregnancy in Kayonza reaches 10 percent, over the national average)[55].
Rural youth (50 percent women), aged 16-30, are found in all Ubudehe categories, while the higher percentage is in the very poor
and poor categories. This target group includes: (i) young men and women who are engaged in subsistence agriculture with an
interest to expand their activities; (ii) young men and women employed under casual or seasonal work at minimum wage, who can be
engaged in works and irrigated agriculture; and (iii) young graduated, interested to apply as service providers.
Vulnerable households. Women-headed households are disproportionally faced with poverty and small-sized land. In Kayonza
district, 4.2 percent of the targeted households are headed by disabled people[56].
Targeting and social inclusion KIIWP2 will combine self-targeting and direct targeting mechanisms. While Project activities are of
interest to all target groups (self-targeting), KIIWP2 will directly target the priority groups with tailored support. KIIWP2 will deploy this
inclusive strategy to tackle the multiple barriers that traditionally prevent women, youth and vulnerable households from improving
livelihoods and enable them to gradually increase their production, capacities and income to engage in other project-supported
interventions. Women will represent at least 50 percent and young people 30 percent of the beneficiaries. At least 40 percent of
targeted households will be vulnerable (10 per cent from the poorest category). Quotas will be established throughout project’s
activities to ensure that women, youth and the most vulnerable households are reached out[57]. A dedicated officer in the SPIU will
be responsible for implementation of the Project’s gender, youth and social inclusion mainstreaming strategy.
In the selection of beneficiaries, KIIWP will adopt eligibility criteria[58], already in use by other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, that
take into account both the social and economic profile of the target groups, giving priority to the most vulnerable ones, women and
youth, as well as farmer’s motivation, commitment and interest in Project’s activities. In order to avoid elite capture and foster
inclusive participation, KIIWP will involve Umudugudu committees at village level, ensuring transparency and locally accepted
households’ selection. Participatory methods (such as community mobilization, public consultations) will be employed to ensure
inclusiveness of all prioritized target groups in decision-making processes; for example, in the development of sub-catchment
management plans, KIIWP will employ a Community-based participatory planning and community competitions (Inteko y’Imihigo),
already successfully tasted under KWAMP, ensuring that the needs of all community representatives are taken into account, including
the most vulnerable. The beneficiary’s contribution to the operation and maintenance of the irrigation schemes will be tailored to the
productive, economic and financial capacities of the target groups.
Gender mainstreaming strategy. KIIWP2 will address gender disparities and constraints that limit women’s participation by: (i)
ensuring equal access to assets, services and capacity building, including financial literacy and business skills training; (ii) promoting
productive opportunities and labour-saving technologies; (iii) enhancing women’s access to financial services; (iv) promoting women’s
leadership in Infrastructure Management Institutions, FFS and Cooperatives; (v) using Matching Grant modalities with a special
window for women and youth (with a reduced beneficiary contribution); (iv) using the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) as
framework to address power inequalities between women and men; (v) trainings to familiarise GoR and SPIU staff with gender and
youth approaches; (vi) provisions to ensure that gender equity concerns are integrated in all Project components; and (vii) use gender
and youth-disaggregated M&E indicators to support gender and youth assessments and analysis.
Youth mainstreaming strategy. KIIWP2 will strongly promote youth inclusion by equipping young men and women with capacities
and professional skills, vocational training, access to seed capital through matching grants, supporting their engagement in
businesses and creation of on- and off-farm jobs. KIIWP2 will leverage on the partnerships with (a) the Rwanda Youth Agribusiness
Forum (RYAF); (b) the Agribusiness Hubs established in the frame of the on-going R-YES[59] IFAD grant, managed by the Kilimo
Trust.
Nutrition mainstreaming strategy[60] will focus on the production pathway by: (i) promoting climate-smart and nutrient-rich varieties
for home-consumption and markets[61], (ii) promoting kitchen gardens for women; (iii) implementing climate and nutrition smart
technologies to reduce post-harvest losses and improve year-round availability of nutritious food crops; (iv) enhancing access to water
for human consumption (boreholes and valley tanks); (v) providing nutrition education modules in FFSs; (vi) linking with the Home-
Grown School Feeding Programme to promote local markets for nutritious crops.
Climate change mainstreaming strategy. This will be mainstreamed throughout Project design, including: (a) catchment
development to improve infiltration of water and better soil coverage; (b) promotion of irrigation technologies that contribute to efficient
use of water; (c) other climate technologies (e.g. energy efficient stoves, solar pumps, climate resilient drying grounds and
warehouses, rainwater harvesting); (d) implementing ESMPs to mitigate all adverse impacts on water, soil and biodiversity resources.
10/28
D. Components/outcomes and activities
Component A: Strengthening Resilience to Droughts
The expected outcome of Component A would be: “Farmers’ drought resistance strengthened”.
Sub-component A1: Catchment rehabilitation and protection. The expected outputs would be investments integrated land and
water resources management (ILWRM) interventions (in addition to those financed under KIIWP1) in order to enable stakeholders of
upstream (rainfed areas) and downstream areas (irrigation schemes) to work together for the better utilization and management of
their land and water resources. Catchment rehabilitation and protection measures including afforestation, reforestation, agro-forestry
and grasses will be favourable to biodiversity and increases habitat to living organisms as well as tree cover in the area. In addition,
the creation of balancing storages may also provide opportunity to aquatic biodiversity.
The KIIWP (1 and 2) catchment rehabilitation and protection approach includes the following steps: i) community-based participatory
sub-catchment management planning; ii) investments in land husbandry in rainfed areas[62][63]; iii) reforestation / afforestation with
fruit trees; and iv) Community competition (Inteko y’Imihigo) will be used to reach out to vulnerable groups in catchment areas and
identify climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive micro-projects. KIIWP2 will further implement the community-based participatory
catchment management plans developed by KIIWP1[61]. The objective is to develop 1,950 ha of catchment areas and 2,000 ha of
afforestation/reforestation.
Environmental and Social Management Plans[65] (ESMPs), identified in the ESIAs, will be implemented. The ESMP recommends to:
i) conduct rapid site biodiversity surveys prior to construction of irrigation infrastructure to ensure that the Project will not have any
negative impact on ecosystems (flora and fauna); and ii) elaborate an Integrated Pest Management Plan for the entire Project as part
of the detailed design of each irrigation scheme. Specific ESMPs were developed for each command areas to tackle the following key
adverse impacts associated with design and management of irrigation system :
Reduction in downstream flow as a result of diversion of water, which could compromise water availability downstream to satisfy
human and livestock demand, and affect aquatic habitats and biodiversity (i.e. environmental flow);
Soil erosion caused by scheme excavation works (including access roads, dams) and poorly managed upper catchment areas,
leading to loss of cultivable land and/or siltation of canals;
Soil degradation and salinization due to improper application of agrochemicals, overwatering and poor drainage;
Reduction in water quality due to application of agrochemicals or oil spills, affecting water for domestic and livestock use
downstream, as well as causing poisoning of aquatic fauna;
Loss of biodiversity and ecological imbalances caused by: clearing land for agriculture, installing irrigation infrastructure (e.g. intakes
in wetlands or lakes), poaching as a result of the schemes’ proximity to Akagera National Park, and from pesticides poisoning of non-
target species, particularly bees and beneficial insects.
The already developed FS and ESIAs for Ihema, Kibare and Nasho command areas have identified that no physical resettlements
are expected, but around 200 households will lose part of their land and another more than 1,200 households will lose income during
land husbandry work, as they may miss one or more agriculture seasons. Therefore, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
was prepared and included in the ESIA and associated costs were integrated in the cost-table. The RAP will be implemented and all
compensation measures provided prior to the construction works or land take.
The Project shall implement the Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) Plan developed in 2018, as Annex 5 of the PDR, within the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the various and required consultations processes (RAPs) and
ensure proactive approach to identify development pathways with local communities and build ownership on project initiatives.
Sub-component A2: Irrigation Development and Management. Sub-component A2 will equip smallholder farmers with 2,285 ha of
irrigation schemes.
Irrigation development. On the basis of the FS and ESIAs, prepared under KIIWP1, selected irrigation command area for
development under KIIWP2 are the following:
Table 3. Identified irrigation schemes for development under KIIWP2
Scheme
Sector
Command Area Sub-Schemes (block) Type
Water Source
Kibare 1 – 219 ha
Kibare Irrigation Scheme Ndego
570 ha
11/28
Kibare 2 – 112 ha
Pumped
irrigation
Lake Kibare on Akagera
River
Ihema Irrigation Scheme Ndego
700 ha
Nasho Irrigation Scheme Kabare
740 ha
Kibare 3 – 239 ha
Ihema 1 – 85 ha
Ihema 2 – 188 ha
Ihema 3 – 161 ha
Ihema 4 – 266 ha
Nasho 1 – 309 ha
Nasho 2 – 218 ha
Nasho 3 – 114 ha
Nasho 4 – 99 ha
Pumped
irrigation
Lake Kibare on Akagera
River
Pumped
irrigation
Lake Nasho on Akagera
River
Kanyeganyenge Dam and
Irrigation Scheme
Kabarondo,
Ruramira
150 ha
Dam irrigation Kanyeganyenge River
Gishanda Dam and
Irrigation Scheme
Rwinkwavu
125 ha
Dam irrigation Rwinkwavu River
Note: Feasibility studies will determine the size of the reservoirs, but they are expected to be above one million m3 each.
The three pumped irrigation schemes (Kibare, Ihema, Nasho) are divided into 11 sub-schemes, which will be implemented as
standalone schemes, where possible, that can be individually managed. The infield irrigation technology to be used will be selected
by the farmers’ cooperatives in a participatory manner that may include a full pressurized irrigation system with center pivot
technology and dragline sprinklers. The detailed design of the schemes will be optimised and recommend a suitable rationing based
on further analysis, close consultation with concerned farmers and cooperatives, and prevailing conditions towards optimising
profitability, making sure that the investments are suitable to the capacity of the target group. Regarding the Gishanda and
Kanyeganyege schemes, KIIWP2[66] will construct the two dams, as well as required distribution system including canals, hydraulic
structures, pipes, small pumping, access road, etc.
The management models for the irrigation systems may include private sector participation. The Project will facilitate management
agreements between the farmers, government and private sector partners for the management of irrigation infrastructure and water
provision to farmers. The cooperative could assume dual responsibilities as a Cooperative and an IWUO, which may hire a qualified
and competent technical team to operate and maintain the scheme as it is a best practice at the existing Nasho Irrigation Scheme
(that has been supported by Buffet Foundation).
In terms of financing, KIIWP2 will finance 100 percent all infrastructure to the farm edge and 90 percent of the in-field installations. In-
kind contribution from farmers will be 10 percent of the in-field installations as well as the operation and maintenance cost. The
contribution of farmers will enhance ownership of the equipment.
The SPIU will hire qualified consultancy companies for supervision of works. Supervision will be a participatory process involving the
consultants for the day-to-day technical supervision with the SPIU, District and Infrastructure Management Institutions.
Infrastructure Management Institutions. Expected outputs will be: the required operational Infrastructure Management Committees,
including Scheme Steering Committees (SSCs), Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs)[67] and Irrigation Water Users
Organizations (IWUOs). The Infrastructure Management Institutions will: (i) ensure long-term sustainability of the irrigation schemes
and play an active role in the planning, construction, operation and maintenance of infrastructures; (ii) develop drought contingency
plans for the catchment areas; (iii) ensure inclusive and equitable access to water for all members. After irrigation scheme completion
and fulfilling all conditions, the IWUOs[68] would sign an Infrastructure Management Transfer Agreement (IMTA) with RAB and co-
signed by Kayonza District Authorities.
KIIWP1 is establishing the required Infrastructure Management Institutions and initiate capacity building, which will be continued
under KIIWP2. Capacity building will cover three areas: (i) governance; (ii) water management and maintenance; and (iii) monitoring
and exchange of experiences.
Three types of Infrastructure Management Institutions would be required:
1.  Scheme Steering Committees[69] (SSCs) that support and oversee the functioning of WUOs and ensure optimal use of land at
12/28
irrigation scheme level.
2.  Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs) will be set up in each watershed and be effective for managing and improving sub-
catchment areas, and to perform a central role in the planning and implementation of the sub-catchment plans. They will also
be responsible for safeguarding communal areas with soil and water conservation measures, monitor implementation of
reforestation and safeguard newly reforested areas.
3.  Irrigation Water Users Organisations (IWUO) for the big schemes will be further strengthened under KIIWP2. The IWUOs will
adopt guidelines for O&M and ensure payments for water, if required. They will ensure women's participation in irrigation
scheme activities and in decision-making processes. For smaller schemes (more or less 200 ha) cooperatives are assumed to
have capacity to handle all required operations. Professional Technical Teams could be hired by the Cooperatives for
operations, maintenance and management of irrigation infrastructures in order to avoid conflict of interests and overlapping
structures. In that case, all the technical capacity and trainings go to the cooperative members and technical teams responsible
for technical management of the schemes.
Sub-component A3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies. The expected output would be
“climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices and technologies[70] are promoted in the targeted areas”.
A baseline study on existing CSA practices and technologies in Rwanda and the region will be undertaken by KIIWP1. A short-term
expert in consultation with national experts from RAB and the MINAGRI, private sector as well as international specialized entities
such as FAO, will compile and propose best practices and technologies, prioritizing those existing in Rwanda. This will set the base
trials and mainstreaming adoption and adaptation of innovations on CSA with the active participation of farmers and FFS.
Farmer Field Schools (FFS) will be enhanced under irrigation (323 FFS) as well as rainfed agriculture (227 FFS), a total of 550 FFS,
through: (i) adaptation to local language and production systems of training manuals and field materials already existing in Rwanda as
well as other East African countries; (ii) training of farmers Facilitators at grassroots level and refresh training on existing facilitators;
(iv) capacity building for implementing partners and district staff to supervise day-to-day implementation of FFS. The FFS topics will
contribute to address gender, nutrition, and CSA topics and sustainable practices[71], with strong focus on women and sustainable
mechanization, System of Rice Intensification (SRI) and agroforestry, water use efficiency, soil and water conservation and drought-
tolerant crop varieties. Prioritized crops in irrigated areas would include rice, maize, beans, soybean, and horticulture crops. In
addition, a training module on basic nutrition education, one on business development and one on Participatory Climate Services for
Agriculture (PICSA) training and Climate information services for Rain-fed agriculture, will be incorporated into the FFS training.
Gender issues will be addressed through the GALS methodology.
For rainfed agriculture, the Project will prioritize crop diversification and intercropping, including staples (e.g. cassava and sorghum);
forage crops (e.g. Elephant grass or Brachiaria grass) and nutritious crops[72]. The introduction of CSA practices and technologies
will be of particular importance to most vulnerable households and groups as they provide increase in yields and diversified food with
low-cost innovations such as rainwater harvesting facilities, manual weeders, SRI, direct seeders with animal or manual draught and
any other tools that promote minimum tillage (Conservation Agriculture) and reduce the workload, especially for women).
KIIWP2 will support the decentralized research stations of RAB for trials of promoted technologies. To reach out to more farmers and
enhance the existing system of Farmer Promoters[73], the FFS will be combined with demonstration plots with Farmer Promoters to
disseminate innovations. Around 315 Farmer Promoters will receive refreshment training.
Farm Mechanisation. KIIWP2 will promote workload-reducing small-scale mechanisation (e.g., power tillers, manual drafted tools),
adapted to the needs of smallholders, while promoting soil conservation practices and CSA. While assessment and dissemination will
be undertaken under Component A, access to these technologies will be provided together with Component B through: (i) groups of
young service providers; (ii) support to local handicrafts to be trained by manufacturers’ trainers[74] and exchanges with other
countries; (iii) individual farmers and cooperatives investing in mechanization.
Climate and Nutrition Smart Technologies. KIIWP2 will support the promotion of Climate and Nutrition Smart Technologies such as
storage facilities, dryers, climate resilient drying grounds and warehouses, rainwater harvesting (water storage tanks/ponds at
household level, drip irrigation and treadle pumps), which will be promoted and co-financed under SC A1 and SC B1. These
technologies will extend shelf life of nutritious foods and increase their year-round availability for enhanced food security.
Component B: Support to Farm Business Development
The expected outcome of Component B will be: “Farm business development with increased sales and linkages of farmers and
cooperatives to services and markets”. The cooperatives and FFS in the irrigation schemes and catchment areas under Component A
will be entry points to provide Component B services.
Component B will benefit from a partnership with ICCO in Kayonza District. ICCO will leverage on its STARS project to spur an
entrepreneurial farming mindset among KIIWP beneficiaries.
Sub-component B1: Developing Farming-as-a-Business. Expected outputs of are: (i) 8,000 FFS members received FaaB training,
(ii) 500 FFS members and 50 cooperatives received business development coaching and have bankable business plans.
Capacity building of farmers and cooperatives. KIIWP2 will assist farmers to acquire a better understanding of market demand and
gross margin calculations to assess crop profitability and plan production accordingly. A FaaB training module will be developed by
ICCO and incorporated in the FFS curriculum. The SPIU District team and ICCO will organize introduction workshops for Project
beneficiaries to raise awareness on FaaB. The RAB and District frontline staff, as well as FFS Facilitators, will be systematically
involved in the FaaB training to ensure spill-over effects and sustainability beyond the Project’s life.
Farmers will be encouraged to join existing cooperatives or establish new cooperatives that will be registered with the RCA. The
organizational and technical capacity of the cooperatives will be built for efficient governance, management, membership policies,
maintenance of records, and internal control processes. Based on existing materials, KIIWP2 in partnership with ICCO will develop
manuals and templates for Cooperative Business Planning, in consultation with local micro-finance institutions (MFIs). The
experience of WFP and IFC in strengthening cooperatives will also be leveraged.
13/28
Promotion of Farm Mechanization, Post-harvest and Climate-smart Technologies. Expected outputs will include: (i) 480 individual
smallholders (at least 50 percent women and 30 percent youth) access farm equipment; (ii) 25 cooperatives access appropriate post-
harvest facilities; (iii) three (3) joint ventures are created between cooperatives and private sector companies to invest in larger
storage and processing facilities. All beneficiaries will be offered solutions for risk management including agricultural insurance.
The Project would work with about 500 FFS members and 50 cooperatives to develop their business plans. The business plans with
most potential will be proposed to receive Matching Grants (MGs). After the MG disbursements, the Business Development Service
Providers (BDSPs) will provide additional coaching services, including: (i) technical support for MG implementation, and (ii) monitoring
of the disbursements and utilization of the MG.
Based on the business plans, the Project will co-finance privately-owned and managed investments, using three grant categories:
1.  Category 1a/1b Performance-based grants (PBG)  to enhance the adoption of climate-smart agriculture technologies for FFS
members, tied to a loan from a financial institution (PRICE model) for Small-Scale Irrigation Technology (SSIT) kits using solar
energy, power tillers, sprayers, agricultural insurance premiums, etc. Category 1b Grants will target women and youth with a
higher subsidy rate.
2.  Category 2 Cooperative-led grants (PASP model) to enhance post-harvest management capacities of cooperatives further to
production increases triggered by irrigation and catchment development, for drying grounds, storage facilities, cold rooms,
maize cribs, fruit aggregation centers, agricultural insurance premiums.
3.  Category 3 Joint-venture grants (PASP model) to support contractual arrangements between cooperatives and off-takers to
handle and process crop surpluses generated by irrigation development, for warehouses, handling and processing facilities.
Optional: agricultural insurance premium.
Under Categories 1a/1b, Matching Grants (MGs) will be implemented to leverage and stimulate commercial rural finance in the target
areas, co-finance strategic investments with local FIs. As successfully implemented in PRICE, the individual household-targeting
grants will be made through Partner Financial Institutions, against good performance of smallholders in repayment of loans. Under
Categories 2 and 3, which are targeting cooperative post-harvest/processing investments, the KIIWP will adopt the PASP models that
have been used along similar business plans (cooperative-led and joint venture models). These two grant models will not be tied to a
loan, but the Project will strive to facilitate the investors’ access to financial services whenever needed. The implementation manual
that has already been developed by PRICE and BDF will be adapted for KIIWP2. More details on the grants are provided in the
Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
Sub-component B2: Supporting Backward and Forward Market Linkages. Expected outputs will include: (i) 8,000 cooperative
members and smallholders have improved access to markets, (ii) 10,000 smallholders have improved access to financial services,
and (iii) 2,500 smallholders use agricultural insurance products.
Market access. Pre-season meetings for cooperatives will be organized to exchange with prospective buyers, help farmers assess
market opportunities, and plan their production accordingly. KIIWP2 will support establishing cooperative linkages and partnerships
with private off-takers and financial institutions. Where needed, formal agreements or MoUs will be prepared and signed. On-going
WFP efforts to strengthen cooperatives in the framework of the Farm to Market Alliance (FtMA) will be leveraged. The BDSPs will
facilitate these marketing arrangements. Market exposure of cooperatives will be enhanced by participation in trade fairs or
agricultural shows.
Horticulture exporters operating in the intervention area will be linked to the Horticulture Export Guarantee Facility (currently set at
US$500,000), piloted under PRICE, in collaboration with Rwanda Development Bank (BRD). Opportunities to complement the
guarantee fund with additional financing from other development partners will be explored during the course of the Project, should
demand exceed current capacities.
exporters operating in the intervention area will be linked to the Horticulture Export Guarantee Facility (currently set at US$ 500,000)
that has been piloted under PRICE in collaboration with Rwanda Development Bank (BRD). Opportunities to complement the
guarantee fund with additional financing from other development partners will be looked at during the course of the Project, if demand
exceeds current capacities.
In the case of pumped irrigation, intended to develop commercial smallholder production systems, 4P-like arrangements with the
private sector will be developed whenever feasible, in particular for vegetables, maize and soybeans. 4Ps between cooperatives and
private sector companies will be fostered through joint-venture grants.
Financial services. To facilitate the targeted communities’ access to inclusive financial services, KIIWP2 will: (i) support the quality and
outreach of local financial services, and (ii) build the capacity of the target groups in use of financial services. These interventions will
ensure bankability of the business plans and to facilitate the in-cash beneficiary contributions of MG investments.
Local financial institutions (FI), including SACCOs and MFIs, will benefit from two KIIWP2 interventions: (i) institutional capacity
building to strengthen their agri-finance capacities overall and in Kayonza District specifically. This includes training FI’s staff in
Kayonza, strengthening of local use of client assessment and monitoring systems, development of client-oriented agri-finance
products for MSMEs and smallholders, such as equipment leasing and value chain finance, and improvement of the FI’s existing
financial products; capacity building will be organized in partnership with ICCO and Access to Finance Rwanda (AIF); and (ii) facilitate
the MFIs, SACCOs and other financial service providers to access existing credit lines and guarantee instruments by IFAD’s partners,
including the International Finance Corporation (IFC), World Bank Group (WBG), Agribusiness Capital (ABC) Fund and Rabobank, to
meet their growing financial needs.
14/28
To strengthen the target groups’ financial literacy skills, KIIWP2, together with ICCO, AMIR (Rwanda Microfinance Association) and
the local FIs will provide trainings to smallholders. This activity will include support in the opening of bank accounts and training on
basic banking skills and concepts such as “Saving for a Purpose”, borrowing, interest rates, collateral, bank transactions, payments,
and use of mobile and digital banking. Focus will be given to women (minimum 50 percent), youth (minimum 30 percent). To enable
increases in savings among target groups, KIIWP2 would benefit from the WFP Solidarity Group (SG) development programme.
KIIWP2 in partnership with key players, including ICCO, AGRA, and AFR will also promote the digitalization of financial services for
smallholders and cooperatives in order to reduce transaction costs, increase efficiency and sustainable access to financial services.
Agricultural insurance. KIIWP2 will support understanding of and access to agricultural insurance products offered under NAIS. The
purpose is to improve resilience of Project beneficiaries by protecting their livelihoods, and by taking away one of their barriers in
accessing finance to invest. The primary targets for agricultural insurance will be farmers targeted by the Project in the value chains
covered by NAIS insurance products.[75]
KIIWP2 will support education and awareness raising for smallholders to improve their understanding of agricultural insurance. NAIS
will carry out Training of Trainers (ToTs) and refresher courses for relevant stakeholders. This includes the delivery of ToTs and the
adjustment of existing training materials, and farmer-level training sessions and materials. The primary ToT targets for farmer
education will be threefold: cooperative leaders; extension officers; and distribution channels (financial and non-financial). To support
the use of agricultural insurance, Matching Grant recipients will be eligible for a contribution to the insurance premium for one
season.KIIWP2 will support capacity building of NAIS stakeholders (NAIS project management unit, insurers, distribution channels)
on climate information; and bundling distribution models for agricultural insurance. Building on a partnership of KIIWP1 with
MeteoRwanda, KIIWP2 will train these NAIS stakeholders on climate variability, climate information tools, and interpretation.
Component C: Institutional Development and Project Coordination
Sub-component C.1: Policy and Institutional Development. The project will (i) provide support to national policy on contract
farming; (ii) support formulation of law on financial lease for agricultural equipment; (iii) provide opportunities among relevant
stakeholders to discuss the value added tax in rice processing that makes Rwandan rice less competitive in the region; and (iv)
highlight current issues of seed availability and its quality, including multiplication. In addition, knowledge generation and
communication activities will be done in accordance with the knowledge management plan.
Strengthen institutional capacities at national and district levels: Based on a needs assessment, the Project will provide support to
RAB and the District staff in order to improve their skills on technical aspects related to the Project. International technical assistance
will be envisaged. The Project would also provide support to Rwanda Environmental Management Authority, Ministry of Environment,
and Rwanda Water Boards on monitoring the irrigation schemes and rehabilitation and maintenance of wetland areas.
Sub-component C.2: Project Coordination. The institutional arrangements for KIIWP2 will remain aligned to the current
implementation framework of IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. Details are presented under Section V of this PDR.
Sub-component C.3: Emergency recovery and resilience. This sub-component is designed to provide swift response in the event
of unforeseen crisis or emergency events such as the global COVID-19 pandemic, and climate extreme events. Through this sub-
component, KIIWP2 may provide support for immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed, in coordination with
MINAGRI and IFAD. It will allow the GoR to request a reallocation of project funds to partially cover emergency response and
recovery costs. This sub-component will be triggered if IFAD and the Government have jointly determined that an eligible crisis or
emergency has occurred and the GoR has made a request to IFAD for emergency response.
E. Theory of Change
The Theory of Change (ToC) of KIIWP[76] (1 and 2) is based on the situation as faced by farmers living in the drought-prone sectors
of Kayonza District. Given the problems of climate change related droughts, crop failures and poor farm-to-market linkages, these
factors inevitably lead to catchment degradation, low production and productivity, food and nutrition insecurity and poverty. The ToC is
based on the premise that investments in irrigation infrastructure and integrated management of water and land resources, combined
with a market-driven approach to climate-smart farm business development will assist smallholders to sustainably improve their food
security and income.
The ToC is based on the hypothesis that vulnerable rural households, women and youth, who are empowered with social and
technical capacities and participate in climate smart value chains, will increase their sustainable management of natural resources,
productivity, nutrition practices and access to market, and will increase their representation and participation in decision making
processes.
The pathway for youth and women’s empowerment is threefold: the project will: (i) help beneficiaries improve skills in financial
literacy, managing and savings through training opportunities while supporting loan provision through informal groups (village saving
and loan associations); (ii) reduce labour burden (especially on women), by supporting the development of small-scale mechanization
and promote climate-smart and efficient tools; (iii) increase youth and women’s access to and control over assets and resources, by
dedicating a special financing window for women and young people in the matching grant scheme. In addition, the Gender Action
Learning System (GALS) will be key to address power inequalities between women and men and foster women’s decision-making
power. Furthermore, the youth strategy is already developed under KIIWP1, setting clear targets on youth involvement.
The project area presents high level of food insecurity and malnutrition. After three consecutive years of drought, Kayonza District
experienced among the highest food insecurity in the country. KIIWP2 will tackle food insecurity and nutrition issues through the
production pathway, identifying key climate smart and nutrient rich crop varieties that would be promoted for both household’s
consumption and for sale. KIIWP’s nutrition strategy will aim to increase and diversify the production and consumption of nutritious
foods to complement the production of agricultural commercial commodities, with particular focus on the most food insecure
households and women.
Combined with the pathway for youth and women’s empowerment, the focus on nutrition through production will improve their
incomes, food and nutrition security and the performance of the value chains. The new income generating opportunities for women
and youth emerging from the sustainable management of the catchment area will also boost their economic empowerment. Women’s
bulk of work will be reduced by addressing gender inequalities and promoting TLST. The Project will ultimately reduce poverty and
enhance poor rural people resilience.
15/28
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
Alignment and ownership
KIIWP2 will contribute to Rwanda’s attainment of several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), notably SDG 1 (No Poverty,
Targets 4 and 5); SDG 2 (Zero Hunger, Targets 3 and 4); SDG 5 (Gender Equality, Target 5); SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic
Growth, Target 3); SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure, Targets 1 and 3); SDG 13 (Climate Action, Target 1) and SDG 15
(Life on Land, Target 3).
KIIWP2 is aligned with the second United Nations Development Assistance Plan for Rwanda (UNDAP II: 2018-2023). For the UNDAP
II’s first pillar of economic transformation, the project will contribute to both outcomes, namely: (i) people in Rwanda benefit from more
inclusive competitive and sustainable economic growth that generates decent work and promotes quality livelihoods for all; and (ii)
Rwandan institutions and communities are more equitably producing and sustainably managing natural resources and addressing
climate change and natural disasters.
KIIWP2 is fully aligned with Rwanda’s PSTA 4, mainly through the priority area 2 (productivity and resilience) while some KIIWP2
interventions are also aligned with priority area 1 (innovation and extension) and priority area 3 (inclusive markets and value addition).
KIIWP2 focuses on priority area 2.2.1: water resource development through development and promotion of climate smart practices.
KIIWP2 is also aligned with the National Policy on Promotion of Cooperatives, Irrigation Master Plan, National Post-Harvest Staple
Crop Strategy and National Information & Communication Technology for Rwanda Agriculture Strategy. Other relevant sector
strategies include the National Horticulture Policy and Strategic Implementation Plan.
KIIWP2 is well-aligned with the IFAD policies, in particular with respect to youth, gender, climate/environment, private sector, rural
finance and nutrition. The Project is also aligned with the RB-COSOB 2019-2024, with its overall objective being to reduce poverty by
empowering poor rural men, women and youth to participate in the transformation of the agriculture sector and to enhance their
resilience. KIIWP2 contributes to SO1: To sustainably increase agricultural productivity in priority food and export value chains; and
SO2: To improve post-harvest processes and strengthen market linkages.
The participatory design process, which was launched in 2017 with the design of KIIWP1 ensures that KIIWP2 responds directly to
cooperatives, private sector priorities and national development policies and strategies. In addition, the participatory preparation of
Sub-catchment development plans ensures that the view of rural households, including the most vulnerable, is taken into account.
Harmonization and Partnerships
Potential partnerships are presented in the Table below.
Table 4. Potential partners of KIIWP2
Potential partner
Potential Areas of Collaboration by Sub-component
16/28
ICCO/CORDAID – co-
financier & service provider,
knowledge management
B1. Farming-as-a-Business training, capacity building of cooperatives (FaaB manual development,
training of trainers, monitoring of trainings); business development services and coaching;
B2. Monitoring of implementation of Matching Grants
B3. Financial services through institutional capacity building, innovative products, financial literacy
training, and digitalization; support on VSLA.  It is to be recalled that ICCO is a recipient of the South-
South Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) China Facility grant and will be implementing the
"Strengthening Agricultural Resilience through Learning and Innovation (STARLIT)" project in
Rwanda. IFAD and ICCO worked closely together during KIIWP2 design to ensure complementarity
between KIIWP2 and STARLIT.
Africa Improved Foods –
agribusiness partner
A4 Agriculture inputs and knowhow for FFS training-of-trainers
B3: Agribusiness agreements with cooperatives to purchase maize
WFP (SMART and FtMA
projects) – Overall
complementarities of
interventions at District level,
scaling-up of interventions
A1. Community-driven development approaches
A3. Exchanges on nutrition-sensitive and climate-smart practices, promotion of nutritious foods and
market linkages through HGSFP, community mobilization and engagement and linking to finance
support.
B3. Market analysis and selection of nutrient rich crops with potential for local market and public
procurement
Access to quality seeds and improved seeds, coupled with insurance (potential facilitation by WFP in
coordination with RAB
B1, B3. (a) capacity building of cooperatives, post-harvest capacity, 4Ps; (b) synergies to link financial
products of MFIs and SACCOs with VSLAs within the targeted cooperatives, (c) linkages between
SMEs crowded into the FtMA;
FAO – sharing of knowledge,
specialized facilitators
A4. Potential technical assistance on FFS ToT, mechanization, nutrition education, CSA practices.
Experienced FFS facilitators, methodologies and training materials produced by on-going FAO
projects (NsWP, GAFSP-SAIP)
WBG – sharing of
knowledge, CDAT
A1&A2. Sharing knowledge and lesson in hillside irrigation
B3. Support on national agricultural insurance scheme (NAIS)
IFC, WBG, ABC Fund,
Rabobank- access to credit
lines
B3. Facilitate access for MFIs and SACCOs to existing credit lines to meet their growing financial
needs.
Kilimo Trust, R-YES IFAD
grant
Targeting youths, for the provision of vocational trainings and capacity building.
One Acre Fund – sharing of
knowledge
17/28
A1&2. Sharing knowledge and lesson learned in irrigation development; potential scaling-up through
coordination with KIIWP2.
B1&3. Sharing of knowledge regarding credit, building market linkages.
AGRA– sharing of knowledge
A4. Adoption of CSA technologies (seeds and fertilizer). B2. Farmers’ linkages to markets and private
sector; capacity building of government staff and institutions; access to/digitalization of financial
services; C1. Policy and Institutional Development.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
[77] Total Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is estimated at about US$61 million. The investment costs amount
to US$52.8 million and represent 86.5 percent of the total Project cost and the recurrent costs amount to US$5.3 million or 8.7
percent. The remaining balance of US$3.0 million (4.9 percent of total Project cost) is currently unallocated and will be allocated at
mid-term review. Funds allocated to the Project Coordination Unit are US$5.0 million, equal to 8.2 percent of the total cost.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
The Table below presents the financiers of the Project by Sub-component.
Table 5. Financiers by Component (US$)
IFAD is expected to contribute resources amounting to US$ 21.8 million (35.7 percent of the total cost) to finance all project
components. Provisions amounting to US$ 1.9 million (3 percent of total cost) for emergency and unforeseen expenses are included
in the “Unallocated” category and partly sourced from IFAD funds. Funds for emergency have not currently been allocated but can be
drawn from the unallocated amount as needed. The emergency related sub-component is set up under component C. Project
components A. Strengthening Resilience to Droughts and B. Support to Farm Business Development are partially counted as climate
finance. As per the multilateral development banks’ methodologies for tracking climate change adaptation and mitigation finance, the
total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as US$4,718,000. 
The Government of Spain (GoS) is expected to co-finance KIIWP2 through a loan of US$ 28 million (46 percent of total cost). The
funds will be allocated on all project components as follows: a) US$ 18.6 million (30 percent of total cost) for component A; b) US$ 4.4
million for component B (7 percent of total cost; and about c) US$ 4.9 million for component C (8 percent of total cost), of which US$
1.9 million is currently unallocated (3 percent of total cost).
The GoR is expected to contribute a total amount of US$ 8 million mainly through the financing of taxes and duties across the different
components and sub-components. The contribution calculation is based on the prevailing rates at design.
Contributions from private sector and ICCO amount to US$ 372,000 (0.6 percent of total cost) and US$ 650,000 (1.1 percent of total
cost) respectively, to co-finance activities under component B. Contribution from beneficiaries, both in-kind and in-cash, are equal to
US$ 497,000 and US$ 1.6 million respectively, for a total contribution of US$ 2.1 million (3.5 percent of total cost) and will be drawn
from the co-financing of irrigation infrastructure in component A and the farm business development of component B.
c. Disbursement
2.
Project eligible expenditures. KIIWP2 expenditure categories have been assigned in accordance with the standard FLEXCUBE
expenditure categories. Eligible expenditures categories include the following: (i) Civil Works, (ii) Equipment and materials, (iii)
Goods, Services and Inputs, (iv) Technical Assistance and Consultancies, (v) Grants and Subsidies, (vi) Training, Workshops and
Meetings, (vii) Salaries, Allowances, and Operational Costs. In terms of materiality, the most significant proportion of KIIWP2
resources will be disbursed for civil works, followed by technical assistance and training. The ratio of recurrent to investment
costs is 12% at design. A further 5.8% of total project costs set aside for allocation at mid-term.
18/28
3.
Disbursement arrangements. The IFAD and Spanish financing secured under KIIWP2 will be disbursed on a parallel basis. Two
separate designated accounts denominated in US$, one to receive loan proceeds from IFAD and another to receive Spanish
financing will be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda. There will be three Project accounts; an operations account, a
counterpart account and a district account. The funds from the different co-financiers will flow through the SPIU under the
uniform terms and conditions, criteria and funds flows mechanisms finalized for KIIWP2. Transfers to implementing partners will
be done through a project operating account. These partners may be required to open bank accounts specific for KIIWP
depending on the nature of activities and amount of advances to be received.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
[78] The economic and financial analysis (EFA) of KIIWP2 accounts for benefits and costs linked to the Project. The target group is
expected to experience increase in income as a direct result of the: (i) increased water availability for productive use; (ii)
diversification of productive activities and sources of income thanks to greater access to technical assistance and inputs; (iii)
increased food availability for rural poor, (iv) increased value-added of agricultural outputs; (v) enhanced productivity through
improved infrastructure; (vi) improved quality of processed products, thus attracting higher prices; (vii) increased employment
opportunity either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; and (viii) tax revenues as a result of increased
volume of taxable production.
Production models are used as building blocks for the elaboration of six household/farm models where differentiation is made both in
terms of cultivation patterns, land holding, source of income, production systems and poverty level. The analysis employs the
Ubudehe categorization system adopted by GoR to differentiate households according to their income levels – where Ubudehe 1
denotes the poorest category and Ubudehe 4 the wealthiest. The economic evaluation of the entire Project is based on the
aggregated net incremental benefits of the target population. In order to include both on- and off-farm benefits in the EFA, other
economic models were considered.
The EFA includes economic benefits related to carbon sequestration directly linked to the adoption CSA practices. The calculation of
the net emission/sequestration effect for different crops and CSA practices is carried out on the Ex-Act software. In addition, expected
future impacts on yield related to climate change are factored into the analysis. Technical parameters for declining yields were
included in the Without-Project scenario and established on the findings of climate projections and technical studies in the region.
A summary of the key profitability indicators resulting from the financial models is provided below. For the poorest beneficiaries in the
target population (Ubudehe 1), the proposed activity will become viable only thanks to Project financing. Differently, due to the lack of
savings and own financial resources, they would not be able to undertake the proposed activities and make a profit.
Table 6.Summary of financial models' results for target populations
MODELS
CAT1 A - UB1
CAT1 B - UB1
CAT1 A - UB2
CAT1 B - UB2
CAT1 A - UB3
CAT1 B – UB3
Before financing
After financing
NPV (‘000 Rwf) @
11%
IRRf
B/C ratio
NPV (‘000 Rwf)
@ 11%
IRRf
B/C ratio
(250)
(200)
624
624
1,335
1,335
7%
8%
0.86
311
44%
1.14
0.90
488
n/a[79]
1.22
16%
1.14
1,748
16%
1.14
2,000
18%
1.20
3,028
18%
1.20
3,404
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
1.35
1.42
1.39
1.46
1.50
Cooperative post/harvest storage facility
6,161
14%
1.17
22,863
Joint venture cooperative and private
sector
4,565,967
n/a
1.76
4,708,095
n/a
1.78
The Project is a technically and economically viable investment to the economy as a whole. The Project economic NPV of the net
benefit stream over the 20-year timeframe, discounted at 8 percent, is RWF 12,047 million (USD 12.5 million). This value yields an
EIRR of 14 percent and BCR of 1.19 for the base case scenario and it results in a payback period of nine years. Profitability results
were tested in the sensitivity analysis to measure variations due to unforeseen factors, hence identifying those variables affecting
final results the most. The Project appears to be more sensitive to a decline in benefits rather than an increase in costs.
19/28
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
Institutional sustainability.KIIWP2’s exit strategy is embedded in the institutional intervention mechanism through: (i) the strategic
approach of working directly with administrative structures and community leaders at District, sector and irrigation scheme levels; (ii)
the empowerment of Infrastructure Management Institutions to assume full responsibility for planning and implementation of
watershed interventions and operation and maintenance of post-harvest infrastructure; (iii) the strengthening of FFS, Farmer
Promoters and Cooperatives, including their back and forward linkages and access to markets, inputs, financial services and
agriculture insurance. This institutional framework, within which the Project will be implemented and the capacity developed, will
continue to exist after its completion to benefit the population and country (further details provided in Annex 10).
Environmental sustainability. The sub-catchment management approach, including participatory preparation of catchment
management plans, will lead to longer term environmental rejuvenation and returns on improved soil fertility and sustainable access to
water, CSA technologies, enhanced resilience and reduced carbon The ESMPs will also be implemented in a participatory manner
through strengthening the capacity of Hydrographic Basin Committees and Irrigation Water User Organizations. Regarding Economic
sustainability, the Project will support enhanced storage and commercial sale of excess production to sustain investments and access
to finance, value addition facilities and markets through FFS, Farmer Promoters, cooperatives and 4Ps. This will ensure that farmers
enhance their incomes. The severe food and nutrition security challenges in Eastern Province are due to frequent droughts and high
dependence on rain-fed agriculture. Using irrigation and catchment protection as entry point is a recognition of the critical importance
of water to sustainable rural livelihoods and food and nutrition security. High nutrition-sensitive and CSA cropping systems will
contribute to the results generated during the Project lifetime. Women’s empowerment is key to addressing household food and
nutrition insecurity. This will ensure targeted support to women and mapping of their long-term inclusion pathway. The support will be
delivered together with nutrition education and participatory approaches to enhance their inclusion and economic empowerment.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
Detailed risk assessment is presented in the IPRM (Annex 9). The inherent risks rated as “high” or “substantial” are summarized in
the Table below.
Table 7. Selected risk categories and subcategories from Integrated Risk Matrix
Risk Categories and Subcategories
20/28
Inherent
Residual
Project Scope
Technical soundness
High
Moderate
Risk(s): Kayonza, and building on the experience of KWAMP, the successful IFAD-supported Community-based Watershed
Management Project, implemented in the neighboring Kirehe District, which completed in June 2016.  There is risk of high cost of
hillside irrigation in case the proposed technologies are not carefully adjusted to the constraints of the target areas and the capacity
of the beneficiaries.
Mitigations: Additional analyses was undertaken to mitigate the risk (high cost of hillside irrigation) of the initial design of the irrigation
schemes and capacity to operate and maintain the same. This allowed to (a) reduce the unit cost of irrigation; (b) reduce the risk of
the management of these schemes.  The detailed design of the  irrigation schemes will be optimised and recommend a suitable
rationing based on further analysis, close consultation with concerned farmers and cooperatives, and prevailing conditions towards
optimising profitability, making sure that the investments are suitable to the capacity of the target group.   The Project will also
establish and support Water Users Organizations and other relevant Infrastructure Management Institutions.  
Financial Management
Budgeting
Substantial
Moderate
Risk(s): (1) Failure to meet budget deadline for submission of AWPBs and receipt of IFAD NO, which could cause ineligible
expenditure; (2) Poor budget monitoring at activity and category level arising out of failure to customize IFMIS to facilitate posting of
budgets by this requirement.
Mitigations: KIIWP2 will use IFMIS for accounting and budget input. Should IFMIS not have been customized, the budget may be
required to be monitored within a parallel software in parallel. Budgeting should involve the project financing team, technical staff,
procurement officer and M&E officer to ensure the expenditures categories are well aligned and the logframe is considered at
budgeting time.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity conservation
Substantial
Moderate
Risk(s): KIIWP2 will be implemented in the vicinity of the Akagera National Park which hosts considerable biodiversity of both fauna
and flora. The area is characterized by a network of lakes hydrologically connected with the Akagera River, either directly through
surface flows or through swampy areas.
Mitigations:The Project will conduct rapid site biodiversity survey for each irrigation scheme coupled with satellite imagery for
establishing a baseline on biodiversity and ecosystem status. The baseline will be annually monitored, for evaluating and
documenting progress in improving ecosystem services through soil, water and biodiversity conservation measures and sustainable
use of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and hazards
Substantial
Moderate
Risk(s): Population has suffered from extreme events (droughts) in 2016 and 2017. The risk of extreme weather event will continue
to remain.
Mitigations: KIIWP2 will apply the watershed and catchment management approach, including participatory preparation of catchment
management plans, which will lead to sustainable use of natural resources. The Project will adopt the PICSA methodology which will
be applied to disseminate weather and climate services information to farmers, through better understanding, access, use and
uptake of the climate information package. The Project will also introduce agricultural insurance under SC B2 while SC A3 will
promote CSA practices and ESMPs will be carefully implemented (Annex 5, Appendix 1).
Stakeholders
Stakeholder engagement/coordination
21/28
Substantial
Moderate
Risk(s): (i) Unequal representation of stakeholders in developing the project activities (i.e. elite capture); (ii) Limited technical
capacity, governance and institutional capacity of beneficiaries (e.g. farmers’ organizations) in managing irrigation schemes, growing
high value crops and linking themselves to markets.
Mitigations: Stakeholder participation by: (i) participatory community-driven preparation of sub-catchment plans; (ii) strengthened
FFS, cooperatives, Infrastructure Management Institutions; (iii) community competition grants; (iv) engagement in the selection of
irrigation systems and technology. The project will ensure capacity development of farmers and farmers’ organizations in areas
including irrigation management (SC.A2), climate-smart agriculture and technologies (SC.A5), and business and marketing skills
(SC.B1).
4.
Financial Management Risk Assessment. The inherent FM risk of the project has been assessed as moderate. Residual risk
remains moderate at design pending the customisation of IFMIS, without which the project would face financial reporting
challenges, as well as budget monitoring and cash forecasting issues which would impact the flow of funds. The customisation
will be foreseen as a covenant of the KIIWP2 financing agreement. The FM risk assessment will be updated throughout
implementation as part of annual supervision processes.
I. Environment and Social category
The environmental and social category is A, because KIIWP investments focus on irrigation and integrated watershed
management and planning, including closely integrated activities and investments on water harvesting and storage, irrigation
infrastructure development (area >100ha) and marshland development. Despite the proximity to the Akagera national park, the area
targeted by the Project is already transformed to agriculture land.
KIIWP1 prepared an ESIA and Feasibility Study (FS) for Ndego and Kabare sectors. In November 2020, the GoR organised a
national validation workshop with all relevant stakeholders, to formally review both documents. The final FS and ESIA were then
shared with IFAD and approved for disclosure.
The already developed FS and ESIAs have identified that no physical involuntary resettlements are expected. An abbreviated RAP
was included in the ESIA prepared for the Ndego and Kabare schemes and associated costs were integrated in the cost-table. The
abbreviated RAP will be refined with the detailed design and implemented during the inception phase. All compensation measures will
be provided prior to the construction works or partial land take. For the FS and ESIAs for the Kanyeganyege and Gishanda irrigation
schemes: hydro-geological surveys for boreholes drilling and valley ponds; water permit requests; and ESIA procedures are initiated
and are expected to be finalized in July 2021. The additional ESIAs will be shared with IFAD for no-objection and disclosed 120 days
prior to the construction of the irrigation infrastructures ( Annex 11 on expected timeline for finalising the required studies/surveys).
J. Climate Risk classification
Because of recent droughts and the vulnerability of Eastern Province to extreme events, the climate risk classification is High. Among
the climate science community[80], there is consensus that Rwanda’s future climate will be substantially warmer, increasing between
1.3°C and 1.9°C by mid-century according to CMIP5 projections. Projections of precipitation in Rwanda are more variable, with
estimates of the change in annual average rainfall ranging from a 10 percent decrease to a 22 percent increase by mid-century.
Through financing support from ASAP II, the University of Cape Town conducted, in 2020, a detailed climate risk analysis to assess
climate change effects and future crop suitability in Rwanda. The assessment examined the impact of climate change on the main
subsistence crops which are beans, cassava, maize, groundnuts and sweet potatoes. The findings for beans and maize are as
follows. For maize, the projected decrease in production is expected to be 7 kg per household in Eastern Province, amounting to a
loss of US$2.5 per household. For beans, all provinces will experience decreased production. Eastern Province is likely to be the
most affected with an annual decrease in production up to 8 percent, representing an annual loss of 38 kg and US$20 per household.
The report recommends: (i) the promotion of fast-growing varieties, (ii) increase technical support for climate resilience and
management of climate risks; and (iii) adoption of alternative and climate resilient crops such as sorghum, millet or groundnuts.
Hence, the Project emphasis on risk management is likely to increase resilience and adaptive capacity of households, communities
and ecosystems.
The Project will promote adaptation and mitigation measures in terms of: (i) enhancement of agricultural productivity using climate-
smart agriculture practices through FFS; (ii) restoration and management of pasture land; (iii) afforestation, reforestation and forest
conservation through synergies and coordination with Rwanda Forest Authority; and (iv) promotion of appropriate and tested (e.g.
under PASP project) innovative and climate smart technologies (e.g. zero energy cooling chambers, metal silos or hermetic bags for
storage of cereals, drying grounds and improved warehouses).
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
The Lead Project Agency will be the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB), an implementing agency
22/28
of MINAGRI, which will have the overall responsibility for the coordination and execution of the Project.
KIIWP2 will be integrated within the SPIU of IFAD projects (KIIWP1, PASP and RDDP) that are under RAB. The SPIU Coordinator will
oversee and coordinate KIIWP implementation at both the central and district level. KIIWP1 already existing personnel will be the
same for KIIWP2, plus required additional extra staff at central and at district unit level. The SPIU will determine modalities of
allocation of staff at central or District unit levels. International technical assistance will be mobilized to support the SPIU in areas such
as irrigation, agribusiness, CSA and GAP. The Chief Finance Officer of RAB will become the Chief Budget Holder for the Project as
for other IFAD-funded projects under the SPIU.
The Project Steering Committee (SC) at District level established for KIIWP1 shall continue for KIIWP2. The SC will be made up of
representatives of MINAGRI and other relevant ministries, and representatives of the District Council, the Farmers’ Organizations
(FOs), local institutions and private sector participating in the Project. The SC will be responsible for the technical oversight of the
review and implementation of the AWPB and the Project’s integration into the District.
Implementation at District level will be monitored by the Director in charge of agriculture in collaboration with existing staff. The
Project will also work with FOs, Cooperatives, IWUOs and national and international NGOs. Raising awareness and capacity building
are key elements, especially of FOs and District, Sector level staff. Practically, the Project will avail a budget for twice yearly planning
and M&E meetings.
Implementation of Components. Sub-component A1. The SPIU will engage a service provider(s) to implement the sub-catchment
management plans. The SPIU will have a field officer responsible for supervising the implementation jointly with the SCCs and with
the active participation of IWUOs. A partnership with WFP will be formalized with an MoU for this sub-component and others where
relevant. The Rwanda Center of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management (CoEB)[81] would be a partner for
monitoring the ecosystems and landscape restoration and rehabilitation measures. As per its mandate, the CoEB would support
implementation of the sub-catchment management plans and all mitigations measures listed under the ESMPs to ensure
conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems.
Sub-component A2. Once the detailed design for irrigation schemes completed, the SPIU will tender for the works to contractors with
demonstrated experience. The procurement of works will be divided into two lots. Lot one will be made of all civil works and
installations required to supply bulk water till the farm edge. This will include but not limited to the pumping stations, supply pipelines,
balancing reservoirs, access roads and preliminary land preparation. Lot two will include the infield installations comprising pivots and
sprinklers as well as distribution sub-mains. To ensure the quality and cost effectiveness of infield installations, the Project will select
specialised international companies with experience in the region, which provide guarantees for the lifespan of equipment and after-
sale services by local representative dealers. District, Sector and Cell-level staff, with the support of the WUO Specialist in the SPIU
and RAB, will support the formation and strengthening of the Infrastructure Management Institutions. The District could
simultaneously replicate the approach in the remaining three Kayonza sectors.
Sub-component A3. RAB with the support of the SPIU and with specialized TA if needed, will organize the FFS facilitator training and
manuals adaptation. They will include sustainable mechanization in the curricula and roll out the trainings for youth mechanization
manufacturers and service providers. District, Sector and Cell-level staff, with the support of the Agronomist at the decentralized
SPIU, will ensure the implementation and coordination of the FFS and support to Farmer Promoters.
Sub-component B1.A FaaB training module will be developed by ICCO and incorporated in the FFS curriculum The FaaB training will
then be imparted along FFS by specialized service providers[82] recruited by the Project on a competitive basis. RCA is in charge of
activities connected with the creation and supervision of cooperatives including: registering, regulating and supervision; assisting with
capacity building through trainings and seminars. An MoU could be signed between RAB/SPIU and BDF to manage the grant
windows, given its thorough experience, outreach capacity through district offices and recently digitalized application process. BDF
has been managing all grants financed by the recent IFAD-funded projects PASP, PRICE and RDDP. Grant management fees will be
availed to BDF to support its overall engagement.
Sub-component B2. An agreement will be signed with NAIS to implement the activities of Sub-component B2.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
5.
6.
7.
Financial management (FM) arrangements of KIIWP2 have been designed on the basis of KIIWP1 taking into account the IFAD-
financed project coordination structure of SPIU.  The financial management arrangements implemented for KIIWP1 will be
retained for KIIWP2. These have been found satisfactory to date, with the Auditor General expressing an unqualified opinion on
the project’s first set of financial statements (FY 2020) and on legal compliance, with no significant internal control weaknesses
reported in the Management Letter and satisfactory quality of financial reporting. KIIWP2 will have dedicated finance staff, either
competitively recruited or transferred from completing projects in the IFAD portfolio under supervision of RAB. FM staff for the
Project both at SPIU and Kayonza District are already in place for KIIWP1. There are therefore no start–up challenges
anticipated in financial management, except for delays in establishing appropriate and efficient financial reporting mechanisms
due to the pending customisation of Integrated Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS).
In line with GoR requirement to have all entities including projects rolled onto IFMIS, KIIWP1 was designed with a view of its
accounting based on IFMIS and no plans to use parallel systems. The KIIWP1 financing agreement provided for customisation of
IFMIS to facilitate reporting by component, financier and categories in a single or slightly modified report as required by
IFAD.While KIIWP1 has been rolled-out on IFMIS, the customisation of IFMIS to meet these requirements is yet to be done. This
would affect financial reporting of both KIIWP1 and KIIWP2, with the risk that data will have to be generated in MS Excel, which is
cumbersome, prone to errors and will not facilitate real time reporting. MINECOFIN has committed to resolving this matter in a
phased manner, namely within two phases completing in April 2021 and June 2021 respectively. The KIIWP2 legal covenants will
include the IFMIS customisation and required adjustments to the PIM will be made accordingly.
As Kayonza District is an independent entity, accounting separately within IFMIS, the SPIU will not be able to consolidate data for
withdrawal application (WA) purposes as the posted data by the district will not be accessible by the SPIU on IFMIS. Accordingly,
this will also have to be addressed by the IFMIS team at customization. Should there be further delay in implementing the
customisation, this will imply that certified monthly extracts of expenditure by Project component, sub-component, and
expenditure category to activity level will be required to be done by the District and submitted to the SPIU for purposes of
generating WAs.
8.
There will be a designated account denominated in US$ held at the National Bank of Rwanda to receive loan proceeds from
IFAD, and a second designated account to receive the Spanish co-financing, if confirmed. There will be three project accounts;
an operations account, a counterpart account and a district account. These three project accounts will be linked to IFMIS. The
IFAD Client Portal (ICP) will be implemented for KIIWP2.
23/28
Procurement
The IFAD Virtual Design Mission of KIIWP2 conducted a remote procurement risk assessment[83] by completing an IFAD
procurement risk matrix (PRM), which included a risk assessment of both the country level and the project institutional dimensions of
public procurement[84]. The PRM returned a low inherent risk rating of 2.91 and, assuming that the recommended risk mitigating
actions are undertaken by the Borrower/IFAD and that their expected benefits are fully realized, the overall net risk rating is also low
(2.96).
The main challenge identified in the PRM[85] involves procurement delays caused by the SPIU using open tendering for low-value
procurements of goods, works and related non-consulting services, when the use of shopping (i.e. requesting a minimum of three
quotations from suppliers, contractors or service providers) would be more efficient. In fact, the SPIU applies national procurement
thresholds, which are far below[86] those stated in IFAD’s Letter to the Borrower (LtB) for each IFAD-funded project implemented by
the SPIU.
After consultations with both the SPIU and the Rwanda Public Procurement Authority, in November 2020, IFAD formally requested
the Rwandan Ministry of Finance (MoF) to consider an increase in procurement thresholds to be applied to all IFAD-funded projects
implemented by the SPIU, including KWIIP2. The MoF is yet to provide its feedback on the proposed increase and the Mission Team
is continuing to follow up with the SPIU in this regard. Once a response from the MoF is received, the final procurement and prior-
review thresholds will be laid out in the LtB. Other challenges concern the application of domestic preferences to national competitive
bidding processes and the lack of mandatory references to IFAD polices in the bidding documents used for low-value procurements of
goods.
Procurement framework and institutional arrangements. The procurement risk assessment ascertained the soundness of both the
Rwandan public procurement framework and the implementing agency. Consequently, the following institutional arrangements will be
in place:
1.  Pursuant to paragraph 42 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, procurement of goods, works and services for KIIWP2
shall be carried out according to the Borrower’s procurement regulations to the extent that they are consistent with the IFAD
Project Procurement Guidelines. Rwandan procurement regulations include Law no. 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 governing public
procurement and the Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement.
2.  Coordination and central procurement capacities will be focused in the Procurement Unit of the existing SPIU, which counts an
experienced Head of Procurement in charge of the procurement function for all IFAD-funded projects implemented by the
SPIU and a dedicated Procurement Specialist recruited under the first phase of KIIWP1, who will reprise his role as
Procurement Specialist under KIIWP2. Capacity at SPIU level will be strengthened with the addition of a Procurement
Assistant to support activities under KIIWP2 and the other IFAD-funded projects implemented by the SPIU. The Procurement
Assistant will be competitively recruited from the market, based on the ToRs included in the PIM and subject to IFAD’s No-
Objection.
3.  Kayonza District will be actively involved in procurement activities wherever possible. Specifically, selected procurements of
goods with an estimated value of US$ 40,000.00 to be delivered at district-level will be delegated to the District’s Corporate
Division, which includes two procurement officers, under the supervision of the SPIU. Procurement at district-level shall be
carried out according to the Borrower’s procurement regulations to the extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Project
Procurement Guidelines. The District Tender Committee will be responsible for the advertisement of tenders and the approval
of recommendations to award.
Governance, prohibited practices and anti-corruption measures
Transparency International’s Country Corruption Perception Index score puts Rwanda at medium risk in terms of corruption (54 points
in 2020). The Office of the Ombudsman is an independent public institution of Rwanda, which investigates cases of injustice in public
administration and private institutions. As the Office of the Ombudsman is also tasked with preventing and combating corruption and
other related offences, it serves both as the national anti-corruption authority and as an Ombudsman.
Anti-corruption measures will include requiring all procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors, consultants and
service providers to observe the highest standard of ethics during the procurement and execution of contracts financed under
KIIWP2, in accordance with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. The Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption
in its Activities and Operations, as well as the IFAD Policy to Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse and the IFAD Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy, shall apply to all IFAD-financed
and/or IFAD-managed operations and activities, as well as to vendors and third parties, and references to said policies will be
included in the standard bidding documents that will be employed by KIIWP2.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is being put in place under KIIWP1, in accordance with the requirements of IFAD and GoR. It is
24/28
coordinated by the SPIU and supported by additional professional staff already hired as part of KIIWP1, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The M&E System (MES) is being put in place in
accordance with MINAGRI’s new management information system and IFAD’s new Operational Results Management System
(ORMS). The MES will be under the supervision of the Project Coordinator and will be managed by the M&E Specialist. To
supplement the Project ORMS Logical Framework, a detailed operational results framework and an M&E plan will be developed to
guide M&E processes, define roles and responsibilities as well as set a plan for realisation of set targets through the Project life. An
M&E Manual will be developed by the SPIU describing how the MES/MIS system works, the tools and processes for its smooth
operation.
Monitoring sustainability. The Project will partner with the CoEB, which will provide technical backstopping to implement the
community–based sub-catchment management plans and all mitigations measures listed under the ESMPs in order to ensure
conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and their services. The Project will use several
tools for evaluating and documenting progress in improving ecosystem services including a rapid biodiversity survey for each
irrigation scheme and satellite imagery for assessing impacts of soil, water and biodiversity conservation measures.
9.
Monitoring resilience.  Because of the recent droughts (2016, 2017), high dependence on rain-fed agriculture, crop failure and
poor markets linkages, the population of Kayonza district has recently suffered from severe food and nutrition insecurity. KIIWP2
will tackle climate risks, food insecurity and nutrition issues through the production pathway, identifying key climate smart and
nutrient rich crop varieties that would be promoted for both household’s consumption and for sale. To monitor progress and
support adjustments along the line, the project will adopt the resilience framework recently developed by IFAD, which aims at
measuring the number of people with improved resilience due to a project intervention. The framework proposes a scorecard
matrix, the Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool (RMDT), to support the design and monitoring of project interventions[87]. This
framework operationalizes resilience as a set of three interrelated capacities (3ACs) possessed by each household that make
them able to anticipate (prevent impacts), absorb (recover and withstand) and adapt (build back better) to the stresses and
shocks to which they are likely to be exposed (Bahadur et al. 2015)[88]. Tailored to the project’s activities, the resilience
scorecard will monitor household resilience through a set of questions and relative answers that will be defined at project start up,
with technical assistance from IFAD- Sustainable Production Markets and Institutions Division (PMI) and the IFAD- Environment,
Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion Division, and together with PMUs and project implementers. Answers will be gathered
through surveys as part of the baseline, midterm and end term surveys in order to evaluate resilience by comparing results in
different stages of the project implementation ( Further details are provided within the SECAP review note).
Knowledge Management (KM) and Communication will be an integral part of KIIIWP to ensure that Project implementation is a
continuous learning process and based on the Knowledge Management and Communication Strategy. The Project M&E system will
form the foundation of KM and learning system and will thus be a primary instrument of information capture and storage, based on the
indicators detailed in the results framework. In addition, a stakeholder Communication Strategy will be developed to detail how
community expectations will be managed and the roles and responsibilities of the District Authority and SPIU teams in
communication.
b. Innovation and scaling up
Sustainability and scaling-up of agricultural insurance is at the heart of the related activities proposed in KIIWP2. There is a direct link
to NAIS priorities and plans, with KIIWP2 both benefitting from the presence of NAIS, its services, products, and partial subsidy, and
also contributing to its scale-up through support to farmer education, capacity building of NAIS stakeholders and KIIWP2 distribution
channels, and policy dialogue. The agricultural insurance activities represent innovative approaches to delivery of education and the
products themselves. In particular the approach to train extension workers in insurance would be an innovation within Rwanda and it
would be a good international practice. The effort to increase bundling of insurance with the credit and potentially grants under
KIIWP2 would also represent an innovation within Rwanda.
The partnership with ICCO, AGRA, and AFR will also allow to promote the digitalization of financial services for smallholders and
cooperatives in order to reduce transaction costs, increase efficiency and sustainable access to financial services.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
10.
KIIWP will promote regular target group engagement and feedback throughout its lifecycle. Under KIIWP1, these will include: (a)
community-based Sub-catchment management plan preparation; (b) establishment of IWUOs. Under KIIWP2, these will include;
(c) establishment and/or strengthening of Cooperatives and FFS; (d) community-competition; (e) participatory M&E workshops;
(f) further strengthening of IWUOs.
b. Grievance redress.
11.
[89] An adequate grievance redress mechanism (GRM) will be established to ensure beneficiaries voice their concerns related to
KIIWP’s interventions with the relevant staff at Project District level. A focal point will be appointed to follow up the GRM process.
The mechanism will be publicized at the local level and in Kinyarwanda. The Project Coordinator will have the overall
responsibility to address concerns brought to the attention of the focal point regarding any environmental and/or social impacts
due to intervention by the target population. Complaints received shall be recorded, documented and included in progress
reports including the number and type of complaints and the results of their resolution.
12.
Establishment of irrigation schemes may raise complaints among local communities mainly due to conflict among water users,
resettlement, conflict between workers and local community, etc. Grievance procedures are required to ensure that Project
Affected Persons (PAPs) are able to lodge complaints or concerns, without cost and with the assurance of a timely and
satisfactory resolution of the issue. The procedures also ensure that the entitlements are effectively transferred to the intended
beneficiaries. Stakeholders will be informed of the intention to implement the grievance mechanism, and the procedure will be
communicated when the RAPs are finalized. Grievances may arise from members of communities who are dissatisfied with
eligibility criteria use, community planning and actual implementation or compensation. In case an agreement is not reached
through the project-level GRM, the PAPs may contact IFAD following the procedures on the IFAD website[90]. The GRM
procedures are detailed in the PIM.
25/28
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
13.
14.
Implementation readiness of KIIWP2 will be ensured by KIIWP1, which: (a) created SPIUs at national and district levels, including
coordination, financial management and M&E units; (b) will establish and build capacity of the Infrastructure Management
Institutions; (c) will prepare the required FS, ESIAs, and Sub-catchment management plans. This PDR defines the required
support to further enhance implementation capacity.
It is recommended that a baseline study on CSA existing practices and technologies in Rwanda and in region would be
undertaken by KIIWP1. The study will include an analysis on sustainable mechanization, including TLST, available and of
potential interest. Technologies and improved tools must be adapted to farmers’ needs and production systems, affordable, will
have to help reduce burden and help increase productivity.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
15.
Supervision and implementation support will be organised jointly by IFAD and GoR. Supervision will be a continuous process
including joint missions, as well as continuous desk review to ensure that implementation is on track. The composition of
supervision and implementation support missions will largely be determined by the prevailing circumstances. Implementation
support will be provided through the in-country IFAD office, the Regional Hub in Nairobi, and TA to be mobilized especially on
irrigation, M&E and Procurement. Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be undertaken midway through Project implementation and
evaluate whether the Project is on course to achieve its goal. The MTR will be a key reflection moment to assess implementation
performance and recommend adjustments, as may be required. The recommendations will take into consideration the likelihood
of achieving the Project's targets during the remaining implementation period and may modify these targets and budget
allocation, if considered necessary. At the end of implementation, GoR will undertake the Project Completion Review (PCR), in
coordination with IFAD, in order to report on the results achieved. As part of completion, a Beneficiary Impact Assessment will be
undertaken and findings inform the PCR. The purposes of the PCR process are to promote accountability, reflect on performance
and elicit lessons learned to inform future programme/project design and to define an appropriate post-project strategy.
Footnotes
[1] Trigger for proceeding from KIIWP1 to KIIWP2, are: (i) FSs identify irrigation schemes that are financially, economically,
environmentally and socially viable and sustainable; (ii) Third party satisfactory review of FSs, ESIAs and Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs); (iii) ESIAs and RAPs are disclosed at local community level, national and IFAD website for a minimum 120 days; (iv)
Provision of a budget and commitment by the Government of Rwanda to implement the RAP and other ESMP activities identified by
the ESIAs; (v) Revision of the PDR and PIM to incorporate the findings of KIIWP1.
[2] National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), National Accounts, 2016.
[3] IMF Policy Support Instrument.
[4]https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2021/01/04/Rwanda-Third-Review-Under-the-Policy-Coordination-Instrument-
Press-Release-Staff-Report-and-49984
[5] NISR, 2020.
[6]http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/RWA.pdf
[7] World Bank
[8] Africa Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Index and Dashboards Report 2020
[9]https://covid19.who.int/region/afro/country/rw
[10] UNDP. The socio-economic impact of COVID-19 in Rwanda. 2020
[11]https://www.bnr.rw/browse-in/economic-recovery-
fund/#:~:text=The%20Economic%20Recovery%20Fund%20(ERF,economic%20effects%20of%20the%20pandemic.
[12] NISR. FinScope. 2016.
[13] NISR. EICV5. 2018
[14] NISR sets the poverty line at RWF 159,375 per year (US$162) and extreme poverty line at RWF 105,064 (US$107).
26/28
[15] NISR. Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 2016/2017 (EICV5), Poverty Profile Report. 2018
[16]https://au.int/en/documents/31247/malabo-declaration-201411-26. 
[17] The seven commitments are as follows: (i) Re-committing to the principles and values of the CAADP process; (ii) Enhancing
investment finance in agriculture; (iii) ending Hunger in Africa by 2025; (iv) Reducing poverty by half, by 2025, through inclusive
agricultural growth and transformation; (v) Boosting intra-African trade in agricultural commodities and services; (vi) Enhancing
resilience of livelihoods and production systems to climate variability and other related risks; and (vii) Strengthening mutual
accountability to actions and results.
[18] https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/38119-doc-2019_biennial_review-en.pdf
[19] Rwanda Agricultural Households Survey 2017.
[20] IFPRI. Women’s Empowerment Agriculture Index (WEAI) Survey, 2015.
[21] WFP. Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda. 2018
[22] Ministry of Health. National Youth Policy. 2015 (revised 2006).
[23] NISR. EICV5. Education Thematic Report. 2016/2017.
[24] Ibid.
[25] MINAGRI. Rwanda National Food and Nutrition Policy. January 2014
[26] WFP. Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda. 2018
[27] Famine Early Warning System Network (FEWS Net). March 2021
[28] WFP. CFSVA. 2018
[29] Ibid 
[30] Kayonza District. Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19-2023/24.
[31] Rwanda. Updated Nationally Determined Contribution. May 2020.
[32] In 2012, the rains failed to come, causing a drop in agricultural growth and a 4 percent decline in GDP in 2013.
[33] Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWSNET). Water Requirement Satisfaction Index (WRSI).
[34] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
[35] MINAGRI. Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan. January 2010
[36] The seven districts constituting the Eastern Province include: Bugesera, Gatsibo, Kayonza, Kirehe, Ngoma, Nyagatare, and
Rwamagana.
[37]https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/internal/documents/projects/wfp285525.pdf
[38] The 2016 Impact Assessment reported that the number of poor people in the district reduced from 54.4 percent in 2008 to 37.1
percent in 2016. Furthermore, land ownership and security were improved resulting in 94.2 per cent of farmers owning land and 92.2
percent of households having their land registered.
[39] President’s Report for KIIWP1. EB 2019/126/R/22/Rev/1”.
[40] Catchment protection planning and works are initiated and ongoing (KIIWP1. Progress Report, 14 April 2021)
[41] Initiated and ongoing (KIIWP1. Progress Report, 14th April 2021)
[42] Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP)
[43] CAP Ltd. on behalf of NAEB/PRICE project. Horticulture Fruit Mapping. December 2020
[44] Climate Resilient Post-Harvest Agribusiness Support Project (PASP)
[45] Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP)
[46] Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE)
[47] The Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, the IFAD Policy to Preventing and
Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and the IFAD Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the
Financing of Terrorism Policy.
27/28
[48] Kayonza is one of the seven districts constituting the Eastern Province of Rwanda.
[49] Data provided by Kayonza District, based on the latest survey of the Ubudehe programme system (2016).
[50] Rwanda Population and Housing Census 2012 (2012 RPHC)
[51] NISR. Kayonza District Profile. 2012
[52] NISR. EICV4. 2014
[53]Since 2015, the Ubudehe categorization classifies Rwandans under four socio-economic wealth categories. In 2020, MINALOC
revised this categorization unveiling five categories (A, B, C, D & E). The new system was not yet disclosed by MINALOC at the time
of KIIWP2 design.
[54] KIIWP ESIA study in Ndego sector. 2020
[55] Kayonza District. Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19- 2023/24.
[56] NISR. Kayonza District Profile. 2012
[57] Direct targeting mechanisms are described in the PIM, Part I, section I.2. Targeting Strategies.
[58] Eligibility criteria for beneficiaries’ selection are included in the PIM, Part I, section I.2. Targeting Strategies.
[59] Rural Youth Employment Opportunities: Supported to Integrated Agribusiness Hubs in Rwanda (R-YES) Project.
[60] Nutrition-sensitive activities will be directed to the poorest households (category 1 and 2 Ubudehe).
[61] KIIWP2 will rely upon the assessment conducted by the on-going IFAD-funded Nutrition Sensitive Water Productivity (NsWP)
project, implemented by FAO in the same district, aimed at identifying nutrient-rich varieties able to tackle micronutrient deficiencies
of the targeted population and that also offer market opportunities.
[62] Farmland protection and rehabilitation techniques to reduce runoff of rainwater and stimulate infiltration will be combined with land
husbandry practices geared towards increasing vegetative cover and soil fertility. The technologies include drainage, land levelling
(terracing), contour buffer strips, contour ditches, contour bunds, contour ploughing, silt traps and application of lime, mulching and
compost. Where needed, slowing down runoff by construction of check dams, gabions, and side drains will be implemented. These
will be complimented with agro-forestry, including planting of trees, shrubs and grasses as well as pastures.
[63] Water points for animals and humans in the catchment areas were financed under KIIWP1 i.e. 20 solar-powered boreholes and
15 valley tanks in Ndego, Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi sectors.
[64] KIIWP1 will establish the exact boundaries of the catchments and sub-catchments in Kayonza District through Geographic
Information System (GIS) mapping. KIIWP1 will also support the preparation of participatory sub-catchment management plans,
involving Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs) to ensure water resources protection and conservation in an integrated approach.
[65] ESIAs and feasibility studies will be prepared by KIIWP1.
[66] KIIWP1 will finance the feasibility and detailed design studies as well as the ESIAs for the two dam projects. The Project will
recruit a qualified consultancy firm to carry out feasibility and design activities for both dam projects. The consultancy firm will design
projects to optimize the available water resources and available command area with no limit to the proposed command area in the
ToRs.
[67] Former Sub-catchment Committees (SCCs), as per Ministerial Instructions (2017 draft)
[68] Water for Livestock Users Organizations (WLUOs) were established under KIIWP1 to manage and maintain the 35 boreholes
and valley tanks.
[69] Draft Ministerial Instructions on Land Development, Conservation and Exploitation of Developed Land. 2017
[70] A baseline study on existing CSA practices and technologies in Rwanda and the region will be undertaken by KIIWP1.
[71] FFS topics will include: Integrated Pest Management (IPM); Conservation Agriculture, composting and use of organic fertilizers;
Good Agriculture Practices (GAP), time and labour saving technologies (TLST)
[72] For example: iron beans, orang-flesh sweet potato, leafy green vegetables, moringa, and fruit trees.
[73] Farmer Promoters are volunteer community leaders who receive technical training by RAB and Local Government to serve
as farmer-to-farmer extension agents in their own villages. There is one Farmer Promoter in every village in Rwanda, with over
14,000 Farmer Promoters nationwide.
[74] ToT for manufacturer is planned in Rwanda, with exchanges in Zimbabwe
[75] Crop insurance products offered by NAIS are: maize, rice, chili, French beans, and Irish potato. NAIS is planning to add banana,
cassava, beans and soybeans. Livestock insurance is available for dairy cows, pigs, and poultry. Other commodities may be added
depending on demand. All crops are subsidized by NAIS at 40 percent.
28/28
[76] Graph presented in Annex 2.
[77] Graph presented in Annex 3.
[78] Detailed EFA analysis presented in Annex 4.
[79] There are instances in which the IRR values could not be mathematically computed. Those instances relate to a mathematical
condition which requires cash flows to change sign – from negative to positive values or vice versa – at least once during the
calculation timeframe. In the after financing scenario, deficits in cash flows are fully offset thanks to the accounting of grant and credit
inflows, hence the mathematical condition above is not met.     
[80]https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/rwanda/climate-data-projections
[81] CoEB is a consortium of governmental and non-governmental research and higher learning institutions in Rwanda called nodes,
with a coordination hub at University of Rwanda in the College of Science and Technology.
[82] Examples of such service providers are HoReCo and RYAF, whose mandate is to encourage the involvement of young
professionals in implementing programs/projects that support agricultural transformation.
[83] The findings of the PRM will be finalized during an in-country procurement mission to be carried out by IFAD as soon as
practically possible.
[84] While the country level dimension drew principally on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) country
assessment reports on Rwanda, the project institutional dimension focused on the capability of the procurement staff at SPIU and
District-level and on the quality of its procurement processes, drawing on in-country data sources and consultations.
[85] For a summary of procurement risks and proposed mitigating actions, kindly refer to Annex 9. Integrated Project Risk Matrix
(IPRM). For the full list of risks and mitigations related to both the country level and project institutional dimensions of public
procurement, kindly refer to the KIIWP2 Procurement Risk Matrix, which was used to inform the procurement section of the IPRM.
[86] The national procurement thresholds restrict the application of the shopping method to those procurements whose value does
not exceed RWF 3,000,000, equal to, approximately, US$3,000.
[87] See IFAD, forthcoming. How to do Note on Designing Resilience: resilience analysis and monitoring for rural poor household in
IFAD projects.
[88] As per Bahadur et al. definitions (2015), the 3 Adaptive capacities are: (i) Anticipatory Capacity which is the ability of people to
recognize or predict shocks and stresses and take proactive steps to prevent them and/or protect themselves; (ii) Absorptive
Capacity perceived as the ability of communities to access and deploy tangible assets such as savings and intangible assets like
social networks and community support to help them survive intensive shocks and maintain levels of wellbeing; and (iii) Adaptive
Capacity which is the capacity to take deliberate and planned decisions to achieve the desired state even when conditions have
changed or about to change.
[89] See Framework for Operational Feedback from Stakeholders https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/128/docs/EB-2019-128-R-
13.pdf?attach=1 for further details.
[90]IFAD accountability and complaints procedures
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Annual
SPIU
Household members
0 90 000 180 000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Annual
SPIU
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
0 20 000
40 000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Annual
SPIU
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons receiving
services
0 10 000
20 000
0 10 000
20 000
0
6 000
12 000
0 20 000
40 000
Project Goal 
Contribute to poverty reduction in the
drought-prone Eastern province of
Rwanda
Reduction in poverty levels in eastern province of Rwanda
Reduction in poverty levels in
eastern province of Rwanda
0
5
Baseline,
Completion
NISR
National
statistics,
poverty &
gender studies
Increased income
will be used on
household
improvements and
that stable political,
macro-economic
environment is
maintained in the
country. Food
security and
incomes increase
through a combined
effect of increased
crop production and
improved market
access
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
2/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Development Objective 
Improve food security and incomes of
40,000 households on a sustainable
basis
Households with improved food security
Households with improved food
security
Households with improved incomes
Households with improved incomes
75
60
Outcome 
Outcome 1: Farmers increase
resilience to drought and productivity
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Total number of household members
Households
Households
40
75
National
statistics,
poverty &
gender studies
National
statistics,
poverty &
gender studies
COI Surveys
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and
practices
COI Surveys
Baseline,
Completion
SPIU, NISR
National statistics,
poverty & gender
studies, CFSVA
Baseline,
Completion
SPIU, NISR
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
Food security and
incomes increase
through a combined
effect of increased
crop production and
improved market
access
Total number of household members
72 000 135 000
Households
Households
40
75
16 000
30 000
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
0
0
0
0
0
20
70
1 210
4 235
5
30
2 000
12 100
9 000
54 450
COI Surveys
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
Output 
Output 1.1 Catchment rehabilitation
and protection systems
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Hectares of land
0
2 000
5 350
Climate-resilient
management will be
complemented by
RWFA reforestation
(A)
Results Hierarchy
Output 
Output 1.2: Infrastructure
development
Output 
Output 1.3 : Infrastructure
management institutions
Output 
Output 1.4: Enhanced CSA and AH
practices and technologies
Name
Indicators
3/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Hectares of land
0
1 230
2 285
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Total size of groups
Groups supported
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
0
0
200
20
100
100
60
496
55
248
248
150
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
Young people trained in crop
Total persons trained in crop
0
0
0
0
4 444
6 050
4 356
6 050
2 613
3 630
8 800
12 100
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Increased
production
combined with
targeted capacity
building will lead to
improved diets and
nutrition
Total persons participating
Males
Females
Households
0
0
0
0
8 800
12 100
4 444
6 050
4 356
6 050
8 800
12 100
Household members benefitted
0 39 600
54 450
Young
0
2 613
3 630
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Increased sales and
linkage of producers to services and
markets
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales
COI Surveys
Number of Rural POs
0
30
64
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with public
or private entities
COI Surveys
Number of POs
0
20
40
SPIU/RAB
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
Baseline,
Midterm and
Completion
Favourable
economic
environment (A)
Public or private
entities are willing to
engage with project
(A).
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
4/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
Total number of household members
Households
Households
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
12 500
31
56 250
COI Surveys
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm and
Completion
Output 
Output 2.1: Development of Farming
as a Business Skills
Output 
Output 2.2: Promotion of Farm
Mechanization and Post-harvest
Facilities
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business management
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Males
Females
Young
Persons trained in IGAs or BM (total)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4 000
4 000
2 400
8 000
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Total number of facilities
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
0
Number of persons supported to access equipment to improve production and productivity
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Males
Females
Young
Total people
0
0
0
0
450
450
270
900
900
900
540
1 800
Output 
Output 2.3: Supporting backward and
forward market linkages
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or use of financial products and services
Project reports Annually
SPIU/RAB
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
3 000
6 250
3 000
6 250
1 800
3 750
Farmers interested
in business skills(A)
Beneficiaries are
able to access the
services by FSPs
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
5/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Persons in rural areas trained in FL
and/or use of FProd and Services
(total)
0
6 000
12 500
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Project reports Annually
SPIU/ICCO
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services - credit
Total persons accessing financial
services - savings
Total persons accessing financial
services - credit
Total persons accessing financial
services - insurance
Total persons accessing financial
services - remittances
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - insurance
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - insurance
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
insurance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 000
6 250
1 800
3 750
3 000
6 250
3 000
6 250
3 000
6 250
1 800
3 750
6 000
12 500
6 000
12 500
6 000
12 500
6 000
12 500
3 000
6 250
3 000
6 250
1 800
3 750
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
6/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services-remittances
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - remittances
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services-
remittances
0
0
0
3 000
6 250
3 000
6 250
1 800
3 750
Outcome 
Outcome 3: Enabling institutional
environment
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for approval,
ratification or amendment
COI Surveys
Number
0
0
6
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
COI Surveys
Household members
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0 135 000
0
0
75
30 000
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making of local authorities and project-supported
service providers
COI Surveys
Household members
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0 135 000
0
0
75
30 000
Project interventions
satisfactorily
implemented
SPIU/RAB
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
Midterm,
Completion
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 3: 
Project Costing and Financing 
A.  Project  Costs 
Main assumptions 
1.  Introduction. This annex describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of costs, 
estimated costs and financing plan for the project. Total project costs are based on March 
2021 prices. 
2.  Project Period. The project will be financed over a six-year period. 
3.  Inflation. The base rate of domestic inflation has been set at an annual rate of 5 per 
cent throughout the project duration while international inflation is estimated at 1 per cent 
per year, over the implementation period. 
4.  Exchange  Rate.  The  exchange  rate  was  fixed  at  1USD  =  965  RWF  as  per  average 
average market forex rate during 2020-2021. Project costs are presented in both RWF and 
USD currency.  
5.  Physical and price contingencies. Both types of contingencies have been taken into 
account and included in the costing of the project. In particular, most categories include a 
physical contingency of 2 per cent with an exception on the “Civil Work” category where a 
5 per cent physical contingency is considered.   
6.  Taxes  and  Duties.  Taxes  and  duties  have  been  considered  for  each  cost  item.  The 
value added tax (VAT) in Rwanda is equal to 18 per cent and is levied on all imported and 
locally procured goods and services.   
7.  Expenditure Accounts. Project ’s expenditure accounts will be the following:  
Technical Assistance and Consultancies 
i. 
ii.  Grants and Subsidies 
iii.  Goods, Services and inputs 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii.  Operating costs 
viii. 
Trainings, Workshops and Meetings 
Civil Works 
Salaries and Allowances 
Unallocated 
8.  Total  cost  and  Financing.  Total  project  cost  (investment  cost  and  incremental 
recurrent cost, including physical and price contingencies) is estimated at about USD 61 
million. IFAD will contribute resources amounting to USD 21.7 million (36% of the total 
cost) to finance all project components as follows: USD 15.5 million (25% of total cost) to 
finance Component A, USD 2.1 million (3% of total cost) for Component B and USD 4.1 
million  for  the  Project  coordination  and  M&E  functions  (7%  of  total  cost).  Provisions 
amounting to USD 1.4 million (2% of total cost) for emergency and unforeseen expenses 
are included in the “Unallocated” category and directly sourced from IFAD funds. Funds 
for  emergency  have  not  currently  be  allocated  but  can  be  drawn  from  the  unallocated 
amount as needed. The emergency related sub-component is set up under component C.  
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
9.  The Government of Spain will co-finance KIIWP2 through a loan of USD 28 million (46% 
of  total  cost).  The  funds  will  be  allocated  on  all  project  components  as  follows:  a)  USD 
18.6 million (44% of total cost) for component A; b) USD 4.4 million for component B (7% 
of total cost), and c) USD 4.9 million for component C (8% of total cost), including USD 
1.5 million currently unallocated and suitable to be diverted to the emergency fund (3% 
of total cost).   
10. Contributions to KIIWP2 are also expected to come from private sector and ICCO. Their 
contributions amount to USD 372,000 (0.6% of total cost) and USD 650,000 (1.1 % of 
total  cost)  respectively.  The  funding  from  such  sources  will  co-finance  activities  under 
component B. 
11.  The government of Rwanda is expected to contribute a total amount of USD 8 million 
(13% of total cost) mainly through the financing of taxes and duties across the different 
components and subcomponents. The contribution calculation is based on the prevailing 
tax rates at design. 
12.  Contribution from beneficiaries, both in-kind and in-cash, are equal to USD 497,000 
and USD 1.6 million respectively, for a total contribution of USD 2.1 million (3.5% of total 
cost) and will be drawn from the co-financing of the irrigation infrastructure in component 
A and the farm business development of component B 
13.  The  foreign  exchange  component  is  estimated  at  about  USD  24.4  million.  Funds 
allocated to the Project Coordination Unit are estimated as USD 4.9 million, equal to 8% 
of the total cost. 
Table 1: Project cost by components (RWF ‘000 / USD ‘000) 
2 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (RWF '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 2,268,0112,159,9314,427,9412,3502,2384,5894982. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 15,962,83715,042,22731,005,06416,54215,58832,13049563. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 1,878,767691,9432,570,7101,9477172,664275Subtotal 20,109,61517,894,10038,003,71520,83918,54339,3824768B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 2,815,2912,519,5195,334,8102,9172,6115,52847102. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 2,206,4771,482,6313,689,1082,2871,5363,823407Subtotal 5,021,7684,002,1499,023,9185,2044,1479,3514416C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 957,859256,2081,214,0679932661,2582122. Sub component C.2: Project coordination 4,605,071-4,605,0714,772-4,772-83. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund 0-00-0--4. Sub component C.4: Unallocated 2,856,682-2,856,6822,960-2,960-5Subtotal 8,419,611256,2088,675,8198,7252668,990316Total BASELINE COSTS 33,550,99522,152,45755,703,45234,76822,95657,72440100Physical Contingencies 917,635843,3381,760,9749518741,825483Price Contingencies 4,327,5853,161,0007,488,5858536231,476423Total PROJECT COSTS 38,796,21526,156,79564,953,01036,57124,45361,02440106 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2: Project expenditure accounts by components (USD ‘000) 
Table 3: Financing Plan by Components (USD ‘000) 
Table 4: Financing Plan by Expenditure Accounts (USD ‘000) 
3 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Component A: Strengthening resilience toComponent B: Support to farmExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies droughtsbusiness development(US$ '000) Sub-componentComponent C: Institutional development andA.3:project coordinationSub-componentEnhancingSub-componentSub-componentSubSub-componentA.2:Climate SmartSub-componentB.2: SupportingC.1: PolicySubcomponentSubA.1: CatchmentInfrastructureAgricultureB.1: Developingbackward andandcomponentC.3:componentRehabilitationDevelopmentPractices andfarming as aforward marketinstitutionalC.2: ProjectEmergencyC.4:and Protectionand ManagementTechnologiesbusinesslinkagesdevelopmentcoordinationfundUnallocatedTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 25074189112,512547---4,646B. Grants and Subsidies ---4,330---0-4,330C. Goods Services & Inputs 715-1,069-641----2,425D. Training Workshops & Meetings 38-1,150143781758---2,870E. Civil Work 3,79834,708-------38,505F. Unallocated --------2,9602,960Total Investment Costs 4,80134,7152,6375,3843,9351,304-02,96055,736II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 61-----4,914--4,974B. Operating Costs /a 15-129170-----314Total Recurrent Costs 76-129170--4,914--5,288Total PROJECT COSTS 4,87734,7152,7655,5543,9351,3044,91402,96061,024  Taxes 8226,12242226256136---7,785Foreign Exchange 2,38116,8587442,6211,577273---24,453Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) (US$ '000)Components by Financiers BeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 1,12123.01,51531.12,17644.6------651.34,8778.02. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 6,12217.613,00037.415,16143.7------4321.234,71556.93. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 42215.31,04137.71,30147.1--------2,7654.5Subtotal 7,66618.115,55736.718,63844.0------4971.242,35769.4B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 260.594217.02,30241.43726.72664.81,64629.6--5,5549.12. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 2566.51,16929.72,12654.0--3849.7----3,9356.4Subtotal 2823.02,11122.24,42846.73723.96506.91,64617.3--9,48915.5C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 13610.545134.671755.0--------1,3042.12. Sub component C.2: Project coordination --2,25545.92,65954.1--------4,9148.13. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund --050.0050.0--------0-4. Sub component C.4: Unallocated --1,40347.41,55852.6--------2,9604.9Subtotal 1361.54,10844.84,93453.8--------9,17815.0Total PROJECT COSTS 8,08413.221,77635.728,00045.93720.66501.11,6462.74970.861,024100.0Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) (US$ '000)Expenditure Accounts by Financiers BeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 0-1,62034.92,45952.9--56612.2----4,6467.6B. Grants and Subsidies -0-73717.01,57536.43728.6--1,64638.0--4,3307.1C. Goods Services & Inputs 73630.31917.91,43459.1------652.72,4254.0D. Training Workshops & Meetings 51718.01,13739.61,13239.5--842.9----2,8704.7E. Civil Work 6,80617.714,26337.017,00544.2------4321.138,50563.1F. Unallocated --1,40347.41,55852.6--------2,9604.9Total Investment Costs 8,05814.519,35134.725,16245.13720.76501.21,6463.04970.955,73691.3II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances --2,25545.32,72054.7--------4,9748.2B. Operating Costs /a 268.317054.211837.6--------3140.5Total Recurrent Costs 260.52,42545.92,83853.7--------5,2888.7Total PROJECT COSTS 8,08413.221,77635.728,00045.93720.66501.11,6462.74970.861,024100.0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix A:  Summary Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1A:   Components Project Cost Summary (RWF ‘000 / USD ‘000) 
Table 2A:  Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (USD 
‘000) 
Table 2AA: Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (RWF 
‘000) 
Table 3A:   Project Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (RWF ‘000)  
Table 3AA: Project Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (USD ‘000)  
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (RWF ‘000) 
Table 4AA: Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (USD ‘000) 
Table 5A:   Project Components by Financiers (USD ‘000) 
Table 5AA: Project Components by Financiers (RWF ‘000)  
Table 6A:   Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (RWF ‘000) 
Table 6AA: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ‘000)   
4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1A:  Components Project Cost Summary (RWF ‘000 / USD ‘000) 
5 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (RWF '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 2,268,0112,159,9314,427,9412,3502,2384,5894982. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 15,962,83715,042,22731,005,06416,54215,58832,13049563. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 1,878,767691,9432,570,7101,9477172,664275Subtotal 20,109,61517,894,10038,003,71520,83918,54339,3824768B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 2,815,2912,519,5195,334,8102,9172,6115,52847102. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 2,206,4771,482,6313,689,1082,2871,5363,823407Subtotal 5,021,7684,002,1499,023,9185,2044,1479,3514416C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 957,859256,2081,214,0679932661,2582122. Sub component C.2: Project coordination 4,605,071-4,605,0714,772-4,772-83. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund 0-00-0--4. Sub component C.4: Unallocated 2,856,682-2,856,6822,960-2,960-5Subtotal 8,419,611256,2088,675,8198,7252668,990316Total BASELINE COSTS 33,550,99522,152,45755,703,45234,76822,95657,72440100Physical Contingencies 917,635843,3381,760,9749518741,825483Price Contingencies 4,327,5853,161,0007,488,5858536231,476423Total PROJECT COSTS 38,796,21526,156,79564,953,01036,57124,45361,02440106 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2A: Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (USD ‘000) 
6 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Component A: Strengthening resilience toComponent B: Support to farmExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies droughtsbusiness development(US$ '000) Sub-componentComponent C: Institutional development andA.3:project coordinationSub-componentEnhancingSub-componentSub-componentSubSub-componentA.2:Climate SmartSub-componentB.2: SupportingC.1: PolicySubcomponentSubA.1: CatchmentInfrastructureAgricultureB.1: Developingbackward andandcomponentC.3:componentRehabilitationDevelopmentPractices andfarming as aforward marketinstitutionalC.2: ProjectEmergencyC.4:and Protectionand ManagementTechnologiesbusinesslinkagesdevelopmentcoordinationfundUnallocatedTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 25074189112,512547---4,646B. Grants and Subsidies ---4,330---0-4,330C. Goods Services & Inputs 715-1,069-641----2,425D. Training Workshops & Meetings 38-1,150143781758---2,870E. Civil Work 3,79834,708-------38,505F. Unallocated --------2,9602,960Total Investment Costs 4,80134,7152,6375,3843,9351,304-02,96055,736II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 61-----4,914--4,974B. Operating Costs /a 15-129170-----314Total Recurrent Costs 76-129170--4,914--5,288Total PROJECT COSTS 4,87734,7152,7655,5543,9351,3044,91402,96061,024  Taxes 8226,12242226256136---7,785Foreign Exchange 2,38116,8587442,6211,577273---24,453 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (RWF ‘000) 
7 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Component A: Strengthening resilience toComponent B: Support to farmExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies droughtsbusiness development(RWF '000) Sub-componentComponent C: Institutional development andA.3:project coordinationSub-componentEnhancingSub-componentSub-componentSubSub-componentA.2:Climate SmartSub-componentB.2: SupportingC.1: PolicySubcomponentSubA.1: CatchmentInfrastructureAgricultureB.1: Developingbackward andandcomponentC.3:componentRehabilitationDevelopmentPractices andfarming as aforward marketinstitutionalC.2: ProjectEmergencyC.4:and Protectionand ManagementTechnologiesbusinesslinkagesdevelopmentcoordinationfundUnallocatedTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 256,4587,634437,597958,6432,655,793592,976---4,909,100B. Grants and Subsidies ---4,178,450---0-4,178,450C. Goods Services & Inputs 740,241-1,128,987-662,282----2,531,510D. Training Workshops & Meetings 40,021-1,192,056150,885820,236796,277---2,999,475E. Civil Work 3,983,25337,785,963-------41,769,216F. Unallocated --------2,856,6822,856,682Total Investment Costs 5,019,97337,793,5972,758,6405,287,9784,138,3111,389,253-02,856,68259,244,434II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 61,128-----5,331,700--5,392,828B. Operating Costs /a 15,134-136,565164,050-----315,748Total Recurrent Costs 76,262-136,565164,050--5,331,700--5,708,577Total PROJECT COSTS 5,096,23437,793,5972,895,2055,452,0284,138,3111,389,2535,331,70002,856,68264,953,010  Taxes 860,1576,666,317442,36927,159266,853143,330---8,406,186Foreign Exchange 2,489,97618,359,455783,2922,568,5461,659,038296,488---26,156,795 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 3A:  Project Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (RWF ‘000) 
8 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies Totals Including Contingencies (RWF '000)202120222023202420252026TotalA. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 965,3561,593,6621,410,030992,43789,24645,5035,096,2342. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 128,8438,308,1629,922,7288,566,9298,936,5201,930,41537,793,5973. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 470,716887,617935,530516,23559,35525,7532,895,205Subtotal 1,564,91610,789,44012,268,28810,075,6019,085,1202,001,67145,785,036B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 39,862697,5211,765,8802,003,065945,700-5,452,0282. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 640,8101,280,2991,161,718644,556402,5608,3704,138,311Subtotal 680,6711,977,8192,927,5982,647,6201,348,2608,3709,590,339C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 241,457301,845360,765267,26526,248191,6731,389,2532. Sub component C.2: Project coordination 896,949802,578842,707884,842929,085975,5395,331,7003. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund 0-----04. Sub component C.4: Unallocated 2,856,682-----2,856,682Subtotal 3,995,0881,104,4231,203,4721,152,108955,3331,167,2129,577,635Total PROJECT COSTS 6,240,67513,871,68316,399,35813,875,32911,388,7133,177,25264,953,010 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 3AA:  Project Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (USD ‘000) 
9 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)202120222023202420252026TotalA. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 9811,5581,32689778384,8772. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 1318,1209,3287,7477,7731,61534,7153. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 47886888046752222,765Subtotal 1,59010,54511,5349,1117,9031,67542,357B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 416961,7972,041980-5,5542. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 6511,2511,09258335073,935Subtotal 6921,9472,8892,6241,33079,489C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 245295339242231601,3042. Sub component C.2: Project coordination 9137847928008088164,9143. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund 0-----04. Sub component C.4: Unallocated 2,960-----2,960Subtotal 4,1181,0791,1311,0428319779,178Total PROJECT COSTS 6,40013,57115,55412,77710,0642,65861,024 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (RWF ‘000) 
10 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies Totals Including Contingencies (RWF '000)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 767,8731,389,6551,241,400950,941371,134188,0984,909,100B. Grants and Subsidies 0193,0001,379,9501,659,800945,700-4,178,450C. Goods Services & Inputs 430,299952,258728,470243,818117,43459,2322,531,510D. Training Workshops & Meetings 590,680883,808876,514538,22086,94723,3062,999,475E. Civil Work 653,3279,536,62211,239,3289,470,4488,938,4131,931,07741,769,216F. Unallocated 2,856,682-----2,856,682Total Investment Costs 5,298,86012,955,34215,465,66212,863,22810,459,6282,201,71459,244,434II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 920,688839,967842,707884,842929,085975,5395,392,828B. Operating Costs /a 21,12776,37490,989127,259--315,748Total Recurrent Costs 941,815916,341933,6961,012,102929,085975,5395,708,577Total PROJECT COSTS 6,240,67513,871,68316,399,35813,875,32911,388,7133,177,25264,953,010 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 4AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (USD ’000) 
11 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 7801,3581,1678603231574,646B. Grants and Subsidies 02001,4301,720980-4,330C. Goods Services & Inputs 437931685220102502,425D. Training Workshops & Meetings 60086482448776202,870E. Civil Work 6649,32110,5668,5647,7751,61638,505F. Unallocated 2,960-----2,960Total Investment Costs 5,44212,67314,67211,8519,2561,84255,736II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 9378217928008088164,974B. Operating Costs /a 217789126--314Total Recurrent Costs 9588988829268088165,288Total PROJECT COSTS 6,40013,57115,55412,77710,0642,65861,024 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 5A:  Project Components by Financiers (USD ‘000) 
12 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) (US$ '000)Components by Financiers BeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 1,12123.01,51531.12,17644.6------651.34,8778.02. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 6,12217.613,00037.415,16143.7------4321.234,71556.93. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 42215.31,04137.71,30147.1--------2,7654.5Subtotal 7,66618.115,55736.718,63844.0------4971.242,35769.4B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 260.594217.02,30241.43726.72664.81,64629.6--5,5549.12. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 2566.51,16929.72,12654.0--3849.7----3,9356.4Subtotal 2823.02,11122.24,42846.73723.96506.91,64617.3--9,48915.5C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 13610.545134.671755.0--------1,3042.12. Sub component C.2: Project coordination --2,25545.92,65954.1--------4,9148.13. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund --050.0050.0--------0-4. Sub component C.4: Unallocated --1,40347.41,55852.6--------2,9604.9Subtotal 1361.54,10844.84,93453.8--------9,17815.0Total PROJECT COSTS 8,08413.221,77635.728,00045.93720.66501.11,6462.74970.861,024100.0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 5AA:  Project Components by Financiers (RWF ’000) 
13 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) (RWF '000)Components by Financiers BeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 1,160,88322.81,606,13531.52,258,93144.3------70,2851.45,096,2347.82. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management 6,666,31717.613,976,92137.016,662,18344.1------488,1751.337,793,59758.23. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies 442,36915.31,082,86437.41,369,97147.3--------2,895,2054.5Subtotal 8,269,57018.116,665,92036.420,291,08644.3------558,4601.245,785,03670.5B. Component B: Support to farm business development 1. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business 27,1590.5911,84516.72,289,61642.0358,9806.6276,0375.11,588,39029.1--5,452,0288.42. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 266,8536.41,214,70529.42,260,24654.6--396,5079.6----4,138,3116.4Subtotal 294,0133.12,126,54922.24,549,86247.4358,9803.7672,5457.01,588,39016.6--9,590,33914.8C. Component C: Institutional development and project coordination 1. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 143,33010.3475,17234.2770,75255.5--------1,389,2532.12. Sub component C.2: Project coordination --2,443,83545.82,887,86554.2--------5,331,7008.23. Sub component C.3: Emergency fund --050.0050.0--------0-4. Sub component C.4: Unallocated --1,353,49647.41,503,18652.6--------2,856,6824.4Subtotal 143,3301.54,272,50344.65,161,80353.9--------9,577,63514.7Total PROJECT COSTS 8,706,91313.423,064,97235.530,002,75146.2358,9800.6672,5451.01,588,3902.4558,4600.964,953,010100.0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 6A:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (RWF ‘000) 
14 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) (RWF '000)Disbursement Accounts by Financiers BeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Technical assistance & Consultancies 0-1,692,70134.52,630,99053.7--578,97911.8----4,902,6717.5Grants and Subsidies -0-711,20517.01,519,87536.4358,9808.6--1,588,39038.0--4,178,4506.4Goods Services & Inputs 756,39929.9204,0198.11,500,80859.3------70,2852.82,531,5103.9Training Workshops and Meetings 539,90618.01,183,20039.41,189,23439.6--93,5653.1----3,005,9054.6Civil Work 7,383,30317.715,312,46636.718,585,27244.5------488,1751.241,769,21664.3Salaries and Allowances --2,443,83545.32,948,99354.7--------5,392,8288.3Operating Costs 27,3068.6164,05052.0124,39339.4--------315,7480.5Unallocated --1,353,49647.41,503,18652.6--------2,856,6824.4Total PROJECT COSTS 8,706,91313.423,064,97235.530,002,75146.2358,9800.6672,5451.01,588,3902.4558,4600.964,953,010100.0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 6AA:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ‘000) 
15 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2)(US$ '000)Disbursement Accounts by FinanciersBeneficiariesBeneficiariesThe GovernmentIFADGoSPrivate SectorICCO(in-cash)(in-kind)TotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Technical assistance & Consultancies0-1,61834.92,45953.0--56212.1----4,6397.6Grants and Subsidies-0-73717.01,57536.43728.6--1,64638.0--4,3307.1Goods Services & Inputs73630.31917.91,43459.1------652.72,4254.0Training Workshops and Meetings51718.01,13939.61,13239.4--883.1----2,8764.7Civil Work6,80617.714,26337.017,00544.2------4321.138,50563.1Salaries and Allowances--2,25545.32,72054.7--------4,9748.2Operating Costs268.317054.211837.6--------3140.5Unallocated--1,40347.41,55852.6--------2,9604.9Total PROJECT COSTS8,08413.221,77635.728,00045.93720.66501.11,6462.74970.861,024100.0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix B:   Detailed Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1B:  Catchment rehabilitation and protection (USD ‘000) 
Table 2B:   Infrastructure development and management (USD ‘000) 
Table 3B:  Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies (USD ‘000) 
Table 4B:   Developing farming as a business (USD ‘000) 
Table 5B:   Supporting backward and forward market linkages (USD ‘000) 
Table 6B:  Policy and institutional development (USD ‘000) 
Table 7B: Project coordination (USD ‘000) 
Table 8B: Emergency fund (USD ‘000) 
Table 9B: Unallocated (USD ‘000) 
16 
Table 1B: Catchment rehabilitation and protection (USD ‘000) (1/2) 
17 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 1. Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Rainfed water management zones Land husbandry activities in Kanyegenyege and Gishanda catchements /a Hectares-150250150--5501,500-239,806403,673244,626--888,104Land husbandary in 1400 ha command area catchement in Kibare, ihema and Nasho Hectares250500400250--1,4001,500395,719799,352645,876407,709--2,248,656Upstream protection for Gishanda and Kanyegenyege dam (reforestation) Hectares400500600500--2,000300126,630159,870193,763163,084--643,347Subtotal 522,3491,199,0281,243,312815,419--3,780,107B. Additional activities Community competition for Natural Resources Management Grant5101010105505,00025,62851,76852,28552,80853,33626,935262,759C. Overall Environmental and Social Management Plan Integrated Pest Management for all blocks Lumpsum1-----110,00010,050-----10,050Compensation for affected assets (e.g. properties due to irrigation, LH, PHI and access roads works) Lumpsum-1----11,000-1,035----1,035Implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanisms Lumpsum-1111-4500-518523528533-2,102Training of workers on occupational and health measures and adherence to them Training session1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Planting of native trees to replace the ones lost Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Irrigation water quality tests ( Level of biochemicals) no. of survey-1-1--22,500-2,538-2,589--5,126Adoption of adequate measures for controlling flow of downstream usage ( reparation of damages canals, structures and pipes) Lumpsum-3333-12420-1,3051,3181,3311,344-5,297Control of spread of water borne diseases (bi-annual survey in project sites) no. of surveys222222125001,0051,0151,0251,0351,0461,0566,183Establishment of warning signposts around Balancing Storage and public awareness Lumpsum1-----11,0001,025-----1,025Control of water pollution no. of surveys-1-1--22,500-2,538-2,589--5,126Regulation of water level/ flow no. of survey-1111-45,000-5,0755,1265,1775,229-20,608Capacity building of Grievance redress committees (GRCs) in every block and monitor GRM process training session-11---21,000-1,0351,046---2,081Mitigation of soil erosion no. of surveys-1111-4250-254256259261-1,030Subtotal 16,18115,3129,29413,5088,4141,05663,764D. Environment and social management plan for Nasho Preparation of Environmental management and Rehabilitation Plans for quarries, borrow pits and working areas Plans4-----42,0008,040-----8,040Preparation and Implementation of employment and recruitment Policy including code of conduct Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Provision for workers occupational health and safety hazards Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126First aid Kits and first aid helper will be provided at each working area Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Training of drivers and preparation of traffic management plan Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Sensitization on methods of HIV/AIDS prevention Session21----31,0002,0501,035----3,086Rapid identification survey of nesting habitats and relocation areas Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Preparation and implementation of borrow pits management plan Lumpsum1-----110,00010,050-----10,050Specific area restricted to only authorize personnel, should be allocated for fuel storage Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Alternative water points for livestock and domestic uses Lumpsum22----45,00010,25110,354----20,605Sensitization on the importance of wild animals protection and reporting mechanism Lumpsum-1111-4500-518523528533-2,102Sensitization of community on ownership, sustainability and vandalism of infrastructure Lumpsum-1111-41,000-1,0351,0461,0561,067-4,204Control of spread of water borne diseases (bi-annual survey in project sites) Lumpsum222222125001,0051,0151,0251,0351,0461,0566,183Provision of though for cattle in case of damages during the construction phase Lumpsum1-----15,0005,276-----5,276Control of water weeds (mechanical and manual removal of weeds) Lumpsum-111115500-5335385445495552,718Subtotal 55,04414,4903,1323,1633,1951,61180,635 
Table 1B: Catchment rehabilitation and protection (USD ‘000) (2/2) 
18 
E. Environment and social management plan for Kibare Preparation of Environmental management and Rehabilitation Plans for quarries, borrow pits and working areas Plans4-----42,0008,040-----8,040Preparation and Implementation of employment and recruitment Policy including code of conduct Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Provision for workers occupational health and safety hazards Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126First aid Kits and first aid helper will be provided at each working area Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Training of drivers and preparation of traffic management plan Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Sensitization on methods of HIV/AIDS prevention Session21----31,0002,0501,035----3,086Rapid identification survey of nesting habitats and relocation areas Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Preparation and implementation of borrow pits management plan Lumpsum1-----110,00010,050-----10,050Specific area restricted to only authorize personnel, should be allocated for fuel storage Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Alternative water points for livestock and domestic uses Lumpsum22----45,00010,25110,354----20,605Sensitization on the importance of wild animals protection and reporting mechanism Lumpsum-1111-4500-518523528533-2,102Sensitization of community on ownership, sustainability and vandalism of infrastructure Lumpsum-1111-41,000-1,0351,0461,0561,067-4,204Control of spread of water borne diseases (bi-annual survey in project sites) Lumpsum222222125001,0051,0151,0251,0351,0461,0566,183Provision of though for cattle in case of damages during the construction phase Lumpsum1-----15,0005,276-----5,276Control of water weeds (mechanical and manual removal of weeds) Lumpsum-1111-4500-533538544549-2,164Subtotal 55,04414,4903,1323,1633,1951,05680,080F. Environment and social management plan for Ihema Preparation of Environmental management and Rehabilitation Plans for quarries, borrow pits and working areas Plans4-----42,0008,040-----8,040Preparation and Implementation of employment and recruitment Policy including code of conduct Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Provision for workers occupational health and safety hazards Lumpsum1-----13,0003,075-----3,075First aid Kits and first aid helper will be provided at each working area Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Training of drivers and preparation of traffic management plan Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Sensitization on methods of HIV/AIDS prevention Session21----31,0002,0501,035----3,086Rapid identification survey of nesting habitats and relocation areas Lumpsum1-----12,0002,010-----2,010Preparation and implementation of borrow pits management plan Lumpsum1-----15,0005,025-----5,025Specific area restricted to only authorize personnel, should be allocated for fuel storage Lumpsum1-----12,0002,050-----2,050Sensitization on the importance of wild animals protection and reporting mechanism Lumpsum-1111-4500-518523528533-2,102Sensitization of community on ownership, sustainability and vandalism of infrastructure Lumpsum-1111-41,000-1,0351,0461,0561,067-4,204Control of spread of water borne diseases (bi-annual survey in project sites) Lumpsum222222125001,0051,0151,0251,0351,0461,0566,183Control of water weeds (mechanical and manual removal of weeds) Lumpsum-1111-4500-533538544549-2,164Subtotal 32,4414,1363,1323,1633,1951,05647,124G. Environment and Social Management Plan Kanyeganyege Overall allocation for the plan Lumpsum27,63820,3015,1262,5892,6152,64160,908H. Environment and Social Management Plan Gishanda Overall allocation for the plan Lumpsum27,63820,3015,1262,5892,6152,64160,908I. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) Compensation for the resettlement Lumpsum179,393181,1861,0461,0561,0671,077364,825Total Investment Costs 941,3531,521,0121,325,584897,45877,63038,0734,801,111II. Recurrent Costs A. Environment and social management plan for Nasho Environment, Social, Health Safety (ESHS) officer  to be contracted by the Contractor Person month1212----241,00012,06012,181----24,241Life insurance for all workers Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Subtotal 17,18612,181----29,366B. Environment and social management plan for Kibare Environment, Social, Health Safety (ESHS) officer  to be contracted by the Contractor Person month1212----241,00012,06012,181----24,241Life insurance for all workers Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Subtotal 17,18612,181----29,366C. Environment and social management plan for Ihema Environment, Social, Health Safety (ESHS) officer  to be contracted by the Contractor Person month-12----121,000-12,181----12,181Life insurance for all workers Lumpsum1-----15,0005,126-----5,126Subtotal 5,12612,181----17,306Total Recurrent Costs 39,49736,542----76,038Total 980,8501,557,5541,325,584897,45877,63038,0734,877,150 
Table 2B: Infrastructure development and management (USD ‘000) 
19 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 2. Sub-component A.2: Infrastructure Development and Management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Infrastructure development Civil works for Bulk Irrigation Infrastructure in Kibare, Ihema and Ndego) Hectares-500500505505-2,01010,120-5,392,9615,446,8905,556,3735,611,936-22,008,160In-field irrigation installation in Kibare, Ihema and Ndego Hectares--5005005055052,0102,400--1,291,7531,304,6701,330,8941,344,2035,271,520In-field irrigation installation in Kibare, Ihema and Ndego (benef. contribution) /a Hectares--5005005055052,010240--129,175130,467133,089134,420527,152Civil Works Kanyeganyege Dam and irrigation infrastructure (150ha) Hectares-7575---15012,000-959,222968,814---1,928,037Civil Works for Gishyanda Dam and irrigation infrastructure (125ha) Hectares-7550---12512,000-959,222645,876---1,605,099Subtotal -7,311,4058,482,5096,991,5107,075,9201,478,62331,339,967B. Supervision of works Supervision work for Nasho, Kibare and Ihema schemes /b Lumpsum-0.20.20.20.2-0.81,500,000-319,741322,938326,168329,429-1,298,276Supervision work for Kanyeganyege (10% of the investment cost) /c Lumpsum-0.20.20.20.20.21180,000-38,36938,75339,14039,53239,927195,720Supervision work for Gishanda (10% of the investment) /d Lumpsum-0.20.20.20.20.21150,000-31,97432,29432,61732,94333,272163,100International technical assistance (irrigation expert) Person month61212121266010,00060,300121,806123,024124,254125,49763,376618,257Subtotal 60,300511,890517,009522,179527,400136,5752,275,353C. Formation and capacity building scheme steering commitees Capacity building for Sector Steering Committes /a /e Lumpsum-11---210,000-10,35410,457---20,811Study tours person--1---12,500--2,614---2,614Subtotal -10,35413,071---23,425D. Formation and Strengthening of Sub-catchment committees Mapping of watersheds /f Lumpsum12,060-----12,060Watershed Management Plans /g Lumpsum45,225-----45,225Capacity building at watershed and district level People2020----4050010,25110,354----20,605Subtotal 67,53610,354----77,890E. Irrigation Water User Organisations Production of Manual on O&M schemes (pumped and dam schemes) Lumpsum--1---115,000--15,378---15,378Layout and printing of O&M manuals Lumpsum--1---114,000--14,640---14,640Production of training manual on O&M and IWUOs Lumpsum--1---17,000--7,176---7,176Organization of workshop at district level (IWUO and stakeholders) Workshop2111--51,5003,0751,5531,5691,584--7,781Training of trainers on IWLUO policy and IMTA Session---2--230,000---63,370--63,370Training of IWUO at scheme and sector levels Session-5555-2030,000-155,303156,856158,424160,008-630,591Support to IWUOs in legislation process Lumpsum---11-21,500---1,5531,569-3,122Support to IWUOs for publication of Official Gazette Lumpsum----1-11,000----1,046-1,046Followup of IWUO activities (training and support) Lumpsum-2222-83,500-7,2477,3207,3937,467-29,428Study tour people-4040---802,700-111,818112,936---224,754Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement Lumpsum---1--11,000---1,035--1,035Subtotal 3,075275,921315,875233,360170,090-998,321Total 130,9118,119,9239,328,4637,747,0497,773,4101,615,19834,714,955 
Table 3B: Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies (USD ‘000)  
20 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 3. Sub-component A.3: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Farmer Field School roll out 1. Preparatory phase Identification and validation of new FFS facilitators /a Lumpsum14,336-----14,336Update of existing FFS and facilitators training modules, translation and printing Lumpsum30,150-----30,150Facilitators refreshment trainings /b Session2-----27,67515,735-----15,735FFS facilitators training /c Session5-----546,055236,055-----236,055Study fields /d Field school41-----4170029,420-----29,420Subtotal 325,697-----325,6972. Implementation Preparatory meetings Meeting-200200150--550150-31,06131,37123,764--86,195FFS /e Field school-200200150--550700-144,949146,399110,897--402,245Visits and exchanges for FFS members Visit-30303020-110270-8,3868,4708,5555,760-31,172Bicycles /f Number-4930---79105-5,3273,294---8,621PICSA training Session-888950--2271,434-128,091130,84274,242--333,175Subtotal -317,814320,376217,4575,760-861,408Subtotal 325,697317,814320,376217,4575,760-1,187,105B. Farmer promoters and demostration plots Inputs and materials for RAB station trials covering Kayonza Lumpsum0.20.30.30.2--140,0008,20112,42412,5488,449--41,623Inputs and materials for cells trials No. of cells71013---306,00043,05462,12181,565---186,740Refreshment trainings  farmer promoters People9013085---30513312,27017,90111,822---41,993Exchanges and local visits /g Visit215103--302,1604,42833,54522,5876,844--67,405Subtotal 67,954125,992128,52215,293--337,761C. Support to sustainable mechanization TA international expertise /h Person day40151510--8050020,1007,6137,6895,177--40,579Support research and construction of best adapted tools /i Lumpsum0.50.5----150,00025,62825,884----51,511Trainings to young artisans /j Session143---810,00010,25141,41431,371---83,036Local exchanges and visits Lumpsum0.30.40.3---115,0004,6136,2124,706---15,531International exchange trainings for local ToT manufacturers /k Visit33----62,5007,6887,765----15,453Trainings to young service providers /l Session-453--1210,000-41,41452,28531,685--125,384Subtotal 68,280130,30296,05136,862--331,495D. Inputs for Farmers' initial support Improved seeds /m kg-14,40014,4009,600--38,40010-149,091150,581101,392--401,064Nutritious improved seeds, pilot /n kg-600600600--1,80015-9,3189,4119,505--28,235Fertilizers /o Lumpsum-0.40.40.10.1-1180,000-74,54575,29119,01119,201-188,048Improved  manual tools for women and most vulnerable Lumpsum per HHs2005001,0005005004003,1005010,25125,88452,28526,40426,66821,548163,040Subtotal 10,251258,838287,569156,31245,86921,548780,386Total Investment Costs 472,181832,946832,518425,92551,62921,5482,636,747II. Recurrent Costs A. Allowances FFS facilitators allowance /p Allowance.FFS-200200150--550124-25,67725,93319,645--71,255Inputs and allowance for FF and demostration plots /q Number90130305305--830666,0898,88321,05021,261--57,283Total Recurrent Costs 6,08934,56046,98440,905--128,538Total 478,271867,506879,502466,83051,62921,5482,765,285 
Table 4B: Developing farming as a business (USD ‘000) 
21 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 4. Sub-component B.1: Developing farming as a business Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Business Development Services Inception Workshop Lumpsum1-----16,5006,533-----6,533TA for preparing of Farming as a Business (Faab) curriculum Lumpsum1-----113,00013,065-----13,065BDSPs services for capacity building on FaaB, integrated to FFS sessions Lumpsum-600600600--1,800325-197,935199,914201,913--599,762Support to preparation of Business Plans Number80200200---48026020,90452,78353,310---126,997Subtotal 40,502250,717253,225201,913--746,357B. Capacity Building of Cooperatives Organizational development of existing cooperatives TA-50----502,600-131,957----131,957Support  TA for external relationships of cooperatives with IWUOs and FFS Session-505050--150650-33,64933,98534,325--101,960Exchange visits / study tours for cooperative leaders Person-150150---300130-20,18920,391---40,581Support to preparation of Business Plans Number-2525---50650-16,49516,660---33,154Subtotal -202,28971,03634,325--307,651C. Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies Cat. 1a Small Equipment Investments for individual men (>30) Lumpsum-20807070-2405,000-100,000400,000350,000350,000-1,200,000Cat. 1b Small Equipment Investments for individual women & youth (<30) Lumpsum-20807070-2405,000-100,000400,000350,000350,000-1,200,000Cat. 2 Cooperative microprojects on post-harvest management facilities Lumpsum--8107-2530,000--240,000300,000210,000-750,000Cat. 2 Option for agricultural insurance (one season only) Lumpsum--8107-2510,000--80,000100,00070,000-250,000Cat. 3 Joint-venture investments on storage/processing infrastructure Lumpsum--12--3300,000--300,000600,000--900,000Cat. 3 Option for agricultural insurance (one season only) Lumpsum--12--310,000--10,00020,000--30,000Subtotal -200,0001,430,0001,720,000980,000-4,330,000Total Investment Costs 40,502653,0071,754,2611,956,238980,000-5,384,007II. Recurrent Costs BDF grant management fee (about 7.35 % of total grants) Lumpsum-42,50042,50085,000--170,000Total Recurrent Costs -42,50042,50085,000--170,000Total 40,502695,5071,796,7612,041,238980,000-5,554,007 
Table 5B: Supporting backward and forward linkages market linkages (USD ‘000) (1/2) 
22 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 5. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Market Access Pre-season meetings for cooperatives Days-112112112112-448520-59,11759,70860,30560,908-240,037Participation in fairs/ shows Event-2222-85,200-10,76810,87510,98411,094-43,721Support coperatives in signing contracts Lumpsum1,307-----1,307Subtotal 1,30769,88470,58371,28972,002-285,064B. Facilitating Public Private Producers Partnerships Inception workshop Lumpsum6,663-----6,663Facilitation of 4Ps development Cooperative-5151510-452,600-13,19639,98340,38327,191-120,752Provision of advisory services to cooperatives Cooperative-5151510-456,500-32,98999,957100,95767,977-301,880Retrofiting workshop Lumpsum6,6636,7306,7976,8656,9347,00340,992Subtotal 13,32652,915146,737148,204102,1027,003470,287C. Access to Finance 1. Selection of Partner Financial Institutions Workshop and communication: Call for EoIs Lumpsum11----213,00013,32613,460----26,786Assessment and due diligence of candidate PFIs Person day2020----4052010,45210,557----21,009Assessment and due diligence of candidate PFIs Person day1010----205205,2265,278----10,504TA for development of PFI workplans Person day5050----10052026,13026,391----52,521Subtotal 55,13455,686----110,8202. Develop tailored agrifinance products of PFIs TA for MFI product development Person day100100100---30052052,26052,78353,310---158,353TA for SACCO product development Person day100100100---30052052,26052,78353,310---158,353TA for MFI product development Person day404040---12052020,90421,11321,324---63,341TA for SACCO product development Person day404040---12052020,90421,11321,324---63,341Subtotal 146,328147,791149,269---443,3883. Strengthen Kayonza local services by PFIs TA for MFI district branches Person day8080808080-40052041,80842,22642,64843,07543,506-213,263TA for SACCOs in Kayonza Person day8080808080-40052041,80842,22642,64843,07543,506-213,263TA for MFI district branches Person day40404040--16052020,90421,11321,32421,537--84,879TA for SACCOs in Kayonza Person day40404040--16052020,90421,11321,32421,537--84,879ICT4D solutions support for the PFIs Lumpsum-33---665,000-201,893203,912---405,806Setting up of targeted banking agents Lumpsum122---519,50019,98940,37940,782---101,151Subtotal 145,413368,950372,640129,22487,011-1,103,2394. Conduct financial literacy trainings (FLT) Development and production of FLT manual Person day20-----2052010,452-----10,452Production and printing of the FLT manual Lumpsum33,316-----33,316FLT TOTs Lumpsum333---99,75029,98430,28430,587---90,855FLT TOTs Person day151515---455207,8397,9177,997---23,753FLT Trainings of smallholders Lumpsum2575757525-27565016,65850,47350,97851,48817,334-186,931FLT Trainings of smallholders Person day100300300300100-1,10026026,13079,17479,96680,76527,191-293,226Subtotal 124,379167,849169,527132,25344,525-638,5335. Facilitate PFI access to credit lines MFI access to credit lines workshop Lumpsum-11---213,000-13,46013,594---27,054MFI access to credit lines coaching Person day-2020---40520-10,55710,662---21,219SACCO acess to credit lines workshop Lumpsum-6,7306,797---13,527SACCO access to credit lines coaching Person day-2020---40520-10,55710,662---21,219Subtotal -41,30241,715---83,018Subtotal 471,255781,578733,152261,478131,536-2,378,999D. Improved access to agricultural insurance 1. Farmer agricultural insurance literacy Adjustment of training of trainers manual Lumpsum2-----213,00026,130-----26,130Production and printing of manuals Lumpsum33,316-----33,316Training of trainers Session2411--813,00026,65353,83813,59413,730--107,815Training of farmers Session2550505025-20065016,65833,64933,98534,32517,334-135,952Training of farmers Person day100200200200100-80026026,13052,78353,31053,84427,191-213,258Subtotal 128,886140,270100,890101,89944,525-516,4702. Awareness raising campaigns and materials Development of materials Lumpsum-65,978----65,978Dissemination Lumpsum-67,298----67,298Subtotal -133,276----133,2763. NAIS stakeholder capacity building Training development /a Lumpsum0.51----1.532,50016,33132,989----49,320Training delivery /b Session122---519,50019,98940,37940,782---101,151Subtotal 36,32173,36840,782---150,471Subtotal 165,207346,914141,672101,89944,525-800,217Total 651,0941,251,2911,092,144582,870350,1657,0033,934,567 
Table 5B: Supporting backward and forward linkages market linkages (USD ‘000) (2/2) 
23 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 5. Sub-component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Market Access Pre-season meetings for cooperatives Days-112112112112-448520-59,11759,70860,30560,908-240,037Participation in fairs/ shows Event-2222-85,200-10,76810,87510,98411,094-43,721Support coperatives in signing contracts Lumpsum1,307-----1,307Subtotal 1,30769,88470,58371,28972,002-285,064B. Facilitating Public Private Producers Partnerships Inception workshop Lumpsum6,663-----6,663Facilitation of 4Ps development Cooperative-5151510-452,600-13,19639,98340,38327,191-120,752Provision of advisory services to cooperatives Cooperative-5151510-456,500-32,98999,957100,95767,977-301,880Retrofiting workshop Lumpsum6,6636,7306,7976,8656,9347,00340,992Subtotal 13,32652,915146,737148,204102,1027,003470,287C. Access to Finance 1. Selection of Partner Financial Institutions Workshop and communication: Call for EoIs Lumpsum11----213,00013,32613,460----26,786Assessment and due diligence of candidate PFIs Person day2020----4052010,45210,557----21,009Assessment and due diligence of candidate PFIs Person day1010----205205,2265,278----10,504TA for development of PFI workplans Person day5050----10052026,13026,391----52,521Subtotal 55,13455,686----110,8202. Develop tailored agrifinance products of PFIs TA for MFI product development Person day100100100---30052052,26052,78353,310---158,353TA for SACCO product development Person day100100100---30052052,26052,78353,310---158,353TA for MFI product development Person day404040---12052020,90421,11321,324---63,341TA for SACCO product development Person day404040---12052020,90421,11321,324---63,341Subtotal 146,328147,791149,269---443,3883. Strengthen Kayonza local services by PFIs TA for MFI district branches Person day8080808080-40052041,80842,22642,64843,07543,506-213,263TA for SACCOs in Kayonza Person day8080808080-40052041,80842,22642,64843,07543,506-213,263TA for MFI district branches Person day40404040--16052020,90421,11321,32421,537--84,879TA for SACCOs in Kayonza Person day40404040--16052020,90421,11321,32421,537--84,879ICT4D solutions support for the PFIs Lumpsum-33---665,000-201,893203,912---405,806Setting up of targeted banking agents Lumpsum122---519,50019,98940,37940,782---101,151Subtotal 145,413368,950372,640129,22487,011-1,103,2394. Conduct financial literacy trainings (FLT) Development and production of FLT manual Person day20-----2052010,452-----10,452Production and printing of the FLT manual Lumpsum33,316-----33,316FLT TOTs Lumpsum333---99,75029,98430,28430,587---90,855FLT TOTs Person day151515---455207,8397,9177,997---23,753FLT Trainings of smallholders Lumpsum2575757525-27565016,65850,47350,97851,48817,334-186,931FLT Trainings of smallholders Person day100300300300100-1,10026026,13079,17479,96680,76527,191-293,226Subtotal 124,379167,849169,527132,25344,525-638,5335. Facilitate PFI access to credit lines MFI access to credit lines workshop Lumpsum-11---213,000-13,46013,594---27,054MFI access to credit lines coaching Person day-2020---40520-10,55710,662---21,219SACCO acess to credit lines workshop Lumpsum-6,7306,797---13,527SACCO access to credit lines coaching Person day-2020---40520-10,55710,662---21,219Subtotal -41,30241,715---83,018Subtotal 471,255781,578733,152261,478131,536-2,378,999D. Improved access to agricultural insurance 1. Farmer agricultural insurance literacy Adjustment of training of trainers manual Lumpsum2-----213,00026,130-----26,130Production and printing of manuals Lumpsum33,316-----33,316Training of trainers Session2411--813,00026,65353,83813,59413,730--107,815Training of farmers Session2550505025-20065016,65833,64933,98534,32517,334-135,952Training of farmers Person day100200200200100-80026026,13052,78353,31053,84427,191-213,258Subtotal 128,886140,270100,890101,89944,525-516,4702. Awareness raising campaigns and materials Development of materials Lumpsum-65,978----65,978Dissemination Lumpsum-67,298----67,298Subtotal -133,276----133,2763. NAIS stakeholder capacity building Training development /a Lumpsum0.51----1.532,50016,33132,989----49,320Training delivery /b Session122---519,50019,98940,37940,782---101,151Subtotal 36,32173,36840,782---150,471Subtotal 165,207346,914141,672101,89944,525-800,217Total 651,0941,251,2911,092,144582,870350,1657,0033,934,567 
Table 6B: Policy and institutional development (USD ‘000) 
24 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 6. Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Policy support and implementation 1. Studies Start-up workshop Session1-----125,00025,628-----25,628Baseline study Studies1-----16,0006,030-----6,030Endline study (impact assessment) Studies-----1180,000-----84,50184,501Policy assesment and regulation studies /a Studies33----625,00075,37576,129----151,504Agricultural insurance studies /b Studies--11--280,000--82,01682,836--164,852Nutrition studies for baseline and completion (MDD-W) Studies1----1225,00025,125----26,40751,532Endline study on gender Studies-----1125,000-----26,40726,407External audit Lumpsum222222125,00010,05010,15110,25210,35510,45810,56361,828Subtotal 142,20886,27992,26893,19110,458147,877572,2812. Support to multistakeholder dialogue Forums and workshops for policy dialogue Lumpsum0.20.30.30.2--1150,00030,75346,59147,05731,685--156,085Study tour international /c People--15---152,500--39,214---39,214Support dialogue and advocacy for Cooperatives unions of Kayonza and National level Federations /d Lumpsum-0.40.40.2--1100,000-41,41441,82821,123--104,365Support dialogue and advocacy for WUO and WLUOs Lumpsum0.30.30.30.1--1100,00030,75331,06131,37110,562--103,746Gender learning and sharing events (multi stakeholder coordination) Lumpsum2,8702,8992,9282,9572,9873,01717,658Nutrition multi stakeholder coordination Lumpsum2,8702,8992,9282,9572,9873,01717,658Subtotal 67,247124,863165,32669,2845,9746,033438,727Subtotal 209,454211,143257,594162,47516,432153,9111,011,008B. Institutional Streghtening 1. RAB and district staff capacity building on identified needs Needs assessment of capacity building Lumpsum5,126-----5,126Diverse trainings of RAB national level staff /e Lumpsum0.20.30.20.3--190,00018,45227,95418,82328,516--93,745Diverse trainings of district decentralized staff /f Lumpsum0.20.30.30.2--160,00012,30118,63618,82312,674--62,434International exchanges of RAB and decentralized staff /g Lumpsum-343--106,000-18,63625,09719,011--62,744National exchanges for government staff /h Lumpsum-3030301010110600-18,63618,82319,0116,4006,46469,335Subtotal 35,87983,86381,56579,2126,4006,464293,384Total 245,333295,006339,159241,68722,832160,3751,304,391 
Table 7B: Project coordination (USD ‘000) 
25 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 7. Sub component C.2: Project coordination UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. New staff 1. Central Level Program Manager Person month121212121212722,81933,99734,33734,68035,02735,37835,731209,151Irrigation Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Climate and Environment Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Civil Engineering Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Cooperative Development Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Social Safeguard and Compliance Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Access to Finance Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Accountant Person month121212121212722,14825,90526,16426,42626,69026,95727,226159,367Procurement Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251M&E Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Drivers Person month36363636363621640314,58114,72614,87415,02215,17315,32489,700Subtotal 307,578310,654313,761316,898320,067323,2681,892,2262. District Level Watershed Management Officer Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Value Chain Development/Agribusiness Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Electromechanical Engineering Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Senior Agronomist and FFS Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Land Husbandry Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Accountant for KIIWP transaction at District Person month121212121212722,14825,90526,16426,42626,69026,95727,226159,367Irrigation Technicians /a Person month2424242424241442,41658,27458,85759,44560,04060,64061,246358,502Water Users’ Association Officer Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Horticulture Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist Person month121212121212722,41629,13729,42829,72330,02030,32030,623179,251Subtotal 317,274320,447323,652326,888330,157333,4591,951,877Subtotal 624,853631,101637,412643,786650,224656,7263,844,103B. Shared SPIU Staff Coordinator of SPIU Person month644444263,89323,47515,80615,96416,12416,28516,448104,103Head of Finance Person month644444263,22119,42313,07813,20913,34113,47413,60986,133Head of Procurement Person month644444263,22119,42313,07813,20913,34113,47413,60986,133Head of M&E Person month644444263,22119,42313,07813,20913,34113,47413,60986,133Chief accountant Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606Access to finance specialist Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606Gender Specialist Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606Administration and logistic specialist Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606Knowledge management officer Person month644444262,55015,37710,35410,45710,56210,66710,77468,190Information technology officer Person month644444261,6119,7146,5416,6066,6726,7396,80743,080Internal auditer Person month644444262,14812,9528,7218,8098,8978,9869,07557,440Administration officer Person month644444268054,8543,2683,3013,3343,3673,40121,527Administrative assistant Person month644444268054,8543,2683,3013,3343,3673,40121,527Messenger Person month644444261731,0437027097177247314,626Procurement Assistant Person month644444261,6119,7146,5416,6066,6726,7396,80743,080Nutrition specialist Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606GIS Specialist Person month644444262,41614,5689,8099,90810,00710,10710,20864,606Allowance for satellite imagery acquisition and analysis Lumpsum60,000-----60,000Subtotal 287,663153,293154,826156,374157,938159,5171,069,610Total 912,515784,394792,238800,160808,162816,2444,913,714 
Table 8B: Emergency fund (USD ‘000) 
Table 9B: Unallocated (USD ‘000) 
26 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 8. Sub-component C.3: Emergency Fund Detailed Costs UnitQuantitiesCostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Emergency Fund Emergency fund Lumpsum0-----0Total 0-----0Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Table 9. Sub-component C.4: Unallocated UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$)Unit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Unallocated Unallocated Lumpsum2,960,292-----2,960,292Total 2,960,292-----2,960,292 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 4: 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
A. 
Introduction 
The KIIWP2 project is expected to generate substantial benefits for rural households 
1. 
and communities living in the project area. KIIWP2 interventions are aimed at: i) boosting 
agriculture  production  and  productivity  thorough  increased  access  to  water,  technical 
assistance  and  inputs;  ii)  diversifying  productive  activities  for  rural  poor,  iii)  increasing 
farmers resilience by strengthening adaptation to climate change, iv) facilitating access to 
finance;  v)  promoting  entrepreneurship  and  value-addition  in  agriculture,  vi)  reducing 
post-harvest losses; and vii) improving food and nutrition security. 
The economic and financial analysis (EFA) of KIIWP2 accounts for benefits and costs 
2. 
directly  linked  to  the  above  mentioned  interventions.  The  target  group  is  expected  to 
experience increase in income as a direct result of the: (i) increased water availability for 
productive use; (ii) diversification of productive activities and sources of income thanks to 
greater access to technical assistance and inputs; (iii) increased food availability for rural 
poor, (iv) increased value-added of agricultural outputs; (v) enhanced productivity through 
improved  infrastructure;  (vi)  improved  quality  of  processed  products,  thus  attracting 
higher prices at local market; (vii) increased employment opportunity either for hired or 
family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; and (viii) tax revenues as a result 
of increased volume of taxable production.  
Increase  in  income  would  be  largely  dependent  on  rural  household  and  rural 
3. 
communities  adopting  improved  technologies  which  the  project  will  promote  through 
technical  assistance  and  infrastructure  investments.  The  project  will  also  aim  at 
strengthening  marketing  linkages  and  creating  a  favourable  economic  environment  for 
farmers/rural community to produce more competitive products and expand production. 
Due  to  the  current  COVID-19  pandemic,  this  EFA  was  prepared  remotely.  The 
4. 
analysis  made  use  of  indicative  crop,  activity  and  farm  models  to  assess  the  economic 
viability of KIIWP2. The EFA builds upon the precautionary principle, accounting for project 
benefits in a realistic and conservative manner. A cash-flow analysis is finally carried out 
to present the “with” and “without” project analysis. The key-indicators used to carry out 
the analysis are Net Present Values (NPVs), Financial and Economic Internal Rate of Return 
(FIRR  -  EIRR),  Benefit-cost  ratio  (BCR).  The  EFA  is  formulated  by  using  the  newly 
developed IFAD-FARMOD software (v. 5.03).  
B. Family farming in Rwanda 
The agricultural sector in Rwanda is particularly relevant and contributes to a large 
5. 
extend  to  the  welfare  and  food  security  of  its  rural  population.  According  to  the  WFP 
(2018)1,  albeit  contributing  to  about  31  percent  of  Rwanda  GDP,  agriculture  is 
characterized by small-scale, subsistence, rain-fed farming. At national level, the average 
landholding size is 0.6 ha often divided into three to four sub-plots. About 50 percent of 
farmers  cultivate  less  than  0.35  ha  and  15  percent  farm  less  than  0.1  ha.  On  average, 
each rural household cultivate around 3.2 crops per plot. 
1 Comprehensive food security and vulnerability analysis (2018) – World Food Programme  
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Land holdings and production vary substantially in each district and they are largely 
6. 
dependent  on  agro-ecological  features  as  well  as  population  size.  Difference  in  land 
productivity and crop yields across districts can be remarkable and would largely depend 
on soil fertility, altitude and climate. Farming characteristics within the project target area 
of  Ndego,  in  the  Kayonza  district,  differ  substantially  from  national  averages.  The 
agricultural  census  (2020)2  reports  main  crops  and  total  acreage  by  district.  The  graph 
below summarizes the key crops by season in Kayonza.   
Figure 1: Crop relevance by season (percentage share of total area cropped) in Kayonza 
Source: Own elaboration based on data from the upgraded season agricultural report 2020 of NISR 
At  national  level,  mixed  farming  is  the  most  frequent  production  systems.  Crop 
7. 
production and livestock rearing are carried out simultaneously to sustain household food 
and cash needs. Rwanda is characterized by three cropping seasons (A, B and C), but in 
Kayonza district season C is often not seized given the lack of rain and consequent aridity. 
Rotation of staple annual crops follows the general calendar provided in  figure 2 below. 
For  lower  income  households,  small  livestock  (goats,  sheep  and  chicken)  is  normally 
preferred  to  larger  animals  (i.e.  buffalo  and  cows),  given  the  lower  cash  requirement 
involved. It is in the eastern province where goats and chicken are more frequently raised 
(by  64.8  percent  and  49.5  percent  of  households  respectively)3.  According  to  the  WFP 
(2018),  the  most  common  income-generating  activity  is  agricultural  production  on  the 
household’s own farm (practiced by 56 percent of households) and daily labour agricultural 
work  (16  percent).  Livestock  raising  was  mainly  practiced  as  a  second  activity  (for  25 
percent of households) or a third activity (47 percent of households). 
2 Upgraded seasonal agricultural census 2020 – National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda 
3 Comprehensive food security and vulnerability analysis (2018) – World Food Programme  
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 2: Seasonal agricultural calendar for Rwanda
Source: USAID - FEWS NET (left) and FAO.GIEWS (right) 
C. Methodology, data and assumptions 
Financial analysis. The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the 
8. 
financial  viability  and  incentives  for  the  project  target  group  as  a  result  of  their 
engagement in project activities, and hence to determine the economic impact on family 
labour, cash flow and household incomes. A number of indicative economic activities to be 
supported by the project were identified during the design mission and are presented in 
the table below.  
Table 1: Key commodity considered in the EFA 
Cereals 
Grain legumes 
Vegetables 
Roots and 
tubers 
Fruit 
Livestock 
Maize 
French beans 
Tomatoes 
Cassava 
Banana 
Chicken 
Sorghum 
Common beans 
Onions 
Sweet Potato 
Avocado 
Goat 
Millet 
Wheat 
Soya beans 
Watermelon 
Irish potato 
Papaya 
Sweet pepper 
Tree tomato 
These  production  models  are  used  as  building  blocks  for  the  elaboration  of  six 
9. 
household/farm models where differentiation is made both in terms of cultivation patterns, 
land holding, source of income, production systems and poverty level. In particular, the 
analysis employs the Ubudehe categorization system adopted by the Rwandan government 
to differentiate households according to their income levels  – where Ubudehe 1 denotes 
the poorest category and Ubudehe 4 the wealthiest.   
Table 2: Key characteristics of farm/household models 
Code 
Model 
Ha 
Crops 
Livestock 
CAT1 A - UB1 
CAT1 B - UB1 
Crop-farming 
(very small) 
Crop-farming 
(very small) 
CAT1 A - UB2 
Mixed-farming 
(small) 
0.2 
0.2 
0.4 
Project 
interventions 
1) Farmer Field 
School, 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato 
Chicken 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato 
Chicken 
2) Seeds and 
fertilizers starting kit, 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato, tomato 
Chicken, 
Goat 
3) Training on CSA 
practices, 
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
CAT1 B - UB2 
CAT1 A - UB3 
CAT1 B – UB3 
Mixed-farming 
(small) 
Mixed-farming 
(medium) 
Mixed-farming 
(medium) 
0.4 
0.6 
0.6 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato, tomato 
Chicken, 
Goat 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato, banana 
Maize, Beans, Irish 
potato, banana 
Chicken, 
Goat 
Chicken, 
Goat 
4) Grant financing 
cat. 1 (50% project 
and 50% own) 
cat.2 (70% project 
and 30% own) 
10.  The  economic  evaluation  of  the  entire  project  is  based  on  the  aggregated  net 
incremental benefits  of  the target population.  In order to include both on- and off-farm 
benefits in the EFA, other economic models were considered. Key characteristics for each 
model are summarized in the table below. 
Table 3: Key characteristics of additional economic models 
Model 
Unit/scope 
Crops 
Key benefits 
Project interventions 
Cooperative 
post/harvest 
storage facility  
600 sq.mt / 
drying, 
sorting and 
storing 
Cereals, pulses and 
vegetables 
Fees for renting 
drying and 
storage facility 
space to 
cooperative 
members 
Joint venture 
cooperative 
and private 
sector 
Kibare 
irrigation 
system  
Ihema 
irrigation 
system 
Nasho irrigation 
system 
Kanyeganyenge 
Dam and 
Irrigation 
Scheme 
Gishanda Dam 
and Irrigation 
Scheme 
Maize flour 
mill 
Maize 
Revenues from 
sales 
570 ha 
700 ha 
740 ha  
150 ha 
125 ha 
Maize, beans, 
sorghum, cassava, 
soybeans, French 
beans, Irish potatoes, 
Tomatoes, onions, 
sweet pepper 
watermelon, bananas, 
avocado 
Increase in crops, 
vegetables and 
fruit production 
and productivity 
Grant financing (50% 
project – 50% 
cooperatives) 
Grant financing (40% 
project – 20% 
cooperatives – 40% 
private sector) 
Construction of pumped 
irrigation systems and 
installation of central 
pivots or sprinkler 
irrigation outlets  
Construction of dams 
and irrigation 
infrastructure 
11.  All the technical assumptions considered in the models were sourced from national 
agricultural  surveys  and  statistics,  technical  studies  and  reports.  The  diagram  in  figure 
2Error! Reference source not found. provides a logical sketch of the adopted approach 
while summary results from the financial models are presented in table 4. 
4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 4: Summary of financial models' results 
Before financing 
After financing 
MODELS 
CAT1 A - UB1 
CAT1 B - UB1 
CAT1 A - UB2 
CAT1 B - UB2 
NPV (‘000 
Rwf) @ 
11% 
(250) 
(200) 
624 
624 
IRRf 
7% 
8% 
B/C 
ratio 
0.86 
0.90 
NPV (‘000 
Rwf) @ 
11% 
IRRf 
B/C 
ratio 
311 
488 
44% 
1.14 
n/a4 
1.22 
16% 
1.14 
1,748 
16% 
1.14 
2,000 
CAT1 A - UB3 
1,335 
18% 
1.20 
3,028 
CAT1 B – UB3 
1,335 
18% 
1.20 
3,404 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.35 
1.42 
1.39 
1.46 
Cooperative post/harvest 
storage facility 
Joint venture cooperative and 
private sector 
6,161 
14% 
1.17 
22,863 
n/a 
1.50 
4,565,967 
n/a 
1.76 
4,708,095 
n/a 
1.78 
4 There are instances in which the IRR values could not be mathematically computed. Those instances relate to a 
mathematical condition which requires cash flows to change sign – from negative to positive values or vice versa – at 
least once during the calculation timeframe. In the after financing scenario, deficits in cash flows are fully offset thanks 
to the accounting of grant and credit inflows, hence the mathematical condition above is not met.      
5 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 3: EFA diagram 
12.  Programme  target  group  and  beneficiaries.  The  primary  target  group  for  the 
Programme will be smallholder farmers  - particularly women and  youth.  It is estimated 
that the number of direct beneficiaries will be 40,000 HHs. The aggregation for production 
models  is  based  on  the  number  of  HHs  directly  engaged  in  the  activity,  the  number  of 
hectares  brought  into  the  new  production  systems  or  the  number  of  infrastructures 
rehabilitated or newly established.  
13.  Overall the project will benefits women, youth and men directly involved in farm and 
off-farm activities proposed by the project as well as indirect beneficiaries benefitting from 
the  use  of  common  goods  and  public  infrastructures.  The  inclusion  pattern  of  the  EFA 
modes  and  beneficiary  is  based  on  the  roll  out  of  the  infrastructure  investment  and 
rehabilitation works and aligned to the phasing described in the costab. 
14.  Key assumptions. The following sources of information gathered during the design 
mission have been used to set up the analysis: a) National statistics and survey data from 
the National Institute of statistics of Rwanda; b) International statistics from FAOSTAT and 
VAM-WFP, c) Research papers, d) technical reports; e) past country/programme evaluation 
reports, and e) own estimates. In particular, information on labour and input requirements 
for various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, yields, farm gate and market prices 
of  commodities,  input  and  farm-to-market  transport  costs  were  updated  from  previous 
from similar past investments in the country. Country data and information from the WFP 
6 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
VAM  platform,  the  E-SOKO  platform  from  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  FAO  price  tool 
were also used for data validation. Conservative assumptions were made for inputs and 
outputs, and do take account of possible risks.  
15.  Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 USD = 965 RWF 
computed as the average exchange rate prevailing during the design mission.  
16.  Numeraire and Prices. The adopted numeraire for the EFA is the domestic price level 
expressed  in  local  currency  unit.  The  financial  prices  for  project  inputs  and  products 
represent  average  farm-gate  and  market  prices  prevailing  in  March  2021.  Prices  used 
represent estimates of the average seasonal prices and the analysis is carried out using 
nominal constant prices.  
Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It has 
17. 
been assumed that farm labour is provided by the households and is valued at RWF 800 
day-1. Hired labour (skilled) is priced at RWF 1,000 day-1, which is the prevailing market 
rate for on-farm and off-farm activities. In the HHs models that follow, family labour is the 
main source of workforce. Labour inputs requirements are affected by land size and varies 
from 79 working days (Ubudehe 1 – 0.2 ha) to 445 working days (Ubudehe 3 – 0.6 ha). 
The increase in labour demand induced by the project is equal to 64% on average, across 
the HHs models presented.         
18.  Opportunity  cost  of  capital.  A  discount  rate  of  11  per  cent  has  been  used  in  the 
financial analysis to assess the viability and robustness of the investments. The values is 
calculated as the average of lending, discount and money market interest rates provided 
in the table below.  In the economic analysis this value is reduced to 8 per cent consistently 
with data on real interest rates, Treasury bill yield rates, money market rates and the risk 
profile of the economy. 
Table 5: Latest available data series on interest rates (data in percentage values) 
Real interest rate  
Lending interest rate  
Discount interest 
rate 
Money market 
interest rate 
Treasury bill rate 
2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019 
14 
12 
17 
17 
18 
17 
17 
17 
9 
17 
9 
17 
11 
17 
13 
17 
8 
17 
12 
17 
14 
17 
12 
10 
11 
12 
11 
11 
11 
10 
10 
10 
9 
1 
7 
6 
7 
6 
9 
9 
9 
9 
6 
4 
4 
3 
6 
6 
6 
7 
6 
5 
9 
5 
5 
Source: International financial statistics - IFS country data retrieved on March 2021 
D. Households models and basic assumptions 
19.  Several farm/households models were elaborated to determine the financial viability 
of the proposed interventions and to analyse the potential change in income the project 
may  enable.  The  underlying  assumption  is  that,  thanks  to  investment  in  infrastructure, 
increased access to inputs, water or water saving technologies, small farming equipment 
and technical assistance, project beneficiaries will be able to increase production, reclaim 
and rehabilitate farm land and engage in new farming practices. Tables below shows the 
key  assumptions  concerning  cropping  patters  and  farm  income  composition  based  on 
landholding and activities. Increase in livestock productivity (20% increase for chicken and 
7 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
27% increase for goat) relates to access to inputs (vaccination, better feed and water) and 
increase in animal keeping standards. Finally, self-consumption of agriculture produce is 
accounted for and equivalent to 30% of the total production.  
Table 6: Assumptions related to HHs models 
Model 
hectares  Maize 
Beans 
Potato  Tomato  Banana 
Cropping 
intensity 
SHARE OF CROPS ON TOTAL CULTIVATED AREA 
CAT1 A & B - UB1 
CAT1 A & B - UB2 
CAT1 A & B - UB3 
CAT1 A & B - UB1 
CAT1 A & B - UB2 
CAT1 A & B - UB3 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Wop 
45% 
45% 
18% 
- 
45% 
45% 
18% 
41% 
- 
- 
108% 
149% 
42% 
42% 
17% 
33% 
33% 
167% 
WP 
50% 
50% 
44% 
- 
50% 
50% 
25% 
51% 
- 
- 
144% 
176% 
50% 
50% 
20% 
47% 
33% 
200% 
Table 7: Relevance of crop/activity to formation of gross revenue 
Model 
Maize 
Beans 
Potato 
Tomato  Banana  Chicken  Goat 
Total 
Contribution to gross revenues 
CAT1 A & B - UB1 
33% 
25% 
25% 
- 
Wop 
CAT1 A & B - UB2 
CAT1 A & B - UB3 
9% 
7% 
6% 
5% 
6% 
5% 
CAT1 A & B - UB1 
22% 
29% 
42% 
42% 
30% 
WP 
- 
- 
- 
28% 
17% 
4% 
5% 
100% 
33% 
100% 
20% 
100% 
CAT1 A & B - UB2 
CAT1 A & B - UB3 
9% 
8% 
12% 
10% 
40% 
11% 
7% 
33% 
22% 
- 
- 
7% 
3% 
4% 
100% 
26% 
100% 
15% 
100% 
Furthermore, the analysis takes into account climate change effects and impacts on 
20. 
crop yields. Several technical reports and climate models were analysed to consider robust 
assumption on projected yields. In particular, Austin et al.5 have identified the potential 
responses of 11 staple crop yields to projected changes in temperature and precipitation 
in Rwanda, using a cross sectional model based on yield data collected across more than 
14,000 villages. In detail, they estimated that future climate change will have the largest 
impacts on potential productivity of maize, bush bean, and Irish potato. All three crops are 
likely to experience a reduction in potential yields of at least 10% under Representative 
Concentration  Pathway  (RCP)  4.5  and  at  least  15%  under  RCP  8.5  by  2050.  Estimates 
from the modelling are presented in the figure below.  
5 Austin, K., Beach, R., Lapidus, D., Salem, M., Taylor, N., Knudsen, M. and Ujeneza, N. (2020) ‘Impacts of 
Climate Change on the Potential Productivity of Eleven Staple Crops in Rwanda’, Sustainability. MDPI AG, 
12(10), p. 4116. doi: 10.3390/su12104116 
8 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Figure  4:  Predicted  changes  in  average  crop  yields  by  2050  relative  to  average  yields 
modelled using climatic conditions from the recent past, under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5. 
Source: Austin et al. (2020) 
21.  The  evidence  provided  above  helped  to  identify  potential  changes  on  the  20-year 
timeframe.  Since  this  EFA  adopted  a  dynamic  factual-counterfactual  comparison6, 
variations in yields from the table below are expressed as a change with respect to the 
current crop yields. 
Table 8: Change in yields by 2040 as a result of climate change and project interventions 
Yields (ton/ha) 
Current (tons) 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Soybeans 
French beans 
Irish potato 
Sweet potato 
Cassava 
Banana 
1.50 
1.00 
0.80 
0.70 
3.80 
5.60 
12.35 
13.00 
WOP future 
(tons) 
1.38 
0.96 
0.73 
0.65 
3.50 
5.54 
12.22 
13.65 
∆(%) 
-8% 
-4% 
-9% 
-6% 
-8% 
-1% 
-1% 
6% 
WP future 
(tons) 
2.50 
1.50 
2.00 
1.5 
8.00 
9.00 
20.00 
17.00 
∆(%) 
66% 
50% 
150% 
114% 
110% 
60% 
62% 
30% 
22.  Generally, the HHs’ models described so far present positive returns in both the pre- 
and post-financing scenarios (Table 4), exception made for the poorest beneficiaries in the 
target population (Ubudehe 1). For the latter, the proposed activity will become viable only 
6 Both with and without- project scenarios present changing yields over the 20-year timeframe 
9 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
thanks  to  the  project  financing  and  else  -  due  to  the  lack  of  savings  and  own  financial 
resources - they would not be able to undertake the proposed activities and make a profit.  
23.  The results of the financial analysis indicates that the activities proposed under the 
KIIWP2  project  are  technically  viably  solutions  capable  to  address  current  production 
constraints and, on this basis, should be adopted by farmers. In addition, the EFA carried 
out a Financing analysis to present the set of incentives the target population may have 
while participating to the project. In light of the financial support provided by the project 
and since post-financing results are higher those shown in the pre-financing scenario, it is 
very  likely  that  project  activities  will  largely  be  taken  up  by  farmers.  The  figure  below 
provides a comparison of the pre-post financing results.  
Figure 5: Comparison of pre-financing (blue) and post-financing (red) results 
D. Economic analysis 
24.  The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall Programme 
viability; (ii) to assess the Project’s impact and the overall economic rate of return; and 
(iii) to perform sensitivity analyses upon risks and variables affecting project’s results. 
Key  Assumptions.  Production  and  activity  models  considered  in  the  financial 
25. 
analysis are used as building blocks for determining the viability of the whole project, once 
addressing for market distortion and opportunity costs for inputs and outputs. In addition, 
other quantifiable benefit related to reduction of GHG emission resulting from the adoption 
of  climate-smart  agriculture  (CSA)  practices  have  been  estimated  and  included  in  the 
analysis. Their description and results are presented further below. The economic analysis 
of the project hinges on the following assumptions:  
i. 
The economic analysis timeframe is 20 years;  
10 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Project inputs and outputs are valued at their economic parity prices. Conversion 
factors for main inputs and outputs are calculated in the FARMOD based on the 
SERF value, custom duty rates on import and export as well as on tax rates; 
An economic discount rate of eight percent has been calculate as the weighted 
average of saving interest rates, Treasury bill rates and the real interest rates 
from the latest available period (table 6). 
Family  labour  is  valued  at  its  opportunity  cost  amounting  to  80  percent  of  its 
current market value;   
The shadow exchange rate factor (SERF) is calculated upon international trade 
statistics and applied to the conversion of tradable commodity prices. Following 
the standard calculation procedure based on the balance of trade method (table 
10), the SERF value was estimated at 1.11 while the standard conversion factor 
(SCF) is equal to 0.90.  
Table 9: Calculation of the SERF based on the balance of trade method (USD million) 
Source: Own elaboration using World Trade Organization data 
Other  quantified  benefits  and  models.  This  EFA  includes  benefits  related  to  the 
26. 
provision of public and private infrastructures such as pumped irrigation schemes, water 
harvesting  structure  (dams  and  reservoirs),  post-harvest  facilities  and  joint  venture 
investments in food processing facilities. Benefits, costs and profitability results have been 
estimated as follows: 
i. 
Investments  in  irrigation  infrastructures  (dams,  pumping  stations,  pivots  and 
sprinklers): The investments are expected to increase water availability and shift 
crop  production  from  rain-fed  to  irrigated  agriculture.  Increase  in  yields  are 
expected  accordingly,  especially  so  considering  the  increased  access  to  water 
during the dry season. Similarly, cropping intensity is also expected to increase. 
Water users are  expected to contribute to the  investment by paying about  15 
percent of the initial investment cost for the construction/rehabilitation work and 
by  covering  O&M  layouts.  Command  areas  vary  according  to  the  irrigation 
scheme,  orography,  water  reservoir  capacity  and  the  altitude  of  the  water 
catchment area. The table below summarizes the key profitability indicators of 
the different irrigation schemes within the Ndego area.  
11 
20092010201120122013201420152016201720182019AverageTotal imports of G&SM1,308   1,431   2,039   2,300   2,302   2,470   2,382   2,254   2,239   2,445   2,703   2,399     Total exports of G&SX235      297      464      591      703      723      682      731      1,042   1,121   1,166   881         Average duties on importst18%12%12%14%14%14%15%16%15%14%14%Import dutiesTm235      172      245      322      322      346      357      361      336      342      378      349         Average taxes on exportss0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%Export dutiesTx-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -            -              Total international commerceM+X1,543   1,728   2,503   2,891   3,005   3,193   3,064   2,985   3,281   3,566   3,869   3,280     M+Tm1,543   1,603   2,284   2,622   2,624   2,816   2,739   2,615   2,575   2,787   3,081   2,748     X-Tx235      297      464      591      703      723      682      731      1,042   1,121   1,166   881         0.87     0.91     0.91     0.90     0.90     0.90     0.90     0.89     0.91     0.91     0.91     0.90       568      583      600      614      646      682      719      787      831      861      900      655      641      659      682      715      756      803      882      916      944      988      SCFOER (LCU/USD)SER 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 10: Summary of profitability results for irrigation schemes 
Model 
Command 
area 
Financial 
Economic 
NPV (Rwf 
mil.) @ 11% 
IRRf 
B/C 
ratio 
NPV (Rwf 
mil.) @ 8% 
IRRe 
B/C 
ratio 
Kibare irrigation 
system 
Ihema irrigation 
system 
Nasho irrigation 
system 
Kanyeganyenge 
Dam and 
Irrigation 
Scheme 
Gishanda Dam 
and Irrigation 
Scheme 
570 ha 
2,303 
15%  1.15 
4,179 
18% 
1.34 
700 ha 
2,671 
16%  1.15 
5,000 
18% 
1.33 
740 ha 
1,332 
13%  1.07 
4,206 
16% 
1.28 
150 ha 
91 
12%  1.03 
151 
9% 
1.05 
125 ha 
111 
12%  1.04 
159 
10% 
1.06 
ii. 
iii. 
Post-harvest  facility  model:  It  is  assumed  that  thanks  to  the  project  support, 
cooperatives  would  be  able  to  invest  in  post-harvest  facilities.  Key  benefits  in 
this  model  are  linked  to  the  reduction  in  post-harvest  losses  and  increasing 
revenues for farmers and cooperatives. Gross revenues in the model relates to 
renting  fees  paid  by  members  to  store  their  produce.  Also  in  this  case, 
beneficiary  are  expected  to  contribute  to  the  initial  investment  with  an  in-
cash/in-kind contribution equivalent to 50 per cent of the initial investment cost. 
The  remaining  50  percent  is  going  to  be  covered  through  a  grant.  Since  this 
activity  is  newly  implemented,  there  is  no  direct  comparable  scenario  to 
benchmark  its  performance.  Hence,  in  order  to  avoid  an  overestimation  of 
benefits, the foregone opportunity income of those people working in the facility 
is  considered  in  the  WoP  scenario.  The  financial  results  (before  and  after 
financing) are positive and amounting to an FNPV of RWF 6.1 million and RWF 
22.6  million  respectively.  The  FIRR  amounts  to  50  percent  and  a  BCRs  equal 
1.17  and  1.50  before  and  after  financing.  On  the  economic  evaluation,  the 
activity presents an ENPV of RWF 6.2 million, with an EIRR of 11.5 percent and 
a BCR of 1.19.            
Joint venture capital investment model: A maize flour mill model is considered 
here  to  represent  the  economic  impact  that  the  grant  financing  and  the  joint 
private-cooperative partnership may leverage. The investment foresees building 
a  workshop  and  installing  the  complete  set  of  machineries  required  for  the 
processing of maize flour. The initial investment cost amounts to RWF 285 million 
(USD 295,000) and has a processing capacity of 2,000 tons of finished product 
per  year.  As  in  the  previous  case,  also  here  the  foregone  employment 
opportunity  for  the  personnel  working  in  the  facility  is  assumed  as  a 
counterfactual  scenario,  so  as  to  avoid  an  overestimation  of  benefits.  The 
investment  yield  a  positive  FNPV  of  RWF  4,565  million  and  an  ENPV  of  4,708 
12 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
million.  The  BCR  of  the  investment  is  of  1.76  and  1.78  for  the  financial  and 
economic analysis respectively. 
27.  Environmental  benefits.  The  EFA  includes  economic  benefits  related  to  carbon 
sequestration  and  directly linked  to  the  adoption  of  Climate-Smart  Agriculture  practices 
and to the reforestation of the land husbandry activities and reforestation of the catchment 
areas. The calculation of the net emission/sequestration effect for different crops and CSA 
practices  is  carried  out  on  the  Ex-Act  software.  Estimates  on  the  potential  carbon 
sequestration of reforestation in Rwanda is based on the work of Branca and Tinlot (2012)7. 
Carbon price is assumed at USD 41 tons.Co2eq. The table 11 below summarizes the net 
emission effect per crop per ha over the 20-year timeframe of the analysis. 
Table 11: Potential reduction in GHG emission 
 Crops 
CSA practices 
from conventional (BAU) to minimum tillage, manual 
Maize 
from  conventional (BAU) to minimum tillage, mechanized 
Maize 
from  conventional (BAU) to minimum tillage, mechanized 
Wheat 
from conventional manual (BAU) to minimum tillage mechanized 
Millet 
from  conventional (BAU) to improved 
Pulses 
Tomato 
from open field (BAU) to production inside tunnels 
Cauliflower  irrigated, from low input/output (BAU) to improved 
irrigated, from low input/output (BAU) to improved 
Potato 
irrigated, from low input/output (BAU) to improved 
Mustard 
irrigated, from low input/output (BAU) to improved 
Lentil 
Average tons of CO2 eq. sequestered/ha/year in cropland  
Average tons of CO2 eq. sequestered/ha/year in forest land 
Tons of CO2 eq. per 
ha over 20 years 
(53.52) 
(55.33) 
(60.25) 
(111.81) 
(39.27) 
(102.08) 
(109.80) 
(109.80) 
(109.80) 
(109.80) 
Tons of CO2 eq. per 
ha per year 
4.31 
9.17 
28.  Programme  Economic  Costs.  The  economic  analysis  includes  the  investment  and 
incremental recurrent costs of project components. Programme financial costs have been 
converted to economic values by removal of taxes, duties and subsidies. In order to avoid 
double counting, the final aggregation considered only those costs that were not already 
accounted  for  in  the  productive  models.  Specifically,  the  estimation  of  economic  costs 
considered: (a) all investments costs deducted from taxes; (b) the recurrent costs of the 
program; and (c) the use of a conversion factor of 1.11 (SERF) to correct market costs to 
economic costs into Costab. The remaining balance is calculated deducting expenses for 
civil works, grants and subsidies and good, services & inputs provided by the project. 
7 Granca G. and Tinlot M. (2012); ‘The Carbon Balance of the World Bank-financed Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and 
Hillside Irrigation (LWH) Project of the Government of Rwanda - Application of the EX-Ante Carbon-balance tool (EX-ACT)’; 
EASYpol module 121; FAO; Rome. 
13 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table 12: Project economic cost - base cost (RWF '000) 
29.  Benefits Estimation and results by sub-components. The incremental benefits stream 
comprises  the  economic  net  values  of  all  the  models  developed  in  the  analysis.  These 
benefits are then aggregated following the inclusion phasing foreseen  in the costab. The 
analysis can also show the contribution of each sub-component to the final results (table 
14).  
Table 13: Summary of economic results by sub-components 
A.2 Infrastructure development and management 
9,180 
18 
1.28 
ENPV @8% 
(Millions of 
RWF) 
EIRR 
(%) 
BCR 
Kibare irrigation system 
Ihema irrigation system  
Nasho irrigation system 
Kanyeganyenge Dam and Irrigation Scheme 
Gishanda Dam and Irrigation Scheme 
B.1:  Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and 
irrigation technologies 
8,491 
89 
1.52 
HH farming model (1a-1b; Ubudehe 1-3) 
Cooperative storage facility 
Joint venture between cooperative and private sector 
A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
Land husbandry activity and reforestation  
A.4: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and 
Technologies 
D. Inputs for Farmers' initial support 
Reduction in GHG emission 
integrated in final economic 
analysis 
Reduction in GHG emission 
integrated in final economic 
analysis  
Integrated in B1 
30.  Aggregation of project activities and benefits. In order to consolidate project effects, 
the EFA inclusion pattern adhered fully to the investment roll-out schedule expected during 
14 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs Economic Costs  Base Cost (RWF '000)202120222023202420252026 I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 790,3471,362,2171,158,942845,501314,270151,693B. Grants and Subsidies 0203,6151,455,8471,751,089997,714-C. Goods Services & Inputs 360,126759,013552,990176,27280,85738,841D. Training Workshops & Meetings 463,278660,174623,548364,65556,10314,323E. Civil Work 555,8117,401,5198,309,2706,671,0406,000,2401,242,956F. Unallocated 2,856,682-----Total Investment Costs 5,026,24410,386,53712,100,5979,808,5577,449,1831,447,813II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 899,644780,457745,717745,717745,717745,717B. Operating Costs /a 16,57067,42676,566112,672--Total Recurrent Costs 916,214847,883822,283858,389745,717745,717Total BASELINE COSTS 5,942,45811,234,42112,922,88010,666,9468,194,9012,193,530 Project costs accounted for in the EFA786,5358,015,2709,959,8948,300,7886,829,8621,220,713Remaining balance5,155,9233,219,1502,962,9862,366,1581,365,038972,817Project O&M expenses in the future (year 6 onwards)112,672 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
implementation and reported in the cost tables of the project. The table below provides a 
consolidated summary. 
Table 14: Consolidated phasing of costs and benefits inclusion 
Unit  PY1  PY2  PY3  PY4  PY5  PY6 
A.2 Infrastructure development and management 
Kibare irrigation system 
Ihema irrigation system  
Nasho irrigation system 
Kanyeganyenge Dam and Irrigation Scheme 
Gishanda Dam and Irrigation Scheme 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
142  142  143  143 
174  174  175  175 
184  184  186  186 
75 
75 
75 
50 
B.1: Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies 
HH farming model (1a-1b; Ubudehe 1-3) 
Cooperative storage facility 
Joint venture between cooperative and private 
no. 
no. 
no. 
40 
160  140  140   
8 
1 
7 
10 
2 
sector 
A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
Land husbandry activity and reforestation  
ha  650  1150  1250  900 
31.  Economic Profitability. The project is a technical and economically viable investment 
to the economy as a whole. The project economic NPV of the net benefit stream over the 
20-year timeframe, discounted at 8%, is RWF 12,047 million (USD 12.5 million). This value 
yields  an  EIRR  of  14%  and  BCR  of  1.19  for  the  base  case  scenario  and  it  results  in  a 
payback period of nine years. 
Table 15: Programme economic cash flow (Millions of RWF) 
Total net 
incremental 
benefits 
0 
(1,222) 
(2,061) 
(690) 
(447) 
(324) 
1,996 
3,759 
5,145 
6,518 
6,620 
6,651 
6,660 
6,652 
6,656 
6,660 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10 
PY11 
PY12 
PY13 
PY14 
PY15 
PY16 
Total 
incremental 
cost 
5,156 
3,219 
2,963 
2,366 
1,365 
1,085 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
113 
15 
Net cash 
flow 
(5,156) 
(4,441) 
(5,024) 
(3,056) 
(1,812) 
(1,409) 
1,884 
3,646 
5,032 
6,405 
6,507 
6,538 
6,548 
6,540 
6,544 
6,547 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
PY17 
PY18 
PY19 
PY20 
6,663 
         6,666  
         6,669  
         6,671  
113 
113 
113 
113 
6,550 
6,553 
6,556 
6,558 
32.  Sensitivity Analysis. The section presents the effect of variations in project benefits 
and costs. Profitability results were tested in the sensitivity analysis to measure variations 
due  to  unforeseen  factors,  hence  identifying  those  variables  affecting  final  results  the 
most. Table 16 below presents tError! Reference source not found.Error! Reference 
source not found.he extent to which a change in variables’ levels would induce a change 
to project key indicators. The project appears to be more sensitive to a decline in benefits 
rather than an increase in costs. 
Table 16: Sensitivity of the ENPV to variations of benefits and costs 
Variation 
Link with the risk matrix 
IRR (%)  BCR 
NPV 
(USD 
m) 
12.5 
14 
1.19 
Base scenario 
Project 
benefits 
Project 
benefits 
Project cost 
Project cost 
1 year lag in 
ben. 
2 year lag in 
ben. 
Output prices 
Output prices 
Input prices 
Input prices 
-10% 
-20% 
10% 
20% 
-10% 
-20% 
10% 
20% 
Combination of risks affecting 
output prices, yields and 
adoption rates 
9 
1.02 
1.7 
3.2 
0.86 
-9 
Increase of construction 
material prices 
Risks affecting  adoption rates 
and low implementation 
capacity 
Low management & negotiating 
capacity of farmers groups 
Market price fluctuations 
10 
7 
10 
6.5 
9 
3.2 
11 
9 
1.07 
0.97 
5.3 
-1.7 
1.06 
4.2 
0.94 
-3.3 
1.02 
0.86 
1.10 
1.03 
1.7 
-9 
6.7 
2.1 
Finally,  the  sensitivity  analysis  allows  to  examine  the  effects  of  a  simultaneous 
33. 
variation of decrease in benefits and increase in costs, on the overall project profitability, 
hence determining all possible combinations of variables’ changes that would result in a 
negative (or positive) NPV.  
Table 17: Simultaneous sensitivity analysis 
Combined Factors 
EIRR 
ENPV (USD M) 
1%,1% 
3%,3% 
5%,5% 
7%,7% 
13% 
11% 
9.6% 
7.9% 
10.3 
7.1 
3.5 
-0.05 
BCR 
1.16 
1.10 
1.05 
0.99 
16 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex A 
PRICES AND MODELS 
17 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
 Table A 1: Prices and conversion factors (RWF) 
18 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
19 
PricesUnitFinancial PricesEconomic Prices Conv. Factor PricesUnitFinancial PricesEconomic Prices Conv. Factor OutputsPen house$ 25 000 19 4670.78         Crop ProductionFowlhead 2 000 1 5570.78         Wheat grainkg  718  5590.78   Chicksno  864  6730.78         Wheat strawskg  200  1640.82   Tools for water and feedlumpsum 1 200  9840.82         Sorghum grainkg  430  2870.67   Chicken feedkg  120  930.78         Sorghum stalkssack  800  6560.82   Vaccinationcycles  400  3110.78         Sorghun stoversbundle  133  1090.82   Equipment Lumpsum 1 500 1 1680.78         Irish Potatokg  230  1790.78   Leguminose green leaveskg  100  780.78         Maizekg  350  2730.78   TransportMaize stalkskg  20  160.82   Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  200  1640.82         Avocadokg  280  2180.78   Bags/boxesunit  300  2340.78         Tomatokg  240  1600.67   LabourOnionkg  320  2140.67   Oxen hireday 17 000 13 9400.82         French beanskg  450  3000.67   Supplementary irrigation waterhour 3 985 3 2680.82         Milletkg  850  5670.67   Tractor hire hour 10 000 8 2000.82         Mangoper kg  283  2200.78   Mechanized land preparationper day 80 000 65 2620.82         Sweet potatokg  200  1560.78   WaterPapayakg  280  2180.78   water feeper ha 45 000 36 9000.82         Tree tomatokg  640  4980.78   Agricultural toolsBananaKg  205  1600.78   Bagssack of 50 kgs  300  2340.78         Cassavakg  150  1170.78   Toolslumpsum 20 000 18 9020.95         Sweet pepperkg  300  2340.78   Gunny bagsno  500  4080.82         Soybeankg  500  3890.78   InfrastructureWatermelonkg   200  1560.78   Irrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)per ha12 358 1188 248 4360.67         Beanskg  575  4480.78   O&M investment $  1  10.82         LivestockIn-kind contribution to infrastructure works$  1  10.82         Goats (mature animals)head 70 000 54 5080.78   Rehabilitation/construction of check dikesper ha 809 607 540 3730.67         Goats (young  animals)head 20 000 15 5740.78   Rehabilitation and modernising irrigation systems (solar pumps)per ha1 474 507 984 1610.67         Manurekg  27  220.82   Individual household rooftop rainwater harvesting systemper system 333 728 222 7470.67         Goat milklt  312  2560.82   Water fee for community infrastructure$  1  10.82         Chickenhead 4 000 3 2800.82   Terrace rehabilitationper ha2 540 3191 695 5380.67         Chicken eggsno.  98  800.82   Dam and irrigation infrastructureper ha 11 580 0009 495 6000.82         Savings benefitSupervision of Dam constuction cost$  1  10.82         Foregone opportunity incomelumpsum 576 000 547 2000.95   Contribution from beneficiaries for pivotsper ha  231 600 231 6001.00         Foregone income (WOP coounterfactual)pers.day 4 500 4 2750.95   Supervision of irrigation infrastructure work per ha1 231 3401 009 6990.82         Cooperative storage facilityGrants equipmentFee for strorage rentton 35 000 25 9560.74   Small farming equipmentper ha4 825 0003 077 3190.64         Joint Venture outputHHs contribution to small farming equipment$  1  10.82         Wheat flourkg  900  6670.74   Cooperative investmentsMaize flourUnit  750  5560.74   Drying and storage facilitylumpsum29 000 00023 780 0000.82         Environmental benefitsTransportton.km  200  1690.85         CO2 - GHG sequestration Tons.CO2eq 39 565 39 5651.00   Electricitylumpsum 260 000 219 8140.85         InputsMiscellaneouslumpsum 150 000 126 8160.85         SeedsO&M of building and machinery$  1  10.82         Sorghum seedskg  465  3620.78   Joint venture investmentMaize seedskg  320  2490.78   Storage unit raw materialunit120 000 000101 452 5210.85         Wheat seedskg  598  4660.78   Storage unit finished product uni40 000 00033 817 5070.85         Potato seedskg  200  1560.78   Pre-cleaner (3tons/hour)unit4 000 0003 381 7510.85         Tomato seedlingsseedling  7  60.78   Grain separatorunit3 600 0003 043 5760.85         Avocado seedingsseedling  800  6230.78   Huskerunit6 000 0005 072 6260.85         Onion seedskg 33 000 25 6970.78   Adhesive whitenerUnit4 800 0004 058 1010.85         French beans seedskg  450  3500.78   Polishing beltUnit4 000 0003 381 7510.85         Millet seedskg  450  3500.78   Rotary shifterunit3 000 0002 536 3130.85         Starting kit (seeds) - FFSper kit 18 750 15 3750.82   Grading machineunit3 600 0003 043 5760.85         Starting kit (fertilizers) - FFSper kit 18 750 15 3750.82   Sorting and weighting sectionunit23 000 00019 445 0670.85         Sweet potato seedskg  172  1340.78   DryerUnit20 000 00016 908 7540.85         Papaya seedlingsseedling 999 999 778 6920.78   Office furniturelumpsum 600 000 507 2630.85         Tree tomatoseedling  150  1170.78   Office vehicleslumpsum6 000 0005 072 6260.85         Banana seedlingsseedling 999 999 778 6920.78   Office equipmentlumpsum 360 000 304 3580.85         Cassava seedkg  250  1950.78   Equipment spare part inventorylumpsum 380 000 321 2660.85         Sweet pepper seedskg 450 000 350 4120.78   Wheat rawkg  718  6070.85         Soybeans seedskg  500  4080.82   Maize rawkg  350  2960.85         Watermelon seedskg 15 000 12 2370.82   Water lumpsum3 000 0002 536 3130.85         Beans seedskg  500  4080.82   ElecticityLumpsum25 000 00021 135 9420.85         Fertilizers, Pesticides, etc.FuelLumpsum8 000 0006 763 5010.85         Ureakg  450  3170.70   O&M main investment$145 000 000118 900 0000.82         TSPkg  600  4230.70   MiscellaneousLumpsum11 422 0009 656 5890.85         Manurekg  15  120.78   LaborPesticideslt 8 000 6 2300.78   Manual LabourAmmonium sulphatekg  928  7230.78   Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  800  6640.83         Calcium carbidekg 1 021  7950.78   Unskilled agricultural labour (hired)pers.day 1 000  8300.83         Potassium chloridekg  520  4050.78   Land preparation pers.day  800  6640.83         KCLkg  500  3890.78   Plantingpers.day  800  6640.83         Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg  410  3190.78   Irrigationpers.day  800  6640.83         Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  700  5450.78   Fertilizer applicationpers.day  800  6640.83         Herbicidekg 20 000 15 5740.78   Weedingpers.day  800  6640.83         Risobiumkg 2 500 1 9470.78   Harvestingpers.day  800  6640.83         Fungicideskg 23 000 17 9100.78   Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  800  6640.83         Insecticideslts 29 000 22 5820.78   Pesticides application pers.day  800  6640.83         Husbandry Costs (Annual): LivestockManagerpers.month 27 000 22 4100.83         Small ruminants: Strawton 2 000 1 6400.82   labourpers.month 22 000 18 2600.83         Small ruminants: Sorghum stoverton 3 000 2 4600.82   Guardpers.month 18 000 14 9400.83         Veterinary serviceslumpsum  664  5440.82   Plant operatorpers.month 23 000 19 0900.83         Mineral blocksunit 6 641 5 1710.78   Driverpers.month 22 000 18 2600.83         Technicianpers.month 25 000 20 7500.83         Administrative staffpers.month 24 000 19 9200.83          
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 2: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 1) model (physical budget) 
20 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
21 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat.1a - Ubudehe 1)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  135  124  135  182  229  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250Maize stalkskg  14  14  14  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Beanskg  60  60  60  86  120  163  190  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Irish Potatokg  152  140  152  461  639  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720Chicken eggsno.  250  250  250  250  266  289  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300On-Farm ConsumptionMaizekg  30  30  30  30  40  50  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70Maize stalkskg  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beanskg  10  10  10  15  20  25  30  50  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60Irish Potatokg  130  130  130  140  150  160  170  180  190  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Chicken eggsno.  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0SalesMaizekg  105  94  105  152  189  200  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180Maize stalkskg  14  14  14  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Beanskg  50  50  50  71  100  138  160  150  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140Irish Potatokg  22  10  22  321  489  560  550  540  530  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520  520Chicken eggsno.  250  250  250  250  266  289  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2Manurekg 1 390 1 390 1 390 2 338 2 973 3 342 3 501 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530 3 530TSPkg  0  0  0  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19Ureakg  7  7  7  13  15  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16  16Pesticideslt  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  8  7  8  14  16  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans seedskg  3  3  3  4  4  5  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  9  9  9  11  12  14  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  32  32  32  77  90  104  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108  108O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Tools for water and feedlumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicken feedkg  54  54  54  54  58  65  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1LaborLand preparation pers.day  20  20  20  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26  26Plantingpers.day  7  7  7  11  12  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13  13Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Fertilizer applicationpers.day  2  2  2  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Weedingpers.day  6  6  6  8  9  10  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11Harvestingpers.day  4  4  4  5  6  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  6  6  6  7  7  7  7  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8Pesticides application pers.day  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  3  3  3  3  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 3: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 1) model (financial budget) 
22 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
23 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat.1a - Ubudehe 1)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 47 250 43 470 47 250 63 525 79 975 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500Maize stalks  270  270  270  320  340  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360Beans 34 673 34 673 34 673 49 181 68 809 93 587 109 392 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000Irish Potato 34 960 32 163 34 960 106 046 146 908 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600 165 600Chicken eggs 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 26 044 28 347 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400Sub-Total Main Production 141 653 135 076 141 653 243 572 322 076 375 394 392 252 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860On-Farm ConsumptionMaize 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 14 000 17 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500Maize stalks  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans 5 750 5 750 5 750 8 625 11 500 14 375 17 250 28 750 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500Irish Potato 29 900 29 900 29 900 32 200 34 500 36 800 39 100 41 400 43 700 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000Chicken eggs  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sub-Total Consumption 46 150 46 150 46 150 51 325 60 000 68 675 80 850 94 650 102 700 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000Total Produccion 141 653 135 076 141 653 243 572 322 076 375 394 392 252 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860TOTAL INCOMES 141 653 135 076 141 653 243 572 322 076 375 394 392 252 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860 397 860EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  0 965 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 6 250  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0  500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 1 080  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0 965 000 7 830  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds  576  576  576  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640Manure 20 850 20 850 20 850 35 065 44 601 50 136 52 510 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950 52 950TSP  0  0  0 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400 11 400Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632 17 632Urea 3 285 3 285 3 285 5 940 6 795 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200Pesticides  0  0  0 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520 1 520Tools 1 800 1 800 1 800 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Bags 2 250 2 010 2 250 4 305 4 695 5 033 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130 5 130Transport to local market (20 km)  26  26  26  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38Beans seeds 1 575 1 575 1 575 1 924 2 245 2 650 2 908 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 6 300 6 300 6 300 7 488 8 386 9 520 10 243 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500water fee  0  0  0  627 1 782 3 240 4 170 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500Potato seeds 6 400 6 400 6 400 15 336 18 000 20 736 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600O&M investment   0  0  0 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950Tools for water and feed  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300Chicken feed 6 450 6 450 6 450 6 450 6 970 7 745 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100Vaccination  0  0  0  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Total Purchased Inputs 49 812 49 572 49 812 139 815 156 154 168 940 174 542 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660 175 660LaborLand preparation  16 240 16 240 16 240 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960 20 960Planting 5 840 5 840 5 840 8 879 9 392 10 040 10 453 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600 10 600Irrigation  0  0  0 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080 3 080Fertilizer application 1 760 1 760 1 760 2 735 2 941 3 200 3 365 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424 3 424Weeding 5 160 5 160 5 160 6 670 7 389 8 296 8 875 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080 9 080Harvesting 2 800 2 800 2 800 4 205 4 837 5 450 5 701 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760 5 760Post harvesting and Marketing 4 568 4 568 4 568 5 518 5 662 5 843 5 959 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Pesticides application   0  0  0 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 2 400 2 400 2 400 2 400 2 652 3 028 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200Total Labor 38 768 38 768 38 768 55 447 57 912 60 897 62 594 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104 63 104TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 88 580 88 3401 053 580 203 092 214 066 229 837 237 135 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764 238 764NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING 53 073 46 736- 911 928 40 480 108 010 145 557 155 117 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 159 096 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 4: HHs farming (cat 1b – Ubudehe 1) model (physical budget) 
24 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
25 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat. 1b - Ubudehe 1)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  135  124  135  182  229  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250  250Maize stalkskg  14  14  14  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Beanskg  60  60  60  86  120  163  190  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Irish Potatokg  152  140  152  512  710  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800Chicken eggsno.  250  250  250  250  266  289  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300On-Farm ConsumptionMaizekg  30  30  30  30  30  40  50  60  60  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70Maize stalkskg  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beanskg  10  10  10  20  30  40  50  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60Irish Potatokg  130  130  130  130  140  150  160  170  180  190  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Chicken eggsno.  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0SalesMaizekg  105  94  105  152  199  210  200  190  190  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180  180Maize stalkskg  14  14  14  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Beanskg  50  50  50  66  90  123  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140  140Irish Potatokg  22  10  22  382  570  650  640  630  620  610  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600Chicken eggsno.  250  250  250  250  266  289  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2Manurekg 1 390 1 390 1 390 2 447 3 108 3 504 3 671 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700 3 700TSPkg  0  0  0  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21Ureakg  7  7  7  14  16  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17  17Pesticideslt  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  8  7  8  16  17  18  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans seedskg  3  3  3  4  4  5  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  9  9  9  11  12  14  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  32  32  32  85  100  115  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Tools for water and feedlumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicken feedkg  54  54  54  54  58  65  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68  68Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1LaborLand preparation pers.day  20  20  20  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27Plantingpers.day  7  7  7  11  12  13  13  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14  14Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Fertilizer applicationpers.day  2  2  2  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Weedingpers.day  6  6  6  8  9  11  11  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12Harvestingpers.day  4  4  4  5  6  7  7  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  6  6  6  7  7  7  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8  8Pesticides application pers.day  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  3  3  3  3  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 5: HHs farming (cat 1b – Ubudehe 1) model (financial budget) 
26 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
27 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat. 1b - Ubudehe 1)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 47 250 43 470 47 250 63 525 79 975 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500 87 500Maize stalks  270  270  270  320  340  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360  360Beans 34 673 34 673 34 673 49 181 68 809 93 587 109 392 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000 115 000Irish Potato 34 960 32 163 34 960 117 829 163 231 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000Chicken eggs 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 26 044 28 347 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400 29 400Sub-Total Main Production 141 653 135 076 141 653 255 355 338 399 393 794 410 652 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260On-Farm ConsumptionMaize 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 14 000 17 500 21 000 21 000 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500 24 500Maize stalks  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans 5 750 5 750 5 750 11 500 17 250 23 000 28 750 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500 34 500Irish Potato 29 900 29 900 29 900 29 900 32 200 34 500 36 800 39 100 41 400 43 700 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000 46 000Chicken eggs  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sub-Total Consumption 46 150 46 150 46 150 51 900 59 950 71 500 83 050 94 600 96 900 102 700 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000 105 000Total Produccion 141 653 135 076 141 653 255 355 338 399 393 794 410 652 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260TOTAL INCOMES 141 653 135 076 141 653 255 355 338 399 393 794 410 652 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260 416 260EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  0 965 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 6 250  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0  500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 1 080  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0 965 000 7 830  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds  576  576  576  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640  640Manure 20 850 20 850 20 850 36 701 46 626 52 560 55 060 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500 55 500TSP  0  0  0 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600 12 600Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488 19 488Urea 3 285 3 285 3 285 6 300 7 200 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650 7 650Pesticides  0  0  0 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600Tools 1 800 1 800 1 800 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Bags 2 250 2 010 2 250 4 677 5 100 5 472 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580 5 580Transport to local market (20 km)  26  26  26  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40Beans seeds 1 575 1 575 1 575 1 924 2 245 2 650 2 908 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 6 300 6 300 6 300 7 488 8 386 9 520 10 243 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500 10 500water fee  0  0  0  627 1 782 3 240 4 170 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500 4 500Potato seeds 6 400 6 400 6 400 17 040 20 000 23 040 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000O&M investment   0  0  0 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950 28 950Tools for water and feed  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300  300Chicken feed 6 450 6 450 6 450 6 450 6 970 7 745 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100 8 100Vaccination  0  0  0  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200Total Purchased Inputs 49 812 49 572 49 812 147 025 164 127 177 695 183 530 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648 184 648LaborLand preparation  16 240 16 240 16 240 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600 21 600Planting 5 840 5 840 5 840 9 079 9 592 10 240 10 653 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800 10 800Irrigation  0  0  0 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200Fertilizer application 1 760 1 760 1 760 2 831 3 037 3 296 3 461 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520 3 520Weeding 5 160 5 160 5 160 6 790 7 509 8 416 8 995 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200 9 200Harvesting 2 800 2 800 2 800 4 375 5 037 5 680 5 941 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Post harvesting and Marketing 4 568 4 568 4 568 5 598 5 742 5 923 6 039 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080 6 080Pesticides application   0  0  0 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040 1 040Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 2 400 2 400 2 400 2 400 2 652 3 028 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200Total Labor 38 768 38 768 38 768 56 914 59 408 62 423 64 130 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640 64 640TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 88 580 88 3401 053 580 211 769 223 535 240 118 247 659 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288 249 288NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING 53 073 46 736- 911 928 43 586 114 864 153 675 162 993 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 166 972 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 6: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 2) model (physical budget) 
28 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
29 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1a - Ubudehe 2)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  270  248  270  363  457  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Maize stalkskg  27  27  27  32  34  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36Beanskg  121  121  121  171  239  326  380  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400Irish Potatokg  266  245  266  512  710  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800Tomatokg 1 920 1 920 1 920 2 504 2 800 3 104 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200Goats (mature animals)head  2  3  2  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Goat milklt  500  550  500  526  600  676  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700Chicken eggsno.  500  500  500  500  532  579  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  3  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Manurekg 3 480 3 480 3 480 4 932 6 367 7 272 7 641 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700TSPkg  2  2  2  25  27  29  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22Ureakg  16  16  16  22  27  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29Pesticideslt  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  14  12  14  19  21  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans seedskg  6  6  6  8  9  11  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  21  21  21  37  44  47  49  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  56  56  56  85  100  115  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120Tomato seedlingsseedling 3 200 3 200 3 200 4 260 5 000 5 760 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Potassium chloridekg  3  3  3  16  20  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Small ruminants: Sorghum stoverton  2  3  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Small ruminants: Strawton  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Mineral blocksunit  5  7  5  6  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Veterinary serviceslumpsum  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Equipment Lumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0Leguminose green leaveskg  0  0  0  65  250  440  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Tools for water and feedlumpsum  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Chicken feedkg  108  108  108  108  116  129  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1LaborLand preparation pers.day  54  54  54  65  67  69  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70Plantingpers.day  18  18  18  25  27  30  31  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9Fertilizer applicationpers.day  6  6  6  9  9  10  10  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11Weedingpers.day  22  22  22  28  31  35  37  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38Harvestingpers.day  31  31  31  40  45  50  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  13  13  13  16  17  18  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19Pesticides application pers.day  0  0  0  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  21  21  21  22  24  27  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 7: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 2) model (financial budget) 
30 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
31 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1a - Ubudehe 2)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 94 500 86 940 94 500 127 050 159 950 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000Maize stalks  540  540  540  640  680  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720Beans 69 345 69 345 69 345 98 361 137 618 187 174 218 784 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000Irish Potato 61 180 56 286 61 180 117 829 163 231 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000Tomato 460 800 460 800 460 800 600 960 672 000 744 960 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000Goats (mature animals) 140 000 210 000 140 000 210 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000Goat milk 156 000 171 600 156 000 164 112 187 200 210 912 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400Chicken eggs 49 000 49 000 49 000 49 000 52 087 56 693 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800Sub-Total Main Production1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920Total Produccion1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920TOTAL INCOMES1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  01 930 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 12 500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0 1 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 2 160  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  01 930 000 15 660  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 1 152 1 152 1 152 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280Manure 52 200 52 200 52 200 73 987 95 502 109 080 114 620 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500TSP  960  960  960 14 868 16 200 17 568 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416Urea 6 975 6 975 6 975 10 076 11 925 12 888 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050Pesticides  0  0  0 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000Tools 3 600 3 600 3 600 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000Bags 4 140 3 720 4 140 5 637 6 150 6 552 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660Transport to local market (20 km)  50  50  50  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60Beans seeds 3 150 3 150 3 150 3 848 4 490 5 300 5 817 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 14 840 14 840 14 840 26 175 30 772 33 040 34 487 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000water fee  0  0  0 1 254 3 564 6 480 8 340 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Potato seeds 11 200 11 200 11 200 17 040 20 000 23 040 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000Tomato seedlings 23 488 23 488 23 488 31 268 36 700 42 278 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040Potassium chloride 1 664 1 664 1 664 8 320 10 400 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480O&M investment   0  0  0 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900Small ruminants: Sorghum stover 6 600 7 500 6 600 6 912 7 800 8 712 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Small ruminants: Straw 1 000 1 400 1 000 1 130 1 500 1 880 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Mineral blocks 33 205 46 487 33 205 37 522 49 808 62 425 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410Veterinary services  0  0  0  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664Equipment   0  0  0  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0Leguminose green leaves  0  0  0 6 500 25 000 44 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000Tools for water and feed  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600Chicken feed 12 900 12 900 12 900 12 900 13 940 15 491 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200Vaccination  0  0  0  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400Total Purchased Inputs 177 724 191 886 177 724 346 757 423 070 490 534 515 923 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660LaborLand preparation  43 360 43 360 43 360 51 824 53 600 55 424 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000Planting 14 040 14 040 14 040 19 669 21 584 23 792 24 907 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200Irrigation  0  0  0 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800Fertilizer application 4 720 4 720 4 720 7 103 7 514 8 032 8 363 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480Weeding 17 880 17 880 17 880 22 396 25 018 28 048 29 589 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000Harvesting 24 640 24 640 24 640 32 087 36 074 40 096 41 483 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600Post harvesting and Marketing 10 592 10 592 10 592 12 586 13 644 14 797 15 278 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360Pesticides application   0  0  0 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 16 800 16 800 16 800 17 320 19 304 21 576 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400Total Labor 132 032 132 032 132 032 173 066 186 816 201 845 208 099 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 309 756 323 9182 239 756 535 483 609 886 692 379 724 023 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING 721 609 780 593-1 208 391 832 4691 042 8801 147 0801 179 6811 189 1401 189 1401 189 1401 187 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 1401 117 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 1401 117 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 140 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 8: HHs farming (cat 1B – Ubudehe 2) model (physical budget) 
32 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1b - Ubudehe 2)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  270  248  270  363  457  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Maize stalkskg  27  27  27  32  34  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36Beanskg  121  121  121  171  239  326  380  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400Irish Potatokg  266  245  266  512  710  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800Tomatokg 1 920 1 920 1 920 2 504 2 800 3 104 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200 3 200Goats (mature animals)head  2  3  2  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Goat milklt  500  550  500  526  600  676  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700Chicken eggsno.  500  500  500  500  532  579  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  3  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Manurekg 3 480 3 480 3 480 4 932 6 367 7 272 7 641 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700 7 700TSPkg  2  2  2  25  27  29  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22Ureakg  16  16  16  22  27  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29  29Pesticideslt  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  14  12  14  19  21  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22  22Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans seedskg  6  6  6  8  9  11  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  21  21  21  37  44  47  49  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  56  56  56  85  100  115  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120  120Tomato seedlingsseedling 3 200 3 200 3 200 4 260 5 000 5 760 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Potassium chloridekg  3  3  3  16  20  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24  24O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Small ruminants: Sorghum stoverton  2  3  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Small ruminants: Strawton  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Mineral blocksunit  5  7  5  6  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Veterinary serviceslumpsum  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Equipment Lumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0Leguminose green leaveskg  0  0  0  65  250  440  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Tools for water and feedlumpsum  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Chicken feedkg  108  108  108  108  116  129  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135  135Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1LaborLand preparation pers.day  54  54  54  65  67  69  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70  70Plantingpers.day  18  18  18  25  27  30  31  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9  9Fertilizer applicationpers.day  6  6  6  9  9  10  10  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11  11Weedingpers.day  22  22  22  28  31  35  37  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38Harvestingpers.day  31  31  31  40  45  50  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52  52Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  13  13  13  16  17  18  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19  19Pesticides application pers.day  0  0  0  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  4Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  21  21  21  22  24  27  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28  28 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
33 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 9: HHs farming (cat 1B – Ubudehe 2) model (financial budget) 
34 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
35 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1b - Ubudehe 2)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 94 500 86 940 94 500 127 050 159 950 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000 175 000Maize stalks  540  540  540  640  680  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720  720Beans 69 345 69 345 69 345 98 361 137 618 187 174 218 784 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000 230 000Irish Potato 61 180 56 286 61 180 117 829 163 231 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000 184 000Tomato 460 800 460 800 460 800 600 960 672 000 744 960 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000 768 000Goats (mature animals) 140 000 210 000 140 000 210 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000Goat milk 156 000 171 600 156 000 164 112 187 200 210 912 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400Chicken eggs 49 000 49 000 49 000 49 000 52 087 56 693 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800 58 800Sub-Total Main Production1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920Total Produccion1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920TOTAL INCOMES1 031 3651 104 5111 031 3651 367 9521 652 7661 839 4591 903 7041 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 914 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 9201 844 920EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  01 930 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 12 500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0 1 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 2 160  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  01 930 000 15 660  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 1 152 1 152 1 152 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280 1 280Manure 52 200 52 200 52 200 73 987 95 502 109 080 114 620 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500 115 500TSP  960  960  960 14 868 16 200 17 568 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416 20 416Urea 6 975 6 975 6 975 10 076 11 925 12 888 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050 13 050Pesticides  0  0  0 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000Tools 3 600 3 600 3 600 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000Bags 4 140 3 720 4 140 5 637 6 150 6 552 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660 6 660Transport to local market (20 km)  50  50  50  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60  60Beans seeds 3 150 3 150 3 150 3 848 4 490 5 300 5 817 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 14 840 14 840 14 840 26 175 30 772 33 040 34 487 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000 35 000water fee  0  0  0 1 254 3 564 6 480 8 340 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Potato seeds 11 200 11 200 11 200 17 040 20 000 23 040 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000 24 000Tomato seedlings 23 488 23 488 23 488 31 268 36 700 42 278 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040 44 040Potassium chloride 1 664 1 664 1 664 8 320 10 400 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480 12 480O&M investment   0  0  0 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900 57 900Small ruminants: Sorghum stover 6 600 7 500 6 600 6 912 7 800 8 712 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Small ruminants: Straw 1 000 1 400 1 000 1 130 1 500 1 880 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Mineral blocks 33 205 46 487 33 205 37 522 49 808 62 425 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410Veterinary services  0  0  0  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664Equipment   0  0  0  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0Leguminose green leaves  0  0  0 6 500 25 000 44 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000Tools for water and feed  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600Chicken feed 12 900 12 900 12 900 12 900 13 940 15 491 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200 16 200Vaccination  0  0  0  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400  400Total Purchased Inputs 177 724 191 886 177 724 346 757 423 070 490 534 515 923 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660 518 160 516 660 516 660 516 660LaborLand preparation  43 360 43 360 43 360 51 824 53 600 55 424 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000 56 000Planting 14 040 14 040 14 040 19 669 21 584 23 792 24 907 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200 25 200Irrigation  0  0  0 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800 6 800Fertilizer application 4 720 4 720 4 720 7 103 7 514 8 032 8 363 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480 8 480Weeding 17 880 17 880 17 880 22 396 25 018 28 048 29 589 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000 30 000Harvesting 24 640 24 640 24 640 32 087 36 074 40 096 41 483 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600 41 600Post harvesting and Marketing 10 592 10 592 10 592 12 586 13 644 14 797 15 278 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360 15 360Pesticides application   0  0  0 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280 3 280Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 16 800 16 800 16 800 17 320 19 304 21 576 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400 22 400Total Labor 132 032 132 032 132 032 173 066 186 816 201 845 208 099 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120 209 120TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 309 756 323 9182 239 756 535 483 609 886 692 379 724 023 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780 727 280 725 780 725 780 725 780NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING 721 609 780 593-1 208 391 832 4691 042 8801 147 0801 179 6811 189 1401 189 1401 189 1401 187 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 1401 117 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 1401 117 6401 119 1401 119 1401 119 140 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 10: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 3) model (physical budget) 
36 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
37 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Hhs farming model (cat 1a - Ubudehe 3)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  375  345  375  545  686  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750Maize stalkskg  38  38  38  48  51  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54Beanskg  168  168  168  257  359  488  571  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600Irish Potatokg  380  350  380  615  852  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960Tomatokg 2 400 2 400 2 400 3 506 3 920 4 346 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480BananaKg 2 600 2 730 2 600 2 600 2 852 3 228 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400Goats (mature animals)head  2  3  2  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Goat milklt  500  550  500  526  600  676  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700Chicken eggsno. 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 063 1 157 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  5  5  5  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6Manurekg 5 750 5 750 5 750 7 958 10 083 11 507 12 297 12 636 12 784 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840TSPkg  2  2  2  31  34  37  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27Ureakg  22  22  22  31  37  39  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40Pesticideslt  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  80  78  80  84  89  95  102  108  111  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Beans seedskg  9  9  9  12  13  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  69  69  69  94  111  131  155  177  189  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  80  80  80  102  120  138  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144Tomato seedlingsseedling 4 000 4 000 4 000 5 964 7 000 8 064 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400Potassium chloridekg  4  4  4  22  28  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Small ruminants: Sorghum stoverton  2  3  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Small ruminants: Strawton  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Mineral blocksunit  5  7  5  6  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Veterinary serviceslumpsum  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Equipment Lumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0Leguminose green leaveskg  0  0  0  65  250  440  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Tools for water and feedlumpsum  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Chicken feedkg  215  215  215  215  232  258  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2LaborLand preparation pers.day  92  92  92  111  115  119  121  123  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124Plantingpers.day  24  24  24  36  39  43  45  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15Fertilizer applicationpers.day  10  10  10  15  16  17  19  20  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21Weedingpers.day  36  36  36  46  51  58  62  63  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64Harvestingpers.day  50  50  50  66  75  84  91  94  96  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  20  20  20  25  27  30  31  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32Pesticides application pers.day  1  1  1  7  7  8  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  27  27  27  28  31  35  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 11: HHs farming (cat 1a – Ubudehe 3) model (financial budget) 
38 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
39 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Hhs farming model (cat 1a - Ubudehe 3)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 131 250 120 750 131 250 190 575 239 925 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500Maize stalks  750  750  750  960 1 020 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080Beans 96 313 96 313 96 313 147 542 206 427 280 761 328 176 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000Irish Potato 87 400 80 408 87 400 141 395 195 877 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800Tomato 576 000 576 000 576 000 841 344 940 8001 042 9441 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 200Banana 533 000 559 650 533 000 533 000 584 660 661 740 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000Goats (mature animals) 140 000 210 000 140 000 210 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000Goat milk 156 000 171 600 156 000 164 112 187 200 210 912 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400Chicken eggs 98 000 98 000 98 000 98 000 104 174 113 386 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600Sub-Total Main Production1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580Total Produccion1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580TOTAL INCOMES1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  02 895 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 25 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0 2 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 4 320  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  02 895 000 31 320  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920Manure 86 250 86 250 86 250 119 376 151 239 172 604 184 449 189 536 191 764 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600TSP 1 200 1 200 1 200 18 535 20 400 22 315 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056Urea 9 675 9 675 9 675 13 926 16 515 17 773 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000Pesticides  0  0  0 5 600 5 740 6 035 6 471 6 873 7 111 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200Tools 5 000 5 000 5 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Bags 23 850 23 250 23 850 25 340 26 639 28 467 30 561 32 369 33 439 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840Transport to local market (20 km)  110  110  110  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124Beans seeds 4 375 4 375 4 375 5 772 6 735 7 950 8 725 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 48 300 48 300 48 300 66 143 77 654 91 376 108 826 123 660 131 980 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100water fee  0  0  0 1 881 5 346 9 720 12 510 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500Potato seeds 16 000 16 000 16 000 20 448 24 000 27 648 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800Tomato seedlings 29 360 29 360 29 360 43 776 51 380 59 190 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656Potassium chloride 2 080 2 080 2 080 11 648 14 560 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472O&M investment   0  0  0 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850Small ruminants: Sorghum stover 6 600 7 500 6 600 6 912 7 800 8 712 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Small ruminants: Straw 1 000 1 400 1 000 1 130 1 500 1 880 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Mineral blocks 33 205 46 487 33 205 37 522 49 808 62 425 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410Veterinary services  0  0  0  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664Equipment   0  0  0  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0Leguminose green leaves  0  0  0 6 500 25 000 44 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000Tools for water and feed 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200Chicken feed 25 800 25 800 25 800 25 800 27 879 30 981 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400Vaccination  0  0  0  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800Total Purchased Inputs 295 605 309 587 295 605 532 923 634 809 731 162 784 314 806 210 818 066 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512LaborLand preparation  73 200 73 200 73 200 88 714 91 620 95 058 97 174 98 379 99 093 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360Planting 19 200 19 200 19 200 28 553 31 336 34 557 36 200 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640Irrigation  0  0  0 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080Fertilizer application 8 000 8 000 8 000 11 726 12 622 13 989 15 359 16 338 16 814 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992Weeding 28 600 28 600 28 600 37 033 41 126 46 140 49 287 50 706 51 182 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360Harvesting 39 600 39 600 39 600 53 115 59 690 67 392 72 403 75 392 77 056 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680Post harvesting and Marketing 16 120 16 120 16 120 20 021 21 669 23 615 24 748 25 273 25 511 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600Pesticides application   800  800  800 5 440 5 650 6 092 6 747 7 350 7 706 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 21 600 21 600 21 600 22 120 24 608 27 632 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800Total Labor 207 120 207 120 207 120 278 801 300 401 326 555 342 797 350 959 354 881 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 502 725 516 7073 397 725 843 045 935 2101 057 7171 127 1111 157 1691 172 9471 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 864NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING1 315 9881 396 764-1 579 0131 483 8831 804 8742 016 4062 073 6442 060 4112 044 6332 038 7162 037 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 7161 967 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 7161 967 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 716 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 12: HHs farming (cat 1b – Ubudehe 3) model (physical budget) 
40 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
41 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1b - Ubudehe 3)/Farm Area ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectUnit1201234567891011121314151617181920Main ProductionMaizekg  375  345  375  545  686  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750  750Maize stalkskg  38  38  38  48  51  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54  54Beanskg  168  168  168  257  359  488  571  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600  600Irish Potatokg  380  350  380  615  852  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960  960Tomatokg 2 400 2 400 2 400 3 506 3 920 4 346 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480 4 480BananaKg 2 600 2 730 2 600 2 600 2 852 3 228 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400 3 400Goats (mature animals)head  2  3  2  3  4  4  4  4  4  4  4  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Goat milklt  500  550  500  526  600  676  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700  700Chicken eggsno. 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000 1 063 1 157 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200InvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipmentper ha  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house$  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowlhead  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicksno  0  0  0  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seedskg  5  5  5  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6Manurekg 5 750 5 750 5 750 7 958 10 083 11 507 12 297 12 636 12 784 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840 12 840TSPkg  2  2  2  31  34  37  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38  38Ammonium sulphatekg  0  0  0  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27  27Ureakg  22  22  22  31  37  39  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40  40Pesticideslt  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Toolslumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Bagssack of 50 kgs  80  78  80  84  89  95  102  108  111  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113  113Transport to local market (20 km)ton.km  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Beans seedskg  9  9  9  12  13  16  17  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18  18Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg  69  69  69  94  111  131  155  177  189  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193  193water feeper ha  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Potato seedskg  80  80  80  102  120  138  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144  144Tomato seedlingsseedling 4 000 4 000 4 000 5 964 7 000 8 064 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400 8 400Potassium chloridekg  4  4  4  22  28  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34  34O&M investment $  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Small ruminants: Sorghum stoverton  2  3  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3Small ruminants: Strawton  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Mineral blocksunit  5  7  5  6  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Veterinary serviceslumpsum  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Equipment Lumpsum  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0Leguminose green leaveskg  0  0  0  65  250  440  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500  500Tools for water and feedlumpsum  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1Chicken feedkg  215  215  215  215  232  258  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270  270Vaccinationcycles  0  0  0  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2LaborLand preparation pers.day  92  92  92  111  115  119  121  123  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124Plantingpers.day  24  24  24  36  39  43  45  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46  46Irrigationpers.day  0  0  0  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15  15Fertilizer applicationpers.day  10  10  10  15  16  17  19  20  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21  21Weedingpers.day  36  36  36  46  51  58  62  63  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64  64Harvestingpers.day  50  50  50  66  75  84  91  94  96  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97  97Post harvesting and Marketingpers.day  20  20  20  25  27  30  31  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32  32Pesticides application pers.day  1  1  1  7  7  8  8  9  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  10Unskilled agricultural labour (family)pers.day  27  27  27  28  31  35  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36  36 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 13: HHs farming (cat 1b – Ubudehe 3) model (financial budget) 
42 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2HHs farming model (cat 1b - Ubudehe 3)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize 131 250 120 750 131 250 190 575 239 925 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500 262 500Maize stalks  750  750  750  960 1 020 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080 1 080Beans 96 313 96 313 96 313 147 542 206 427 280 761 328 176 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000 345 000Irish Potato 87 400 80 408 87 400 141 395 195 877 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800 220 800Tomato 576 000 576 000 576 000 841 344 940 8001 042 9441 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 2001 075 200Banana 533 000 559 650 533 000 533 000 584 660 661 740 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000 697 000Goats (mature animals) 140 000 210 000 140 000 210 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 280 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000 210 000Goat milk 156 000 171 600 156 000 164 112 187 200 210 912 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400 218 400Chicken eggs 98 000 98 000 98 000 98 000 104 174 113 386 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600 117 600Sub-Total Main Production1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580Total Produccion1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580TOTAL INCOMES1 818 7131 913 4711 818 7132 326 9272 740 0843 074 1233 200 7563 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 217 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 5803 147 580EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  02 895 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0 25 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0 2 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0 4 320  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  02 895 000 31 320  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920 1 920Manure 86 250 86 250 86 250 119 376 151 239 172 604 184 449 189 536 191 764 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600 192 600TSP 1 200 1 200 1 200 18 535 20 400 22 315 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920 22 920Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056 25 056Urea 9 675 9 675 9 675 13 926 16 515 17 773 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000 18 000Pesticides  0  0  0 5 600 5 740 6 035 6 471 6 873 7 111 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200 7 200Tools 5 000 5 000 5 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000 6 000Bags 23 850 23 250 23 850 25 340 26 639 28 467 30 561 32 369 33 439 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840 33 840Transport to local market (20 km)  110  110  110  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124  124Beans seeds 4 375 4 375 4 375 5 772 6 735 7 950 8 725 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN) 48 300 48 300 48 300 66 143 77 654 91 376 108 826 123 660 131 980 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100 135 100water fee  0  0  0 1 881 5 346 9 720 12 510 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500 13 500Potato seeds 16 000 16 000 16 000 20 448 24 000 27 648 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800Tomato seedlings 29 360 29 360 29 360 43 776 51 380 59 190 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656 61 656Potassium chloride 2 080 2 080 2 080 11 648 14 560 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472 17 472O&M investment   0  0  0 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850 86 850Small ruminants: Sorghum stover 6 600 7 500 6 600 6 912 7 800 8 712 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000Small ruminants: Straw 1 000 1 400 1 000 1 130 1 500 1 880 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000Mineral blocks 33 205 46 487 33 205 37 522 49 808 62 425 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410 66 410Veterinary services  0  0  0  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664  664Equipment   0  0  0  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0 1 500  0  0  0Leguminose green leaves  0  0  0 6 500 25 000 44 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000 50 000Tools for water and feed 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200 1 200Chicken feed 25 800 25 800 25 800 25 800 27 879 30 981 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400 32 400Vaccination  0  0  0  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800  800Total Purchased Inputs 295 605 309 587 295 605 532 923 634 809 731 162 784 314 806 210 818 066 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512 824 012 822 512 822 512 822 512LaborLand preparation  73 200 73 200 73 200 88 714 91 620 95 058 97 174 98 379 99 093 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360 99 360Planting 19 200 19 200 19 200 28 553 31 336 34 557 36 200 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640 36 640Irrigation  0  0  0 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080 12 080Fertilizer application 8 000 8 000 8 000 11 726 12 622 13 989 15 359 16 338 16 814 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992 16 992Weeding 28 600 28 600 28 600 37 033 41 126 46 140 49 287 50 706 51 182 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360 51 360Harvesting 39 600 39 600 39 600 53 115 59 690 67 392 72 403 75 392 77 056 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680 77 680Post harvesting and Marketing 16 120 16 120 16 120 20 021 21 669 23 615 24 748 25 273 25 511 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600 25 600Pesticides application   800  800  800 5 440 5 650 6 092 6 747 7 350 7 706 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840 7 840Unskilled agricultural labour (family) 21 600 21 600 21 600 22 120 24 608 27 632 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800 28 800Total Labor 207 120 207 120 207 120 278 801 300 401 326 555 342 797 350 959 354 881 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352 356 352TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS 502 725 516 7073 397 725 843 045 935 2101 057 7171 127 1111 157 1691 172 9471 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 8641 180 3641 178 8641 178 8641 178 864NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING1 315 9881 396 764-1 579 0131 483 8831 804 8742 016 4062 073 6442 060 4112 044 6332 038 7162 037 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 7161 967 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 7161 967 2161 968 7161 968 7161 968 716 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 14: Cooperative storage facility model (Financial budget) 
43 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Cooperative Storage facility/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionOther BenefitsFee for strorage rent  0  01 750 0003 500 0005 250 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 000Foregone opportunity income 576 000 576 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sub-Total Other Benefits 576 000 576 0001 750 0003 500 0005 250 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 000TOTAL INCOMES 576 000 576 0001 750 0003 500 0005 250 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 0007 000 000EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsDrying and storage facility  0  029 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsO&M of building and machinery  0  0  0 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000 290 000Transport  0  0 20 000 24 000 30 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000 40 000Electricity  0  0 65 000 130 000 195 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000 260 000Miscellaneous  0  0 37 500 75 000 112 500 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000 150 000Total Purchased Inputs  0  0 122 500 519 000 627 500 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000 740 000LaborManager  0  0 162 000 243 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000 324 000labour  0  0 132 000 198 000 264 000 330 000 330 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000Total Labor  0  0 294 000 441 000 588 000 654 000 654 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000 720 000TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS  0  029 416 500 960 0001 215 5001 394 0001 394 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 0001 460 000NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING 576 000 576 000-27 666 5002 540 0004 034 5005 606 0005 606 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 0005 540 000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 15: Joint venture – maize flour mill Model (Financial Budget) 
44 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
45 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Joint venture between cooperative and private sector/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionOther BenefitsMaize flour  0  0795 000 000930 000 0001125 000 0001200 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 000Foregone opportunity income6 912 0006 912 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sub-Total Other Benefits6 912 0006 912 000795 000 000930 000 0001125 000 0001200 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 000TOTAL INCOMES6 912 0006 912 000795 000 000930 000 0001125 000 0001200 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 0001545 000 000EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsStorage unit raw material  0  0120 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Storage unit finished product   0  040 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pre-cleaner (3tons/hour)  0  04 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Grain separator  0  03 600 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Husker  0  06 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Adhesive whitener  0  04 800 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Polishing belt  0  04 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Rotary shifter  0  03 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Grading machine  0  03 600 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorting and weighting section  0  023 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Dryer  0  060 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office furniture  0  0 600 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office vehicles  0  012 000 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office equipment  0  0 360 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Equipment spare part inventory  0  0 380 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0285 340 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize raw  0  0296 100 000378 000 000441 000 000504 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000630 000 000Water   0  0 990 0001 980 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 0003 000 000Electicity  0  08 250 00016 500 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 00025 000 000Fuel  0  02 640 0005 280 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 0008 000 000O&M main investment  0  047 850 00095 700 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000145 000 000Miscellaneous  0  011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 00011 422 000Total Purchased Inputs  0  0367 252 000508 882 000633 422 000696 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000822 422 000LaborManager  0  0 324 000 486 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000Plant operator  0  01 380 0001 380 0001 656 0001 932 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 0002 208 000Driver  0  0 528 000 528 000 528 000 792 000 792 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 0001 056 000Guard  0  0 432 000 432 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000 648 000Administrative staff  0  01 152 0001 152 0001 200 0001 200 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 0001 488 000Technician  0  01 200 0001 200 0001 200 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 0001 250 000Total Labor  0  05 016 0005 178 0005 880 0006 470 0007 034 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 0007 298 000TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS  0  0657 608 000514 060 000639 302 000702 892 000829 456 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000829 720 000NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING6 912 0006 912 000137 392 000415 940 000485 698 000497 108 000715 544 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000715 280 000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 16: Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation infrastructure model – 150 ha (financial budget) 
46 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
47 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Kanyeganyege Dam and irrigation infrastructure (150ha)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize22 893 56221 062 07722 893 56281 619 638102 755 302112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744112 423 744Maize stalks 137 760 137 760 137 760 432 960 460 020 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080 487 080Beans35 398 97635 398 97635 398 9769 957 09113 931 09618 947 63122 147 47923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 90923 282 909Soybean5 606 5875 101 9945 606 5876 879 74910 173 61911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 38911 680 389Irish Potato10 208 6609 391 96710 208 66027 525 77138 132 03142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 83142 983 831Tomato9 611 2919 611 2919 611 29136 100 01140 367 42444 750 17346 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 19946 134 199Banana10 376 07910 894 88310 376 079  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghum grain2 009 0271 928 6662 009 027  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers1 832 2081 526 8401 832 208  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Cassava44 718 36944 269 37544 718 369  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans  0  07 568 89210 293 69314 359 26916 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 05416 219 054Avocado  0  0116 007 131120 676 274130 518 095145 090 094158 502 436166 436 927169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361169 412 361Onion  0  024 604 90626 903 92733 447 29440 167 50942 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 68242 289 682Sweet pepper  0  021 024 70021 943 78023 881 05626 749 42629 389 52730 951 36231 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 05031 537 050Watermelon  0  03 114 7704 360 6796 229 5418 721 35711 213 17312 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 08212 459 082Sub-Total Main Production142 792 519139 323 829315 112 919346 693 572414 254 747468 220 288493 470 595505 348 259508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381Total Produccion142 792 519139 323 829315 112 919346 693 572414 254 747468 220 288493 470 595505 348 259508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381TOTAL INCOMES142 792 519139 323 829315 112 919346 693 572414 254 747468 220 288493 470 595505 348 259508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381508 909 381EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsDam and irrigation infrastructure  0  01424 340 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Supervision of Dam constuction cost  0  0142 434 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  01566 774 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 279 083 279 083 279 083 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299 822 299Manure17 357 05817 357 05821 188 22626 452 54535 380 32238 926 29141 143 20841 670 67241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 79241 815 792TSP 21 136 21 136 325 4943 758 0553 956 6484 157 5244 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 0514 299 051Ammonium sulphate  0  0 520 2916 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 3866 048 386Urea1 458 3801 458 3805 370 6438 092 3209 114 4909 641 1699 779 6389 814 9659 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 2139 828 213Pesticides  0  0 594 9212 057 7292 309 6212 630 2242 839 7672 918 0102 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 6552 921 655Tools1 190 8301 190 8302 570 6804 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 6914 498 691Bags1 186 2601 116 1784 565 1635 729 5816 410 4007 234 3157 911 5558 277 3718 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 5528 414 552Transport to local market (20 km) 13 612 13 612 28 208 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576 46 576Beans seeds1 684 5721 684 5721 684 572 408 118 476 167 562 068 616 860 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303 636 303Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)18 996 20618 996 20622 770 3737 669 4639 684 92712 338 82014 716 64116 088 64616 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 66016 583 660water fee  0  0  0 210 797 599 1081 089 2881 401 9541 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 9001 512 900Soybeans seeds 256 969 256 969 256 969 226 928 250 483 280 218 299 185 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915 305 915Mechanized land preparation  0  01 305 2371 441 6341 692 8932 010 0652 212 3772 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 1652 284 165Risobium  0  0  0 1 627 4 625 8 410 10 824 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680 11 680Potato seeds1 868 8621 868 8621 868 8623 980 6774 672 1565 382 3235 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 5875 606 587Tomato seedlings 571 560 571 560 571 5602 191 3622 572 0222 962 9693 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 4263 086 426Potassium chloride 40 492 40 492 40 492 583 085 728 856 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628 874 628Sorghum seeds 88 713 88 713 88 713  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  0 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087 216 087Cassava seed14 181 93914 181 93914 181 939  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans seeds  0  0 252 296 315 371 378 445 441 519 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593 504 593Calcium carbide  0  03 009 2463 097 4963 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 3293 156 329Onion seeds  0  04 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 4344 625 434Herbicide  0  02 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 9642 522 964Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  01 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 3501 149 350Sweet pepper seeds  0  05 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 1755 256 175Watermelon seeds  0  01 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 3921 468 392Insecticides  0  0 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627 722 627Fungicides  0  0 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037 788 037O&M investment   0  0  071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 00071 217 000Total Purchased Inputs59 195 67259 125 58998 222 034165 598 805180 769 510191 078 178197 841 639200 430 258201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467201 224 467LaborLand preparation 15 079 44015 079 44021 055 44021 262 50621 452 24821 648 57421 728 23321 764 69621 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 76021 805 760Planting4 657 9604 657 9606 507 2009 988 86210 308 99810 681 90110 875 87710 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 44010 929 440Irrigation  0  0 466 1283 788 2154 192 8754 691 7295 013 5795 161 5575 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 0485 217 048Fertilizer application1 540 4801 540 4802 751 6163 198 0693 385 8903 614 1903 753 5953 810 6493 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 2963 827 296Weeding5 046 4005 046 4008 791 3609 214 7279 665 37610 219 05510 559 05810 688 12310 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 32010 710 320Harvesting3 691 8403 691 8406 115 4407 312 5228 283 4599 335 0059 715 5569 798 3639 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 5609 820 560Post harvesting and Marketing4 411 6164 411 6165 487 2965 587 0935 794 7456 035 3436 159 7746 195 7756 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 1046 199 104Pesticides application  109 560 109 5601 262 2642 273 4892 332 3092 409 3712 466 5702 496 1662 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 2642 507 264Total Labor34 537 29634 537 29652 436 74462 625 48265 415 90168 635 16870 272 24370 844 76971 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 79271 016 792TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS93 732 96893 662 8851717 432 778228 224 287246 185 411259 713 346268 113 883271 275 027272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259272 241 259NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING49 059 55245 660 944-1402 319 859118 469 286168 069 336208 506 942225 356 712234 073 232236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123236 668 123 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 17: Ghyshianda dam and irrigation infrastructure model – 125 ha (financial budget) 
48 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Gishyanda Dam and irrigation infrastructure (125 ha)/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize24 675 00022 701 00024 675 00087 664 500110 365 500120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000120 750 000Maize stalks 141 000 141 000 141 000 441 600 469 200 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800 496 800Beans38 139 75038 139 75038 139 75010 819 71415 138 00220 589 14024 066 20325 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 00025 300 000Soybean6 000 0005 460 0006 000 0007 657 00011 323 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 00013 000 000Irish Potato11 362 00010 453 04011 362 00029 457 25040 807 75046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 00046 000 000Tomato11 520 00011 520 00011 520 00048 076 80053 760 00059 596 80061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 00061 440 000Banana10 660 00011 193 00010 660 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghum grain2 580 0002 476 8002 580 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers1 915 2001 596 0001 915 200  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Cassava44 460 00044 013 60044 460 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans  0  06 930 0009 424 80013 147 20014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 00014 850 000Avocado  0  0124 818 400129 842 186140 431 538156 110 346170 541 416179 078 568182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000182 280 000Onion  0  032 768 00035 829 76044 544 00053 493 76056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 00056 320 000Sweet pepper  0  021 600 00022 544 22924 534 51427 481 37130 193 71431 798 28632 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 00032 400 000Watermelon  0  03 000 0004 200 0006 000 0008 400 00010 800 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 00012 000 000Sub-Total Main Production151 452 950147 694 190340 569 350385 957 838460 520 704520 768 217548 458 134561 033 654564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800Total Produccion151 452 950147 694 190340 569 350385 957 838460 520 704520 768 217548 458 134561 033 654564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800TOTAL INCOMES151 452 950147 694 190340 569 350385 957 838460 520 704520 768 217548 458 134561 033 654564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800564 836 800EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsDam and irrigation infrastructure  0  01447 500 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Supervision of Dam constuction cost  0  0144 750 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  01592 250 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 300 800 300 800 300 800 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 200Manure18 585 00018 585 00022 305 00027 955 40337 386 53141 037 76743 232 17143 796 22943 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 00043 950 000TSP 24 000 24 000 288 0004 324 4404 530 0004 738 4404 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 000Ammonium sulphate  0  0 408 3206 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 9606 328 960Urea1 755 0001 755 0006 376 5009 590 24610 819 36311 459 67411 626 84311 666 95711 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 00011 682 000Pesticides  0  0 580 8002 163 5822 442 8992 798 1953 030 0053 116 2563 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 0003 120 000Tools1 060 0001 060 0002 120 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 0003 820 000Bags1 276 2001 198 2004 836 6006 070 0886 787 1357 655 8668 367 7638 757 3178 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 4008 903 400Transport to local market (20 km) 14 000 14 000 28 800 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400 47 400Beans seeds1 732 5001 732 5001 732 500 423 317 493 900 583 000 639 833 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000 660 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)19 516 00019 516 00023 462 6008 232 20710 408 24013 255 32015 805 33317 276 20017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 60017 806 600water fee  0  0  0 219 450 623 7001 134 0001 459 5001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 0001 575 000Soybeans seeds 262 500 262 500 262 500 241 085 266 110 297 700 317 850 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000 325 000Mechanized land preparation  0  01 200 0001 344 9071 611 8401 948 8002 163 7332 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 0002 240 000Risobium  0  0  0 1 811 5 148 9 360 12 047 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000 13 000Potato seeds2 080 0002 080 0002 080 0004 260 0005 000 0005 760 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 0006 000 000Tomato seedlings 587 200 587 200 587 2002 501 4722 936 0003 382 2723 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 2003 523 200Potassium chloride 41 600 41 600 41 600 665 600 832 000 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400 998 400Sorghum seeds 97 650 97 650 97 650  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  0 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500 232 500Cassava seed14 100 00014 100 00014 100 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans seeds  0  0 198 000 247 500 297 000 346 500 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000 396 000Calcium carbide  0  03 425 4553 520 4083 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 7103 583 710Onion seeds  0  05 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 0005 280 000Herbicide  0  02 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 0002 880 000Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  01 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 0001 312 000Sweet pepper seeds  0  05 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 0005 400 000Watermelon seeds  0  01 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 0001 350 000Insecticides  0  0 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000 696 000Fungicides  0  0 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000 759 000O&M investment   0  0  072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 00072 375 000Total Purchased Inputs61 432 45061 354 450102 341 825173 125 574189 387 636200 353 065207 392 449210 163 329211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370211 012 370LaborLand preparation 15 160 00015 160 00020 588 00020 952 62021 154 31521 360 84121 440 27821 474 54921 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 00021 516 000Planting4 680 0004 680 0006 372 0009 926 69910 261 79210 651 36010 852 85310 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 00010 908 000Irrigation  0  0 396 8003 751 9314 165 6464 670 7894 988 6865 131 3145 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 8005 184 800Fertilizer application1 552 0001 552 0002 702 4003 166 1823 359 1503 592 0373 731 4593 787 1543 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 2003 803 200Weeding5 076 0005 076 0008 500 0009 004 0399 468 41810 036 63510 381 68810 510 60610 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 00010 532 000Harvesting3 644 0003 644 0005 988 0007 373 1118 345 4109 398 6359 761 2089 842 6069 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 0009 864 000Post harvesting and Marketing4 427 2004 427 2005 388 8005 535 9005 753 7986 005 5436 134 5326 171 1916 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 4006 174 400Pesticides application  112 000 112 0001 233 6002 257 9062 316 9692 393 6782 449 5772 478 1032 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 8002 488 800Total Labor34 651 20034 651 20051 169 60061 968 39064 825 49968 109 51869 740 28070 303 52270 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 20070 471 200TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS96 083 65096 005 6501745 761 425235 093 964254 213 135268 462 583277 132 730280 466 851281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570281 483 570NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING55 369 30051 688 540-1405 192 075150 863 874206 307 569252 305 634271 325 404280 566 803283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230283 353 230 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 18: Kibare irrigation scheme (financial budget) 
49 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
50 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Kibare Irrigation scheme/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize72 450 00066 654 00072 450 00072 144 947255 120 250279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000279 125 000Maize stalks 414 000 414 000 414 000 414 0001 084 6001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 4001 148 400Beans143 313 000143 313 000143 313 000143 313 000125 232 562170 328 340199 093 137209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000209 300 000Irish Potato64 676 00059 501 92064 676 00064 624 259138 746 350156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000156 400 000Tomato92 160 00092 160 00092 160 00092 160 000268 800 000297 984 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000307 200 000Banana26 650 00027 982 50026 650 00026 663 325  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghum grain86 860 00083 385 60086 860 00086 825 256  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers64 478 40053 732 00064 478 40063 081 368  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Cassava111 150 000110 034 000111 150 000111 138 840  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Onion  0  0163 840 000179 148 800222 720 000267 468 800281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000281 600 000Sweet pepper  0  0266 400 000278 045 486302 592 343338 936 914372 389 143392 178 857399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000399 600 000Avocado  0  0825 412 000858 633 808928 660 1681032 342 6081127 773 8801184 229 2401205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 0001205 400 000Soybean38 000 00034 580 00038 000 00037 965 800118 456 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000136 000 000Watermelon  0  017 000 00023 800 00034 000 00047 600 00061 200 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 00068 000 000French beans  0  053 865 00073 256 400102 189 600115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000115 425 000Sub-Total Main Production700 151 400671 757 0202026 668 4002111 215 2892497 601 8732842 759 0623037 354 5603130 606 4973159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 400Total Produccion700 151 400671 757 0202026 668 4002111 215 2892497 601 8732842 759 0623037 354 5603130 606 4973159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 400TOTAL INCOMES700 151 400671 757 0202026 668 4002111 215 2892497 601 8732842 759 0623037 354 5603130 606 4973159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 4003159 198 400EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)  0  07044 127 260  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0In-kind contribution to infrastructure works  0  01056 619 089  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  08100 746 349  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 883 200 883 200 883 200 883 2002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 6002 041 600Manure86 280 00086 280 000115 432 500122 036 454155 585 044179 131 446195 270 514200 146 286201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000201 450 000TSP 192 000 192 0002 244 0003 013 50016 905 00018 221 70019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 00019 164 000Ammonium sulphate  0  03 173 7603 173 76021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 08021 910 080Urea14 670 00014 670 00042 705 00044 386 63746 705 80950 492 62351 825 72952 320 47152 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 00052 506 000Pesticides  0  04 003 2004 075 66112 408 87716 160 14118 616 82119 537 82419 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 00019 584 000Tools6 800 0006 800 00014 320 00014 320 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 00013 900 000Bags5 654 4005 210 40034 248 60036 200 08141 403 15347 624 88753 103 96956 169 59157 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 20057 319 200Transport to local market (20 km) 84 800 84 800 196 400 196 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400 192 400Beans seeds6 510 0006 510 0006 510 0006 510 0004 085 9004 823 0005 293 1675 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 0005 460 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)61 838 00061 838 00091 721 00097 645 16078 676 88099 229 560117 563 467128 097 800131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000131 873 000water fee  0  0  0  05 666 76010 303 20013 260 60014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 00014 310 000Potato seeds11 840 00011 840 00011 840 00011 840 00017 000 00019 584 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 00020 400 000Tomato seedlings4 697 6004 697 6004 697 6004 697 60014 680 00016 911 36017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 00017 616 000Potassium chloride 332 800 332 800 332 800 332 8004 160 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 0004 992 000Sorghum seeds3 287 5503 287 5503 287 5503 287 550  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  01 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 5001 537 500Cassava seed35 250 00035 250 00035 250 00035 250 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Onion seeds  0  026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 00026 400 000Herbicide  0  014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 00014 400 000Calcium carbide  0  017 382 52518 010 44018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 05018 429 050Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  06 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 0006 560 000Sweet pepper seeds  0  066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 00066 600 000Soybeans seeds1 662 5001 662 5001 662 5001 662 5002 783 9203 114 4003 325 2003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 0003 400 000Mechanized land preparation  0  06 800 0006 800 00011 108 48014 633 60016 882 13317 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 00017 680 000Risobium  0  0  0  0 53 856 97 920 126 027 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000 136 000Watermelon seeds  0  07 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 0007 650 000Insecticides  0  03 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 0003 944 000Fungicides  0  04 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 0004 301 000O&M investment   0  0  0352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363352 206 363French beans seeds  0  01 539 0001 923 7502 308 5002 693 2503 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 0003 078 000Total Purchased Inputs239 982 850239 538 850529 622 135899 844 356953 604 1711028 085 0801080 589 6191102 579 9661109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 1931109 040 193LaborLand preparation 67 152 00067 152 000109 652 000110 414 949101 376 354100 896 091100 420 781100 353 886100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000100 628 000Planting17 260 00017 260 00029 688 00029 812 80040 773 98443 740 48045 397 70745 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 00045 904 000Irrigation  0  02 760 0004 211 15415 617 09720 063 72623 421 25725 180 34325 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 00025 840 000Fertilizer application9 288 0009 288 00018 150 40018 627 34617 338 50519 265 83820 612 40421 246 90321 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 80021 444 800Weeding23 572 00023 572 00048 540 00049 037 26252 160 82357 067 57060 327 54361 684 13761 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 00061 948 000Harvesting17 836 00017 836 00034 832 00036 745 46244 376 48751 038 25053 998 05054 928 13755 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 00055 192 000Post harvesting and Marketing19 317 60019 317 60025 956 00026 101 30925 529 74927 494 44828 622 26729 002 02129 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 60029 041 600Pesticides application 3 272 0003 272 00011 754 40012 003 03112 307 41913 075 14513 708 25114 060 06914 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 00014 192 000Total Labor157 697 600157 697 600281 332 800286 953 313309 480 419332 641 548346 508 260352 359 495354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400354 190 400TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS397 680 450397 236 4508911 701 2841186 797 6681263 084 5901360 726 6281427 097 8791454 939 4601463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 5931463 230 593NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING302 470 950274 520 570-6885 032 884924 417 6211234 517 2831482 032 4341610 256 6811675 667 0371695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 8071695 967 807 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 19: Ihema irrigation scheme (financial budget) 
51 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
52 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Ihema Irrigation system/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize89 250 00082 110 00089 250 00088 874 211205 800 000249 018 000313 502 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000343 000 000Maize stalks 510 000 510 000 510 000 510 0001 176 0001 254 4001 332 8001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 2001 411 200Beans169 124 750169 124 750169 124 750169 124 750154 132 384209 634 880245 037 707257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000257 600 000Soybean46 800 00042 588 00046 800 00046 757 880146 328 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000168 000 000Irish Potato79 534 00073 171 28079 534 00079 470 373171 392 550193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000193 200 000Tomato115 200 000115 200 000115 200 000115 200 000329 280 000365 030 400376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000376 320 000Banana31 980 00033 579 00031 980 00031 995 990  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghum grain114 810 000110 217 600114 810 000114 764 076  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers85 226 40071 022 00085 226 40083 379 828  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Cassava137 085 000135 708 600137 085 000137 071 236  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans  0  066 150 00089 964 000125 496 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000141 750 000Onion  0  0200 704 000219 457 280272 832 000327 649 280344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000344 960 000Sweet pepper  0  0327 600 000341 920 800372 106 800416 800 800457 938 000482 274 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000491 400 000Watermelon  0  021 000 00029 400 00042 000 00058 800 00075 600 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 00084 000 000Avocado  0  01014 652 8001055 491 3151141 572 4991269 026 0351386 336 6721455 735 4561481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 0001481 760 000Sub-Total Main Production869 520 150833 231 2302499 626 9502603 381 7392962 116 2333400 163 7953703 977 1793848 250 6563883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 200Total Produccion869 520 150833 231 2302499 626 9502603 381 7392962 116 2333400 163 7953703 977 1793848 250 6563883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 200TOTAL INCOMES869 520 150833 231 2302499 626 9502603 381 7392962 116 2333400 163 7953703 977 1793848 250 6563883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 2003883 401 200EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)  0  08650 682 600  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0In-kind contribution to infrastructure works  0  01297 602 390  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  09948 284 990  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds1 088 0001 088 0001 088 0001 088 0002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 8002 508 800Manure105 915 000105 915 000141 720 000149 831 820161 978 640202 706 970240 197 900246 197 100247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000247 800 000TSP 240 000 240 0002 760 0003 705 00020 832 00022 447 32023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 00023 604 000Ammonium sulphate  0  03 897 6003 897 60027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 36027 023 360Urea18 886 50018 886 50053 284 50055 349 82053 827 92060 242 94063 643 95064 252 35064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 50064 480 500Pesticides  0  04 916 8005 005 90715 275 97119 908 62722 942 19224 079 21624 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 00024 136 000Tools8 740 0008 740 00017 980 00017 980 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 00017 080 000Bags7 007 4006 461 40042 161 40044 560 30850 331 34858 099 48865 188 68069 075 24070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 60070 488 600Transport to local market (20 km) 108 000 108 000 245 200 245 200 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600 236 600Beans seeds7 682 5007 682 5007 682 5007 682 5005 028 8005 936 0006 514 6676 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 0006 720 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)74 830 00074 830 000111 589 800118 872 60096 798 240122 067 400144 607 867157 558 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800162 199 800water fee  0  0  0  06 985 44012 700 80016 346 40017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 000Soybeans seeds2 047 5002 047 5002 047 5002 047 5003 438 9603 847 2004 107 6004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 0004 200 000Mechanized land preparation  0  08 400 0008 400 00013 722 24018 076 80020 854 40021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 00021 840 000Risobium  0  0  0  0 66 528 120 960 155 680 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000 168 000Potato seeds14 560 00014 560 00014 560 00014 560 00021 000 00024 192 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 00025 200 000Tomato seedlings5 872 0005 872 0005 872 0005 872 00017 983 00020 716 41621 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 60021 579 600Potassium chloride 416 000 416 000 416 000 416 0005 096 0006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 2006 115 200Sorghum seeds4 345 4254 345 4254 345 4254 345 425  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  01 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 0001 890 000Cassava seed43 475 00043 475 00043 475 00043 475 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans seeds  0  01 890 0002 362 5002 835 0003 307 5003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 0003 780 000Onion seeds  0  032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 00032 340 000Herbicide  0  017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 00017 640 000Calcium carbide  0  021 298 06022 069 93622 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 52022 584 520Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  08 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 0008 036 000Sweet pepper seeds  0  081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 00081 900 000Watermelon seeds  0  09 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 0009 450 000Insecticides  0  04 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 0004 872 000Fungicides  0  05 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 0005 313 000O&M on main investment  0  0  0432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130432 534 130Total Purchased Inputs295 213 325294 667 325651 070 7851105 742 2461138 608 4971243 894 0311328 246 5451355 417 9161363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 1101363 360 110LaborLand preparation 82 064 00082 064 000134 284 000135 220 448124 645 088124 026 208123 426 080123 339 040123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000123 676 000Planting20 884 00020 884 00036 144 00036 296 88050 130 75253 782 40055 823 78756 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 00056 448 000Irrigation  0  03 393 6005 176 16019 193 76024 656 16028 783 20030 946 40031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 60031 757 600Fertilizer application11 652 00011 652 00022 538 40023 124 12820 678 88023 674 36825 329 86726 110 24026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 60026 353 600Weeding28 880 00028 880 00059 568 00060 179 10464 140 96070 180 06474 193 33375 863 52076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 00076 188 000Harvesting22 088 00022 088 00042 976 00045 327 02453 266 43261 767 18466 033 38767 491 52067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 00067 816 000Post harvesting and Marketing23 643 20023 643 20031 796 80031 975 09831 403 07233 821 72235 211 14735 679 32835 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 00035 728 000Pesticides application 4 320 0004 320 00014 747 20015 052 75215 127 23216 070 75216 849 12017 281 76017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 00017 444 000Total Labor193 531 200193 531 200345 448 000352 351 594378 586 176407 978 858425 649 920433 159 808435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200435 411 200TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS488 744 525488 198 52510944 803 7751458 093 8401517 194 6731651 872 8891753 896 4651788 577 7241798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 3101798 771 310NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING380 775 625345 032 705-8445 176 8251145 287 8991444 921 5601748 290 9061950 080 7132059 672 9322084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 8902084 629 890 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 20: Nasho irrigation scheme (financial budget) 
53 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
54 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Nasho irrigation scheme/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize93 975 00086 457 00093 975 00093 579 316331 096 500362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000362 250 000Maize stalks 537 000 537 000 537 000 537 0001 407 6001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 4001 490 400Beans178 756 000178 756 000178 756 000178 756 000162 389 476220 865 320258 164 727271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000271 400 000Soybean49 600 00045 136 00049 600 00049 555 360154 167 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000177 000 000Irish Potato83 904 00077 191 68083 904 00083 836 877181 186 410204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000204 240 000Tomato120 960 000120 960 000120 960 000120 960 000346 080 000383 654 400395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000395 520 000Banana34 645 00036 377 25034 645 00034 662 323  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghum grain121 260 000116 409 600121 260 000121 211 496  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers90 014 40075 012 00090 014 40088 064 088  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Cassava144 495 000143 044 200144 495 000144 480 492  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans  0  069 930 00095 104 800132 667 200149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000149 850 000Sweet pepper  0  0345 600 000360 707 657392 552 229439 701 943483 099 429508 772 571518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000518 400 000Watermelon  0  022 000 00030 800 00044 000 00061 600 00079 200 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 00088 000 000Avocado  0  01071 022 4001114 129 7221204 993 1941339 527 4821463 355 3761536 609 6481564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 0001564 080 000Sub-Total Main Production918 146 400879 880 7302426 698 8002516 385 1302950 539 6083340 179 5443574 169 9313695 132 6193732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 400Total Produccion918 146 400879 880 7302426 698 8002516 385 1302950 539 6083340 179 5443574 169 9313695 132 6193732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 400TOTAL INCOMES918 146 400879 880 7302426 698 8002516 385 1302950 539 6083340 179 5443574 169 9313695 132 6193732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 4003732 230 400EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)  0  09268 588 500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0In-kind contribution to infrastructure works  0  01390 288 275  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  010658 876 775  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds1 145 6001 145 6001 145 6001 145 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 6002 649 600Manure111 870 000111 870 000141 915 000149 980 581192 264 626221 352 939241 835 686248 163 514249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000249 855 000TSP 252 000 252 0002 916 0003 915 00022 011 00023 714 52024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 00024 936 000Ammonium sulphate  0  04 120 3204 120 32028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 84028 563 840Urea19 930 50019 930 50037 624 50039 199 19139 609 43142 748 86943 917 23644 559 06444 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 75044 799 750Pesticides  0  04 364 8004 458 80315 288 30720 169 52323 365 95224 564 09624 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 00024 624 000Tools9 220 0009 220 00018 980 00018 980 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 00018 040 000Bags7 421 4006 845 40044 521 80047 053 95853 750 03561 825 18668 935 06372 912 61774 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 20074 404 200Transport to local market (20 km) 114 000 114 000 258 800 258 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800 249 800Beans seeds8 120 0008 120 0008 120 0008 120 0005 298 2006 254 0006 863 6677 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 0007 080 000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)79 058 00079 058 000116 508 000124 194 720100 730 080127 395 920151 183 467164 851 600169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000169 750 000water fee  0  0  0  07 359 66013 381 20017 222 10018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 00018 585 000Soybeans seeds2 170 0002 170 0002 170 0002 170 0003 623 1904 053 3004 327 6504 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 0004 425 000Mechanized land preparation  0  08 800 0008 800 00014 407 36018 995 20021 921 60022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 00022 960 000Risobium  0  0  0  0 70 092 127 440 164 020 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000 177 000Potato seeds15 360 00015 360 00015 360 00015 360 00022 200 00025 574 40026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 00026 640 000Tomato seedlings6 165 6006 165 6006 165 6006 165 60018 900 50021 773 37622 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 60022 680 600Potassium chloride 436 800 436 800 436 800 436 8005 356 0006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 2006 427 200Sorghum seeds4 589 5504 589 5504 589 5504 589 550  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  01 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 0001 995 000Cassava seed45 825 00045 825 00045 825 00045 825 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0French beans seeds  0  01 998 0002 497 5002 997 0003 496 5003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 0003 996 000Sweet pepper seeds  0  086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 00086 400 000Watermelon seeds  0  09 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 0009 900 000Insecticides  0  05 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 0005 104 000Fungicides  0  05 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 0005 566 000Calcium carbide  0  01 357 9302 172 6882 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 8602 715 860O&M investment   0  0  0463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425463 429 425Total Purchased Inputs311 678 450311 102 450576 142 7001061 838 5371128 479 0051221 903 0981289 029 7651317 571 2171325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 2751325 953 275LaborLand preparation 86 688 00086 688 000135 192 000135 750 144123 235 264121 328 704120 302 240120 212 320120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000120 568 000Planting22 044 00022 044 00033 188 00033 188 00047 313 32850 688 64052 690 34753 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 00053 348 000Irrigation  0  03 580 8004 923 70318 190 33122 381 41726 238 97128 521 02929 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 80029 376 800Fertilizer application12 304 00012 304 00021 312 00021 714 87119 171 70721 040 74522 588 19823 411 26923 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 00023 668 000Weeding30 504 00030 504 00060 408 00060 945 16164 752 75770 802 16774 932 84276 693 69177 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 00077 036 000Harvesting23 308 00023 308 00043 700 00045 967 16154 998 96563 003 52766 642 65567 849 69168 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 00068 192 000Post harvesting and Marketing24 972 80024 972 80031 926 40032 006 97431 059 20533 292 88534 657 61335 151 05435 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 40035 202 400Pesticides application 4 564 0004 564 00015 154 40015 422 98115 342 70616 180 92316 952 43417 408 84617 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 00017 580 000Total Labor204 384 800204 384 800344 461 600349 918 995374 064 264398 719 008415 005 301422 595 899424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200424 971 200TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS516 063 250515 487 25011579 481 0751411 757 5321502 543 2691620 622 1061704 035 0651740 167 1161750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 4751750 924 475NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING402 083 150364 393 480-9152 782 2751104 627 5981447 996 3391719 557 4381870 134 8661954 965 5031981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 9251981 305 925 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 21: Ndego area irrigation scheme (financial budget) 
55 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Ndego Irrigation system/Farm Area ModelRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize255 675 000235 221 000255 675 000254 598 474899 718 750984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000984 375 000Maize stalks1 461 0001 461 0001 461 0001 461 0003 825 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 0004 050 000Sorghum grain322 930 000310 012 800322 930 000322 800 828  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers239 719 200199 766 000239 719 200234 525 284  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Irish Potato228 114 000209 864 880228 114 000227 931 509491 325 310553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000553 840 000Sweet potato408 800 000408 800 000408 800 000408 800 000532 900 000627 216 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000657 000 000Cassava394 582 500390 620 700394 582 500394 542 882  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Tomato328 320 000328 320 000328 320 000328 320 000947 520 0001050 393 6001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 0001082 880 000Onion  0  0  0  0782 304 000939 484 160989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000989 120 000French beans  0  0  0  0360 352 800407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000407 025 000Avocado104 686 400104 686 400104 686 400104 686 4003019 987 0983146 036 1343406 157 1183783 930 8614127 660 8564329 454 3444404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 0004404 120 000Banana95 940 000100 737 00095 940 00095 987 970  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sweet pepper  0  0  0  01067 251 3711195 439 6571313 426 5711383 225 4291409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 0001409 400 000Beans491 579 000491 579 000491 579 000491 579 000442 442 513601 764 410703 389 488739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000739 450 000Soybean134 400 000122 304 000134 400 000134 279 040  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Watermelon  0  060 000 00084 000 000120 000 000168 000 000216 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000240 000 000Sub-Total Main Production3006 207 1002903 372 7803066 207 1003083 512 3868667 626 8429677 623 96210317 263 17810824 896 28911194 800 85611396 594 34411471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 000Total Produccion3006 207 1002903 372 7803066 207 1003083 512 3868667 626 8429677 623 96210317 263 17810824 896 28911194 800 85611396 594 34411471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 000TOTAL INCOMES3006 207 1002903 372 7803066 207 1003083 512 3868667 626 8429677 623 96210317 263 17810824 896 28911194 800 85611396 594 34411471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 00011471 260 000EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)  0  0  06179 059 0006179 059 0006179 059 0006302 640 180  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Contribution from beneficiaries for pivots  0  0  0115 800 000115 800 000115 800 000118 116 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Supervision of irrigation infrastructure work   0  0  0615 670 000615 670 000615 670 000627 983 400  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0  06910 529 0006910 529 0006910 529 0007048 739 580  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsO&M investment   0  0  0308 952 950617 905 900926 858 8501241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 8591241 990 859Maize seeds3 116 8003 116 8003 116 8003 116 8007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 0007 200 000Manure359 445 000359 445 000359 445 000359 445 000537 881 683603 893 372652 412 011673 286 109686 593 671693 125 614695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500695 542 500TSP 684 000 684 000 684 000 684 000103 563 000108 205 380111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000111 528 000Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0  0145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280145 241 280Urea64 984 50064 984 50064 984 50065 803 500173 748 034188 848 671196 914 664201 913 136202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500202 567 500Pesticides  0  0  0 208 00031 695 07532 492 69133 226 83233 661 13633 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 00033 824 000Tools25 280 00025 280 00025 280 00025 280 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 00049 540 000Bags33 307 20031 741 20033 307 20033 103 620151 865 901167 471 280184 074 564201 248 328214 883 289222 068 426224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000224 727 000Transport to local market (20 km) 390 400 390 400 390 400 390 400 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200 762 200Sorghum seeds12 222 52512 222 52512 222 52512 222 525  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  0  0 195 0005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 5005 617 500Potato seeds41 760 00041 760 00041 760 00041 760 00060 200 00069 350 40072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 00072 240 000Sweet potato seeds125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000125 560 000Cassava seed125 137 500125 137 500125 137 500125 137 500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)218 211 000218 211 000232 911 000232 911 000191 437 500227 739 960280 860 953345 005 640398 964 400429 446 800440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600440 725 600Tomato seedlings16 735 20016 735 20016 735 20016 735 20051 747 00059 612 54462 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 40062 096 400Potassium chloride1 185 6001 185 6001 185 6001 185 60014 664 00017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 80017 596 800Onion seeds  0  0  0  092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 00092 730 000Herbicide  0  0  0  050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 00050 580 000Calcium carbide  0  0  0 132 73061 283 48363 551 12465 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 49065 027 490Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  0  0  023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 00023 042 000French beans seeds  0  0  0  08 140 5009 497 25010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 00010 854 000Sweet pepper seeds  0  0  0  0234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000234 900 000Beans seeds22 330 00022 330 00022 330 00022 330 00014 435 35017 039 50018 700 58319 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 00019 290 000water fee  0  0  0  011 458 26020 833 20026 813 10028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 00028 935 000Soybeans seeds5 880 0005 880 0005 880 0005 880 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Mechanized land preparation  0  024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 00024 000 000Risobium  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Watermelon seeds  0  027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 00027 000 000Insecticides  0  013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 00013 920 000Fungicides  0  015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 00015 180 000Total Purchased Inputs1056 229 7251054 663 7251151 029 7251461 133 8252845 298 6663328 264 0033789 609 2373899 945 8773981 664 3894025 863 8694042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 1294042 218 129LaborLand preparation 260 704 000260 704 000264 304 000264 304 000354 366 555361 987 410367 246 599372 137 929376 588 469379 201 246380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000380 168 000Planting67 524 00067 524 00068 724 00068 724 000136 938 560143 672 480147 140 933148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000148 084 000Irrigation  0  01 440 0001 564 80059 573 98975 239 70387 076 22993 280 57195 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 20095 607 200Fertilizer application36 288 00036 288 00036 672 00036 776 00064 847 46171 640 95176 389 88278 628 41179 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 40079 326 400Weeding88 228 00088 228 00093 988 00094 404 000170 860 299183 820 201192 547 318196 349 349197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000197 280 000Harvesting70 404 00070 404 00071 364 00071 364 000152 793 739171 633 121183 982 385192 625 349193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000193 556 000Post harvesting and Marketing71 108 80071 108 80072 068 80072 068 80078 251 52482 070 55884 065 68384 702 00284 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 60084 841 600Pesticides application 12 160 00012 160 00012 832 00013 456 00045 487 35848 193 38150 425 80651 666 67452 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 00052 132 000Total Labor606 416 800606 416 800621 392 800622 661 6001063 119 4851138 257 8051188 874 8341217 474 2861227 415 6691230 028 4461230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 2001230 995 200TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS1662 646 5251661 080 5251772 422 5258994 324 42510818 947 15111377 050 80812027 223 6525117 420 1635209 080 0585255 892 3155273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 3295273 213 329NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING1343 560 5751242 292 2551293 784 575-5910 812 039-2151 320 309-1699 426 846-1709 960 4745707 476 1265985 720 7986140 702 0296198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 6716198 046 671 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 22: Subcomponent A.2: Irrigation development subproject (Economic budget) 
56 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
57 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Development/SubprojectRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize241 200 032221 904 029241 200 032240 273 101796 599 898935 815 241964 099 011972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399972 976 399Maize stalks1 451 4001 451 4001 451 4001 451 4003 660 7264 140 9184 190 6104 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 4564 215 456Sorghum grain219 270 936210 500 098219 270 936219 183 9741 865 525  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorghun stovers199 972 416166 643 680199 972 416195 676 5431 701 336  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Irish Potato196 686 848180 951 900196 686 848196 537 121417 351 420491 457 426505 627 315510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798510 074 798Sweet potato318 329 533318 329 533318 329 533318 329 533414 965 284488 408 455511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036511 601 036Cassava386 597 513382 715 886386 597 513386 562 68039 669 521  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Tomato236 437 770236 437 770236 437 770236 437 770675 167 596773 305 289803 157 961808 604 359809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495809 911 495Onion  0  0  023 237 967570 796 659684 057 827729 714 024738 065 169740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443740 069 443French beans  0  0  06 097 163254 907 068291 528 491296 301 699297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859297 799 859Avocado81 518 52581 518 52581 518 525188 119 6722569 134 4522680 622 3032905 610 9083225 495 8643512 771 8753679 932 3073740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 0843740 808 084Banana93 384 71098 053 94593 384 71093 426 7339 338 471  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sweet pepper  0  0  018 922 230869 732 373972 122 3621068 322 9801127 632 4571151 796 1451153 728 9161154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 0351154 256 035Beans447 887 045447 887 045447 887 045447 887 045386 266 929490 640 124578 073 780613 738 188617 739 982618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071618 788 071Soybean114 935 027104 590 875114 935 027114 836 21111 560 47015 916 47720 397 07421 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 39321 803 393Watermelon  0  046 721 55668 135 60299 984 129140 086 798181 279 636204 328 937207 599 446208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616208 689 616Sub-Total Main Production2537 671 7542450 984 6862584 393 3102755 114 7447122 701 8587968 101 7138568 376 0349036 335 9149358 359 3279529 590 7899590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 684Total Produccion2537 671 7542450 984 6862584 393 3102755 114 7447122 701 8587968 101 7138568 376 0349036 335 9149358 359 3279529 590 7899590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 684TOTAL INCOMES2537 671 7542450 984 6862584 393 3102755 114 7447122 701 8587968 101 7138568 376 0349036 335 9149358 359 3279529 590 7899590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 6849590 993 684EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)  0  0  04124 217 8524124 217 8524124 217 8524206 702 209  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Contribution from beneficiaries for pivots  0  0  0115 800 000115 800 000115 800 000118 116 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Supervision of irrigation infrastructure work   0  0  0504 849 400504 849 400504 849 400514 946 388  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Dam and irrigation infrastructure  0  0  01305 645 0001305 645 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Supervision of Dam constuction cost  0  0  0130 564 500130 564 500  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0  06181 076 7526181 076 7524744 867 2524839 764 597  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsO&M investment   0  0  0206 210 893477 704 035749 197 178959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288959 532 288Maize seeds2 940 3432 940 3432 940 3432 940 3436 618 2647 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 6277 116 627Manure311 726 220311 726 220311 726 220315 090 172462 233 571526 604 371575 715 920597 127 846609 936 534615 638 685617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127617 653 127TSP 519 944 519 944 519 944 765 12176 629 96483 210 55585 897 01786 188 69386 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 50586 306 505Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0 419 124119 005 783124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009124 075 009Urea48 478 45348 478 45348 478 45352 639 592134 766 963148 842 828155 958 533160 097 135160 718 072160 761 789160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712160 773 712Pesticides  0  0  0 685 56127 075 56129 279 01030 384 01131 215 86131 610 41131 686 39431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 67431 689 674Tools26 084 84526 084 84526 084 84527 275 67553 162 04954 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 39254 929 392Bags28 116 09826 765 84528 116 09831 024 748127 650 703141 484 548155 783 187170 522 258182 090 075188 145 135190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815190 340 815Transport to local market (20 km) 345 220 345 220 345 220 358 586 693 638 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448 710 448Sorghum seeds9 682 3429 682 3429 682 3429 682 342 82 376  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0KCL  0  0  0 350 4124 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 4394 771 439Potato seeds36 006 74636 006 74636 006 74636 006 74652 270 51961 934 40665 469 35966 325 92166 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 49566 531 495Sweet potato seeds97 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 64297 772 642Cassava seed122 605 149122 605 149122 605 149122 605 14912 580 752  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)204 112 461204 112 461215 559 242218 982 920176 631 137193 274 204238 929 538293 495 726338 953 440364 402 555373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290373 639 290Tomato seedlings14 060 38514 060 38514 060 38514 060 38542 879 03050 918 59853 581 49854 067 32454 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 92354 183 923Potassium chloride 996 104 996 104 996 104 996 10412 005 88214 941 55415 216 89915 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 57215 354 572Onion seeds  0  0  04 368 46580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 09580 945 095Herbicide  0  0  02 382 79944 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 87044 151 870Calcium carbide  0  0  02 941 66753 478 71155 379 66456 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 36356 583 363Superphosphate 18% P2O5  0  0  01 085 49720 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 63020 113 630French beans seeds  0  0  0 203 2396 796 2347 954 3459 112 4559 214 0759 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 8859 264 885Sweet pepper seeds  0  0  04 730 558192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006192 376 006Beans seeds21 314 11421 314 11421 314 11421 314 11413 701 64514 716 63016 213 80516 824 50616 893 03116 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 97816 910 978water fee  0  0  0  09 591 14617 833 86823 551 59726 035 65626 428 27226 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 10026 531 100Soybeans seeds5 267 8555 267 8555 267 8555 267 855 447 354 445 583 495 321 540 776 564 760 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041 571 041Mechanized land preparation  0  019 578 55720 720 63921 990 02622 351 83822 882 37323 367 22523 623 05123 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 05423 690 054Risobium  0  0  0  0 1 519 5 836 12 166 17 951 21 004 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803 21 803Watermelon seeds  0  022 025 87623 310 71924 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 56224 595 562Insecticides  0  010 839 40111 471 69912 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 99812 103 998Fungicides  0  011 820 55412 510 08613 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 61813 199 618Total Purchased Inputs930 028 921928 678 6681005 740 0901248 173 8522378 026 7232795 236 3533142 180 6683243 372 5143315 457 0183352 977 9033366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 9623366 439 962LaborLand preparation 244 046 560244 046 560247 034 560252 275 180332 522 571339 281 306344 008 878348 325 349352 124 547354 363 340355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480355 203 480Planting64 587 28064 587 28065 583 28067 210 080128 670 996137 775 312141 301 382142 612 858142 843 133142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800142 892 800Irrigation  0  01 195 2001 696 52053 295 30569 725 29380 382 69286 284 21088 641 34488 824 46688 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 40888 874 408Fertilizer application32 947 68032 947 68033 266 40034 435 70459 233 69765 461 98169 788 38471 984 72572 743 25872 809 88172 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 86472 824 864Weeding82 488 72082 488 72087 269 52090 908 240158 081 268169 676 888177 851 087181 832 620183 036 292183 174 303183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280183 194 280Harvesting65 151 68065 151 68065 948 48068 133 040139 077 646156 776 667168 878 390177 355 655178 544 022178 639 183178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160178 659 160Post harvesting and Marketing67 106 49667 106 49667 903 29668 840 20075 019 71078 494 70880 569 68881 438 35181 703 17781 739 38781 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 38481 742 384Pesticides application 10 295 32010 295 32010 853 08012 412 81640 971 35844 201 97846 179 17847 331 26147 795 91547 832 54047 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 52847 842 528Total Labor566 623 736566 623 736579 053 816595 911 780986 872 5511061 394 1331108 959 6791137 165 0291147 431 6891150 275 9001151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 9041151 233 904TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS1496 652 6571495 302 4041584 793 9068025 162 3849545 976 0278601 497 7389090 904 9444380 537 5444462 888 7074503 253 8034517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 8664517 673 866NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING1041 019 097955 682 282999 599 404-5270 047 640-2423 274 169-633 396 025-522 528 9104655 798 3714895 470 6205026 336 9865073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 8195073 319 819 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 23: Subcomponent B.2 Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies/Subproject (Economic budget)
58 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
59 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2Sub-component B.2: Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies/SubprojectRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize37 283 80134 301 09737 283 80137 139 89938 346 71744 641 35658 388 39568 341 64471 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 19671 951 196Maize stalks 224 352 224 352 224 352 224 352 228 747 247 771 285 754 301 629 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731 311 731Beans27 359 20927 359 20927 359 20927 359 20928 449 36734 155 04848 864 25166 154 22782 755 95891 874 33494 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 42994 564 429Irish Potato24 827 46122 841 26424 827 46124 809 25426 662 34435 630 89555 382 10968 742 98873 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 31973 588 319Chicken eggs25 072 32025 072 32025 072 32025 072 32025 072 32025 203 95025 926 86827 723 71829 457 88730 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 78430 086 784Tomato132 866 493132 866 493132 866 493132 866 493137 196 957156 339 574195 805 843216 621 594232 073 475236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099236 207 099Goats (mature animals)41 862 51462 793 77141 862 51461 049 50043 606 78552 328 14271 515 12883 725 02883 725 02883 725 02883 725 02883 725 02881 980 75775 003 67162 793 77162 793 77162 793 77162 793 77162 793 77162 793 77162 793 77162 793 771Goat milk49 121 28054 033 40849 121 28049 706 64250 766 84350 791 40455 326 93562 253 03667 394 39668 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 79268 769 792Banana79 688 28683 672 70079 688 28679 724 80979 734 77080 331 92283 866 81292 652 957101 132 607104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758104 207 758Sub-Total Main Production418 305 716443 164 614418 305 716437 952 478430 064 850479 670 062595 362 096686 516 820742 390 598760 722 041763 412 136763 412 136761 667 865754 690 779742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879On-Farm ConsumptionMaize 784 922 784 922 784 922 784 922 784 922 795 824 861 2341 057 4651 351 8101 624 3531 711 5661 755 1731 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 4851 831 485Maize stalks  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Beans 429 838 429 838 429 838 429 838 456 703 591 028 913 4061 235 7851 585 0292 005 9122 453 6602 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 0302 579 030Irish Potato2 235 1592 235 1592 235 1592 235 1592 242 3232 285 3072 407 0952 579 0302 750 9652 922 9013 094 8363 259 6073 388 5593 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 7073 438 707Chicken eggs  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Tomato  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Goats (mature animals)  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Goat milk  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Banana  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sub-Total Consumption3 449 9203 449 9203 449 9203 449 9203 483 9493 672 1594 181 7354 872 2805 687 8046 553 1657 260 0637 593 8107 799 0747 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 2217 849 221Total Produccion418 305 716443 164 614418 305 716437 952 478430 064 850479 670 062595 362 096686 516 820742 390 598760 722 041763 412 136763 412 136761 667 865754 690 779742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879742 480 879Other BenefitsFee for strorage rent  0  0  0  012 978 21045 423 73577 869 260110 314 784129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099129 782 099Foregone opportunity income33 379 20033 379 20033 379 20033 379 20021 340 800  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Maize flour  0  0  0  0589 581 5371868 862 2312213 711 8092558 561 3872925 659 3253437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 6033437 371 603Sub-Total Other Benefits33 379 20033 379 20033 379 20033 379 200623 900 5471914 285 9652291 581 0682668 876 1723055 441 4253567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 7023567 153 702TOTAL INCOMES451 684 916476 543 814451 684 916471 331 6781053 965 3972393 956 0272886 943 1643355 392 9923797 832 0224327 875 7434330 565 8384330 565 8384328 821 5674321 844 4814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 5814309 634 581EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsSmall farming equipment  0  0  054 160 814216 643 256379 125 698  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pen house  0  0  0  0 506 1502 024 6013 543 051  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Fowl  0  0  0  0 40 492 161 968 283 444  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Chicks  0  0  0  0 87 463 349 851 612 239  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Drying and storage facility  0  0  0  0237 800 000356 700 000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Storage unit raw material  0  0  0  0101 452 521202 905 042  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Storage unit finished product   0  0  0  033 817 50767 635 014  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Pre-cleaner (3tons/hour)  0  0  0  03 381 7516 763 501  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Grain separator  0  0  0  03 043 5766 087 151  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Husker  0  0  0  05 072 62610 145 252  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Adhesive whitener  0  0  0  04 058 1018 116 202  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Polishing belt  0  0  0  03 381 7516 763 501  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Rotary shifter  0  0  0  02 536 3135 072 626  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Grading machine  0  0  0  03 043 5766 087 151  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Sorting and weighting section  0  0  0  019 445 06738 890 133  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Dryer  0  0  0  050 726 261101 452 521  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office furniture  0  0  0  0 507 2631 014 525  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office vehicles  0  0  0  010 145 25220 290 504  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Office equipment  0  0  0  0 304 358 608 715  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Equipment spare part inventory  0  0  0  0 321 266 642 533  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0Total Purchased Inputs  0  0  054 160 814696 314 5471220 836 4914 438 735  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0LaborOperatingPurchased InputsMaize seeds 454 507 454 507 454 507 454 507 460 488 484 409 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272 526 272Manure22 258 14922 258 14922 258 14922 258 14923 035 96226 872 87735 691 29542 887 01447 188 72849 147 30349 808 38250 044 39350 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 27850 117 278TSP 292 183 292 183 292 183 292 183 712 0072 427 3395 547 2625 959 2406 265 0586 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 8706 346 870Ammonium sulphate  0  0  0  0 682 1603 410 7988 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 9168 185 916Urea2 474 4272 474 4272 474 4272 474 4272 573 2723 023 6353 962 9284 461 9784 671 6454 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 3244 702 324Pesticides  0  0  0  0 129 325 648 3691 564 2911 596 6251 649 1041 710 1661 758 1691 783 3431 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 1181 791 118Tools1 723 8681 723 8681 723 8681 723 8681 746 5511 837 2801 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 0581 996 058Bags4 352 9544 182 5144 352 9544 332 6434 354 4244 633 9705 122 6605 446 4365 791 1676 091 1436 307 1546 420 4396 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 4246 455 424Transport to local market (20 km) 27 237 27 237 27 237 27 237 27 637 29 238 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039 32 039Beans seeds1 301 9741 301 9741 301 9741 301 9741 331 6081 473 1781 801 8202 097 8862 382 1672 538 3052 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 3692 584 369Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)9 910 9509 910 9509 910 9509 910 95010 281 88411 971 90215 599 85618 108 91820 705 49023 259 98825 063 18725 944 29326 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 39926 216 399water fee  0  0  0  0 45 244 309 5661 064 8652 136 2253 164 9383 729 9503 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 6403 896 640Potato seeds4 545 0734 545 0734 545 0734 545 0734 734 2275 589 4937 409 4918 537 3129 374 5129 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 4769 598 476O&M investment   0  0  0  01 624 8248 124 12219 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 89319 497 893Tools for water and feed 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008 307 008Chicken feed6 268 1646 268 1646 268 1646 268 1646 268 1646 310 2556 541 4247 116 0067 670 5447 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 6487 871 648Vaccination  0  0  0  0 16 197 80 984 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362 194 362Tomato seedlings7 901 2507 901 2507 901 2507 901 2508 177 7949 446 38412 198 65314 055 44715 433 77615 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 50115 802 501Potassium chloride 559 762 559 762 559 762 559 762 761 8981 632 6383 358 5704 042 7234 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 0934 478 093Small ruminants: Sorghum stover2 078 2082 361 6002 078 2082 111 9792 169 0512 142 4442 316 8872 583 2762 781 0202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 9202 833 920Small ruminants: Straw 314 880 440 832 314 880 329 889 355 027 341 645 414 330 525 325 607 718 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760 629 760Mineral blocks9 928 89113 900 4489 928 89110 016 26610 263 49510 772 84713 064 76616 564 70019 162 76019 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 78319 857 783Veterinary services  0  0  0  0 17 423 87 117 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080 209 080Equipment   0  0  0  0  0  0  0 37 377 149 509 261 641  0 37 377 149 509 261 641  0 37 377 149 509 261 641  0 37 377 149 509 261 641Leguminose green leaves  0  0  0  0 161 9681 270 8264 721 9929 992 18313 904 33514 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 89814 950 898O&M of building and machinery  0  0  0  0  02 378 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 0005 945 000Transport  0  0  0  0 169 088 456 536 557 989 718 622 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438 845 438Electricity  0  0  0  0 549 5341 923 3713 297 2074 671 0435 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 3455 495 345Miscellaneous  0  0  0  0 317 0391 109 6371 902 2352 694 8333 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 3913 170 391Maize raw  0  0  0  0250 334 096820 243 6331011 988 8981171 776 6191384 826 9131597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 2071597 877 207Water   0  0  0  0 836 9833 347 9335 884 2467 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 9397 608 939Electicity  0  0  0  06 974 86127 899 44349 035 38563 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 82663 407 826Fuel  0  0  0  02 231 9558 927 82215 691 32320 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 50420 290 504O&M main investment  0  0  0  039 237 000156 948 000275 848 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000356 700 000Miscellaneous  0  0  0  09 656 58928 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 76728 969 767Total Purchased Inputs74 699 48678 909 94674 699 48674 815 330390 544 7841155 432 4681550 449 7661839 880 4492073 589 3142295 069 8142297 749 2182299 042 1712299 542 0552299 654 1862299 392 5462299 429 9232299 542 0552299 654 1862299 392 5462299 429 9232299 542 0552299 654 186LaborLand preparation 19 869 00519 869 00519 869 00519 869 00520 220 89321 690 62324 472 43325 222 95425 871 14026 194 90526 348 40026 428 90026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 76026 453 760Planting5 762 4585 762 4585 762 4585 762 4585 982 2616 927 2718 805 4789 611 00910 313 97810 632 41110 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 39810 707 398Irrigation  0  0  0  0 271 5761 357 8803 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 9123 258 912Fertilizer application2 167 2962 167 2962 167 2962 167 2962 255 2242 625 6483 342 7573 604 4723 901 4594 133 3024 265 6274 319 2934 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 8674 335 867Weeding7 818 2027 818 2027 818 2027 818 2028 000 5918 824 09110 589 43911 764 54012 844 55813 416 25213 623 56513 677 23113 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 80513 693 805Harvesting10 460 39010 460 39010 460 39010 460 39010 748 66312 046 29714 802 25516 540 23118 047 66518 842 98819 231 14019 418 97219 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 97919 476 979Post harvesting and Marketing4 620 8034 620 8034 620 8034 620 8034 705 6635 081 9905 865 9136 315 7506 709 4296 901 3716 973 5337 000 3667 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 6537 008 653Pesticides application  127 488 127 488 127 488 127 488 239 438 690 0271 490 6991 542 3951 626 3011 723 9291 800 6771 840 9271 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 3571 853 357Unskilled agricultural labour (family)6 310 6566 310 6566 310 6566 310 6566 324 4676 440 7736 854 5257 600 8618 221 0378 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 2088 414 208Manager  0  0  0  01 613 5204 975 0207 059 1508 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 5208 336 520labour  0  0  0  01 095 6003 286 8004 656 3006 025 8006 847 5007 395 3008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 0008 217 000Plant operator  0  0  0  01 145 4003 436 2003 665 2804 352 5205 039 7605 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 9205 497 920Driver  0  0  0  0 438 2401 314 7201 314 7201 533 8401 972 0802 191 2002 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 4402 629 440Guard  0  0  0  0 358 5601 075 6801 254 9601 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 5201 613 520Administrative staff  0  0  0  0 956 1602 868 4802 908 3202 988 0003 227 0403 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 1203 705 120Technician  0  0  0  0 996 0002 988 0002 988 0003 029 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 5003 112 500Total Labor57 136 29757 136 29757 136 29757 136 29765 352 25685 629 500103 329 141113 340 825120 943 397125 370 358127 735 480128 178 228128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959128 314 959TOTAL PRODUCTION COSTS131 835 783136 046 243131 835 783186 112 4411152 211 5882461 898 4601658 217 6411953 221 2742194 532 7112420 440 1722425 484 6982427 220 3992427 857 0132427 969 1452427 707 5042427 744 8822427 857 0132427 969 1452427 707 5042427 744 8822427 857 0132427 969 145NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING319 849 133340 497 571319 849 133285 219 237-98 246 191-67 942 4321228 725 5231402 171 7181603 299 3111907 435 5711905 081 1401903 345 4391900 964 5531893 875 3361881 927 0771881 889 7001881 777 5681881 665 4361881 927 0771881 889 7001881 777 5681881 665 436 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 24: KIIWP2 economic budget (1/2) 
60 
RwandaKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - KIIWIP2PROJECTRWF/haWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCOMESMain ProductionMaize278,483,833256,205,126278,483,833277,630,661337,291,607539,193,394718,528,299878,824,5261,026,642,5201,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,5951,044,927,595Maize stalks1,675,7521,675,7521,675,7521,675,7521,975,6422,752,5923,355,6293,935,1644,476,0114,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,1874,527,187Sorghum grain219,270,936210,500,098219,270,936219,205,596217,125,438161,633,360107,748,38953,863,41700000000000000Sorghun stovers199,972,416166,643,680199,972,416196,744,698188,858,875139,154,99897,220,11948,077,68300000000000000Irish Potato221,514,309203,793,164221,514,309221,382,609240,284,499325,536,400415,884,878497,906,163569,070,520583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117583,663,117Sweet potato318,329,533318,329,533318,329,533318,329,533318,329,533342,488,471385,008,202433,326,077481,643,953505,802,891511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036511,601,036Cassava386,597,513382,715,886386,597,513386,570,740343,427,362230,436,141153,621,52376,806,90500000000000000Tomato369,304,263369,304,263369,304,263369,304,263401,519,006551,396,972704,373,619865,061,0851,007,432,7611,038,631,0131,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,5941,046,118,594Onion00025,425,07048,851,589188,117,365357,424,665530,414,327697,277,197731,787,073740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443740,069,443French beans0006,559,70614,555,82080,237,224152,792,923222,094,720290,012,010297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859297,799,859Avocado81,518,52581,518,52581,518,525197,839,189299,402,582880,701,1351,495,600,8982,163,926,7782,899,333,9383,124,578,1253,357,442,7643,551,719,3413,672,453,5133,726,272,6853,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,0843,740,808,084Banana173,072,995181,726,645173,072,995173,141,788162,997,615136,372,086121,230,035109,086,51097,771,396102,670,183104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758104,207,758Sweet pepper00020,604,20638,745,158249,162,519486,282,091746,910,3401,019,882,6721,088,344,5011,130,477,0991,149,160,5491,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,0351,154,256,035Beans475,246,253475,246,253475,246,253475,246,253450,851,123429,765,317470,496,281535,558,593603,006,267673,048,115704,987,439713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500713,352,500Soybean114,935,027104,590,875114,935,027114,860,179116,228,04694,670,61172,832,25547,943,91621,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,39321,803,393Watermelon00014,639,42134,667,39460,800,31897,367,722132,097,412165,643,489190,000,993204,017,460208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616208,689,616Chicken eggs25,072,32025,072,32025,072,32025,072,32025,072,32025,203,95025,926,86827,263,01428,770,48729,772,33530,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,78430,086,784Goats (mature animals)41,862,51462,793,77141,862,51461,049,50043,606,78558,433,09265,410,17877,620,07883,725,02883,725,02883,725,02883,725,02881,980,75775,003,67168,898,72162,793,77162,793,77162,793,77162,793,77162,793,77162,793,77162,793,771Goat milk49,121,28054,033,40849,121,28049,706,64250,766,84352,052,18354,581,92960,132,63465,216,68668,082,09468,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,79268,769,792CO2 - GHG sequestration 000293,255,780704,415,2601,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,7851,020,341,785Sub-Total Main Production2,955,977,4702,894,149,3012,955,977,4703,448,243,9074,038,972,4995,568,449,9147,006,028,2888,531,191,12810,082,050,11310,609,505,28810,954,566,13311,180,563,37611,304,648,76411,351,490,85011,359,921,29911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,349Total Produccion2,955,977,4702,894,149,3012,955,977,4703,448,243,9074,038,972,4995,568,449,9147,006,028,2888,531,191,12810,082,050,11310,609,505,28810,954,566,13311,180,563,37611,304,648,76411,351,490,85011,359,921,29911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,34911,353,816,349Other BenefitsFee for strorage rent000010,382,56833,743,34666,188,87198,634,396120,697,352129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099129,782,099Foregone opportunity income33,379,20033,379,20033,379,20033,379,20022,435,2003,830,4000000000000000000Maize flour0000589,581,5371,868,862,2312,213,711,8092,558,561,3872,925,659,3253,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,6033,437,371,603Sub-Total Other Benefits33,379,20033,379,20033,379,20033,379,200622,399,3051,906,435,9762,279,900,6792,657,195,7833,046,356,6783,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,7023,567,153,702TOTAL INCOMES2,989,356,6702,927,528,5012,989,356,6703,481,623,1074,661,371,8047,474,885,8919,285,928,96711,188,386,91113,128,406,79114,176,658,99014,521,719,83514,747,717,07814,871,802,46614,918,644,55214,927,075,00114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,051EXPENSESInvestmentPurchased InputsIrrigation infrastructure (pivot & sprinklers)00001,031,054,4632,062,108,9263,093,163,3894,144,838,9413,113,784,4782,082,730,0151,051,675,55200000000000Contribution from beneficiaries for pivots000028,950,00057,900,00086,850,000116,379,00087,429,00058,479,00029,529,00000000000000Supervision of irrigation infrastructure work 0000126,212,350252,424,700378,637,050507,373,647381,161,297254,948,947128,736,59700000000000Dam and irrigation infrastructure0001,424,340,0001,186,950,00000000000000000000Supervision of Dam constuction cost000142,434,000118,695,00000000000000000000Small farming equipment00054,160,814216,643,256189,562,849189,562,849000000000000000Pen house0000506,1502,024,6011,771,5261,771,52600000000000000Fowl000040,492161,968141,722141,72200000000000000Chicks000087,463349,851306,120306,12000000000000000Drying and storage facility0000190,240,000237,800,000166,460,000000000000000000Storage unit raw material0000101,452,521202,905,0420000000000000000Storage unit finished product 000033,817,50767,635,0140000000000000000Pre-cleaner (3tons/hour)00003,381,7516,763,5010000000000000000Grain separator00003,043,5766,087,1510000000000000000Husker00005,072,62610,145,2520000000000000000Adhesive whitener00004,058,1018,116,2020000000000000000Polishing belt00003,381,7516,763,5010000000000000000Rotary shifter00002,536,3135,072,6260000000000000000Grading machine00003,043,5766,087,1510000000000000000Sorting and weighting section000019,445,06738,890,1330000000000000000Dryer000050,726,261101,452,5210000000000000000Office furniture0000507,2631,014,5250000000000000000Office vehicles000010,145,25220,290,5040000000000000000Office equipment0000304,358608,7150000000000000000Equipment spare part inventory0000321,266642,5330000000000000000Total Purchased Inputs0001,620,934,8143,140,616,3603,284,807,2683,916,892,6554,770,810,9563,582,374,7752,396,157,9621,209,941,14900000000000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 25: KIIWP2 economic budget (2/2) 
61 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
62 
Purchased InputsO&M investment 0000124,394,548293,346,792453,691,846666,620,679822,309,903926,446,404979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181979,030,181Maize seeds3,394,8513,394,8513,394,8513,394,8513,944,5455,216,3686,032,1896,848,0107,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,8997,642,899Manure333,984,369333,984,369333,984,369337,637,995346,762,202398,598,336463,162,312532,617,340601,225,796633,555,950652,250,039661,055,018665,521,363667,299,903667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405667,770,405TSP812,127812,127812,1271,075,9045,144,86528,020,56048,954,92070,519,82790,453,90892,027,24792,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,37592,653,375Ammonium sulphate000450,9197,050,66942,662,07673,324,212103,986,348132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925132,260,925Urea50,952,88050,952,88050,952,88054,862,60761,083,58283,987,945107,789,306132,262,799156,693,179161,922,593164,365,132165,360,782165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037165,476,037Pesticides000568,8192,687,90810,857,98318,185,96925,617,25932,431,80132,970,68633,282,36233,430,94633,476,90433,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,79133,480,791Tools27,808,71327,808,71327,808,71329,099,72432,141,06639,570,52145,381,96051,193,39956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,44956,925,449Bags32,469,05230,948,35932,469,05235,675,05839,435,90564,430,32192,551,636123,670,802157,656,997170,672,537181,650,654189,710,081194,344,887196,278,686196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239196,796,239Transport to local market (20 km)372,457372,457372,457387,037417,924511,029588,648666,268742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487742,487Sorghum seeds9,682,3429,682,3429,682,3429,682,3429,592,3627,138,1924,758,7952,379,39700000000000000KCL000216,671435,0941,528,6712,622,2473,715,8244,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,4394,771,439Potato seeds40,551,81940,551,81940,551,81940,551,81942,815,40949,686,85557,502,32465,696,61272,645,00575,455,46276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,97276,129,972Sweet potato seeds97,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,64297,772,642Cassava seed122,605,149122,605,149122,605,149122,605,149108,926,44073,082,73448,721,82224,360,91100000000000000Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)214,023,411214,023,411214,023,411220,616,103212,298,759198,506,731207,034,112224,048,084251,822,861296,298,939337,946,708370,261,204389,394,172397,660,010399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689399,855,689Tomato seedlings21,961,63521,961,63521,961,63521,961,63523,942,45833,826,40644,687,49356,236,39666,535,59469,318,52169,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,42469,986,424Potassium chloride1,555,8651,555,8651,555,8651,555,8652,320,8406,431,75210,920,37315,413,85219,044,04319,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,66519,832,665Onion seeds0004,779,6158,736,93126,788,97244,841,01362,893,05480,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,09580,945,095Herbicide0002,607,0634,765,59914,612,16724,458,73434,305,30244,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,87044,151,870Calcium carbide0003,105,0495,790,95017,853,89130,274,72342,933,82955,567,09656,295,95456,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,36356,583,363Superphosphate 18% P2O50001,187,6622,170,9956,656,65411,142,31215,627,97120,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,63020,113,630French beans seeds000218,657461,1422,147,4984,097,9776,312,5798,472,5169,000,7629,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,8859,264,885Sweet pepper seeds0005,151,0529,461,11555,189,838100,918,560146,647,283192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006192,376,006Beans seeds22,616,08822,616,08822,616,08822,616,08821,366,69818,901,35318,190,93117,897,14917,605,82818,805,19419,352,10819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,34819,495,348water fee0000258,6123,442,3039,132,95916,296,60023,555,85827,930,31129,909,40630,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,74030,427,740Soybeans seeds5,267,8555,267,8555,267,8555,267,8555,242,3534,045,1852,896,2711,741,606565,343571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041571,041Mechanized land preparation0006,134,61412,212,56917,478,97422,909,86123,384,75923,629,27323,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,05423,690,054Risobium00001,6606,09612,49418,16121,07821,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,80321,803Watermelon seeds0006,901,44113,582,62419,089,09324,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,56224,595,562Insecticides0003,396,3466,684,2979,394,14712,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,99812,103,998Fungicides0003,703,7737,289,34110,244,48013,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,61813,199,618Tools for water and feed307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008307,008Chicken feed6,268,1646,268,1646,268,1646,268,1646,268,1646,310,2556,541,4246,968,6867,450,7337,771,0967,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,6487,871,648Vaccination000016,19780,984137,673194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362194,362Small ruminants: Sorghum stover2,078,2082,361,6002,078,2082,111,9792,169,0512,215,1812,288,2332,501,7222,697,2622,807,4702,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,9202,833,920Small ruminants: Straw314,880440,832314,880329,889355,027373,972402,390491,344572,819618,739629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760629,760Mineral blocks9,928,89113,900,4489,928,89110,016,26610,263,49511,030,00512,688,29615,493,20718,062,30819,510,27119,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,78319,857,783Veterinary services000017,42387,117148,099209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080209,080Equipment 000000037,377149,509130,820130,82037,377149,509130,820130,82037,377149,509130,820130,82037,377149,509130,820Leguminose green leaves0000161,9681,270,8264,155,1048,378,73212,247,27714,427,61614,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,89814,950,898O&M of building and machinery000001,902,4004,280,4005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,0005,945,000Transport0000135,270331,412524,171666,205786,257845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438845,438Electricity0000439,6281,428,7902,802,6264,176,4625,110,6715,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,3455,495,345Miscellaneous0000253,631824,3021,616,9002,409,4972,948,4643,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,3913,170,391Maize raw0000250,334,096820,243,6331,011,988,8981,171,776,6191,384,826,9131,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,2071,597,877,207Water 0000836,9833,347,9335,884,2467,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,9397,608,939Electicity00006,974,86127,899,44349,035,38563,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,82663,407,826Fuel00002,231,9558,927,82215,691,32320,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,50420,290,504O&M main investment000039,237,000156,948,000275,848,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000356,700,000Miscellaneous00009,656,58928,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,76728,969,767Total Purchased Inputs1,004,728,4081,007,588,6151,004,728,4081,062,217,6611,548,850,4512,713,525,4133,525,767,7674,318,116,2585,006,322,4005,438,704,6245,571,417,4875,622,308,7535,650,816,2185,662,779,5925,665,963,3285,665,869,8855,665,982,0165,665,963,3285,665,963,3285,665,869,8855,665,982,0165,665,963,328LaborLand preparation 263,915,565263,915,565263,915,565270,353,709276,527,807297,852,419320,781,775344,152,991367,251,254372,376,306376,205,065378,989,639380,701,456381,456,638381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240381,657,240Planting70,349,73870,349,73870,349,73872,365,97477,832,21296,428,679113,990,158132,119,348149,470,542152,276,342153,367,018153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198153,600,198Irrigation000729,4705,022,44321,653,65739,057,08258,513,48877,955,99585,608,60989,880,36891,650,54592,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,32092,133,320Fertilizer application35,114,97635,114,97635,114,97636,373,12338,004,00244,867,72453,000,92762,076,95871,202,39774,512,77476,283,97976,977,22777,152,44477,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,73177,160,731Weeding90,306,92290,306,92290,306,92295,079,754100,015,606118,820,918140,722,595163,465,641186,046,439192,392,931195,552,858196,656,303196,879,798196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085196,888,085Harvesting75,612,07075,612,07075,612,07078,190,38281,956,189102,377,765126,988,364153,843,985180,852,078190,451,980195,564,928197,807,679198,107,136198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139198,136,139Post harvesting and Marketing71,727,29971,727,29971,727,29972,943,21574,207,52276,377,03979,560,35082,997,78786,134,98887,798,34388,496,77288,702,73588,746,89388,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,03788,751,037Pesticides application 10,422,80810,422,80810,422,80811,697,15714,042,46722,312,98830,324,51138,679,43246,757,40948,259,06549,164,59949,570,32649,689,67049,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,88549,695,885Unskilled agricultural labour (family)6,310,6566,310,6566,310,6566,310,6566,324,4676,440,7736,806,1867,387,1467,966,1418,317,6238,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,2088,414,208Manager00001,344,6003,899,3406,454,0807,865,9108,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,5208,336,520labour0000876,4802,410,3204,163,2805,532,7806,464,0407,285,7407,833,5408,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,0008,217,000Plant operator00001,145,4003,436,2003,665,2804,352,5205,039,7605,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,9205,497,920Driver0000438,2401,314,7201,314,7201,533,8401,972,0802,191,2002,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,4402,629,440Guard0000358,5601,075,6801,254,9601,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,5201,613,520Administrative staff0000956,1602,868,4802,908,3202,988,0003,227,0403,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,1203,705,120Technician0000996,0002,988,0002,988,0003,029,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,5003,112,500Total Labor623,760,033623,760,033623,760,033644,043,440680,048,155805,124,703933,980,5891,070,152,8451,203,402,7031,243,736,4931,265,658,3551,275,480,8801,278,537,1431,279,348,2611,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,863Project CostsPROJECT COMPONENT5,155,923,0353,219,150,4092,962,986,0162,366,158,4321,365,038,289972,817,46500000000000000OPERATION & MAINTENANCE COST00000112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049Total Project Costs005,155,923,0353,219,150,4092,962,986,0162,366,158,4321,365,038,2891,085,489,514112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049TOTAL PROJECT COSTS1,628,488,4411,631,348,6486,784,411,4766,546,346,3248,332,500,9829,169,615,8169,741,679,30011,244,569,5739,904,771,9269,191,271,1288,159,689,0407,010,461,6837,042,025,4107,054,799,9037,058,184,2407,058,090,7977,058,202,9287,058,184,2407,058,184,2407,058,090,7977,058,202,9287,058,184,240NET BENEFIT BEFORE FINANCING1,360,868,2291,296,179,853-3,795,054,806-3,064,723,217-3,671,129,178-1,694,729,925-455,750,333-56,182,6623,223,634,8644,985,387,8626,362,030,7957,737,255,3967,829,777,0567,863,844,6497,868,890,7617,862,879,2547,862,767,1227,862,785,8117,862,785,8117,862,879,2547,862,767,1227,862,785,811 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 26: RDLP Economic budget and results (incremental) 
63 
NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITWithout ProjectWith Project1201234567891011121314151617181920INCREMENTAL PRODUCTIONTotal Production2,989,356,6702,927,528,5012,989,356,6703,481,623,1074,661,371,8047,474,885,8919,285,928,96711,188,386,91113,128,406,79114,176,658,99014,521,719,83514,747,717,07814,871,802,46614,918,644,55214,927,075,00114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,05114,920,970,051Incremental Production0476,522,5441,689,209,8474,493,122,2696,332,564,9298,216,867,38510,180,914,93211,211,652,92611,581,382,72111,790,827,68111,919,292,04311,970,513,10511,982,681,24511,979,993,34711,983,089,75711,985,865,52611,988,320,65411,990,455,14111,991,948,34611,993,441,550INCREMENTAL PROJECT COSTInvestment Input Costs0001,620,934,8143,140,616,3603,284,807,2683,916,892,6554,770,810,9563,582,374,7752,396,157,9621,209,941,14900000000000Investment Labor Costs0000000000000000000000Operating Input Costs1,004,728,4081,007,588,6151,004,728,4081,062,217,6611,548,850,4512,713,525,4133,525,767,7674,318,116,2585,006,322,4005,438,704,6245,571,417,4875,622,308,7535,650,816,2185,662,779,5925,665,963,3285,665,869,8855,665,982,0165,665,963,3285,665,963,3285,665,869,8855,665,982,0165,665,963,328Operating Labor Costs623,760,033623,760,033623,760,033644,043,440680,048,155805,124,703933,980,5891,070,152,8451,203,402,7031,243,736,4931,265,658,3551,275,480,8801,278,537,1431,279,348,2611,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,8631,279,548,863Project Costs005,155,923,0353,219,150,4092,962,986,0162,366,158,4321,365,038,2891,085,489,514112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049112,672,049TOTAL PROJECT COST1,628,488,4411,631,348,6486,784,411,4766,546,346,3248,332,500,9829,169,615,8169,741,679,30011,244,569,5739,904,771,9269,191,271,1288,159,689,0407,010,461,6837,042,025,4107,054,799,9037,058,184,2407,058,090,7977,058,202,9287,058,184,2407,058,184,2407,058,090,7977,058,202,9287,058,184,240Incremental PROJECT Cost5,155,923,0354,917,907,0426,704,179,0047,541,223,6778,112,729,4729,614,793,6628,274,304,9647,560,311,6936,528,435,7105,379,113,0355,410,676,7625,423,451,2555,426,835,5925,426,742,1495,426,854,2805,426,835,5925,426,835,5925,426,742,1495,426,854,2805,426,835,592NET INCREMENTAL BENEFIT-5,155,923,035-4,441,384,498-5,014,969,156-3,048,101,407-1,780,164,543-1,397,926,2761,906,609,9683,651,341,2335,052,947,0116,411,714,6476,508,615,2816,547,061,8506,555,845,6546,553,251,1986,556,235,4776,559,029,9346,561,485,0626,563,712,9926,565,094,0656,566,605,958EIRR13.88%ENPV12,047,416,137B/C Ratio1.19 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Table A 27: Project economic costs (RWF '000) 
64 
Rwanda Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase II (KIIWP2) Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs Economic Costs  Base Cost (RWF '000)202120222023202420252026 I. Investment Costs A. Technical Assistance & Consultancies 790,3471,362,2171,158,942845,501314,270151,693B. Grants and Subsidies 0203,6151,455,8471,751,089997,714-C. Goods Services & Inputs 360,126759,013552,990176,27280,85738,841D. Training Workshops & Meetings 463,278660,174623,548364,65556,10314,323E. Civil Work 555,8117,401,5198,309,2706,671,0406,000,2401,242,956F. Unallocated 2,856,682-----Total Investment Costs 5,026,24410,386,53712,100,5979,808,5577,449,1831,447,813II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 899,644780,457745,717745,717745,717745,717B. Operating Costs /a 16,57067,42676,566112,672--Total Recurrent Costs 916,214847,883822,283858,389745,717745,717Total BASELINE COSTS 5,942,45811,234,42112,922,88010,666,9468,194,9012,193,530 Project costs accounted for in the EFA786,5358,015,2709,959,8948,300,7886,829,8621,220,713Remaining balance5,155,9233,219,1502,962,9862,366,1581,365,038972,817Project O&M expenses in the future (year 6 onwards)112,672 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Introduction 
The objective of the SECAP Review Note is to assess the social, environmental and climate change 
issues relevant for the Project, in order to identify how the Project might impact them and how 
IFAD's mainstreaming themes (gender, youth, nutrition, environment and climate change) could 
be addressed through an integrated approach.  
Given the current COVID-19 pandemic, the assessment was conducted mostly remotely and was 
based  on  the  findings  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  conducted 
during the implementation of KIIWP1 in the three irrigation schemes in Ndego and Kabare sectors. 
This  was  complemented  by  stakeholder  consultations  during  the  remote  design  mission, 
including:  Farmers  Organizations,  national  authorities  -  Ministry  of  Environment,  Rwanda 
Cooperative Agency (RCA), Rwanda Water Board, Rwanda Forest Authority-, local authorities at 
the district level, technical and development partners (FAO, WFP, SUN civil society network, SNV), 
the  Rwanda  Youth  Agribusiness  Forum,  Kilimo  Trust,  Center  of  Excellence  in  Biodiversity  and 
Natural Resources Management (CoEB) among others. 
Situational analysis and potential project impacts  
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment  
Overall poverty situation 
Kayonza is one of the seven districts constituting the Eastern Province of the Republic of Rwanda. 
The area has been identified on the basis of its high vulnerability to drought and the poverty and 
food insecurity level of its population. The District, in fact, has been one of the most affected by 
the severe drought that hit the Eastern Province in 2016, followed by two years of poor rains. 
Climate  change  affected  agricultural  production  and  led  to  the  loss  of  more  than  2,600  cattle, 
leaving  about  47,000  households  food  insecure.  Nevertheless,  the  Project  area  is  home  of 
important and untapped potential of water resources that, if fully and sustainably reached, would 
contribute  to  significantly  increase  agricultural  production,  food  security  and  improve  people’s 
livelihoods.  
In terms of poverty reduction, Kayonza District has known a positive evolution from 2010 (42.6 
per cent) to 2017 (26.7 per cent), and today poverty rate is below the national average (38.2 per 
cent)1.  Similarly,  extreme  poverty  rate  is  estimated  at  8.5  per  cent,  against  the  16  per  cent 
national  rate.  In  spite  of  these  achievements,  the  District  still  faces  important  food  security 
challenges.  Data  show  that,  compared  to  2015,  food  security  highly  deteriorated  in  Kayonza 
(+21.9%  of  food  insecure  households).  After  three  consecutive  years  of  drought,  in  2018  the 
District  registered  the  highest  prevalence  of  food  insecure  households  (32.8  per  cent)  of  the 
Province  (average  16.2  per  cent)  and  the  second  highest  rate  of  severely  food  insecure 
households (4.8 per cent) of the country2. 
The increased food insecurity, in spite of monetary poverty reduction, is linked to a set of inter-
related  underlying  causes:  small  plot  sizes,  limited  land  availability,  low  productivity  in 
subsistence  agriculture  and  low  farmers’  purchasing  power,  exacerbated  by  erratic  weather 
patterns and recurrent droughts. District data reveal that almost 40 per cent of the farms have 
less of 0.2 ha, while 62 per cent have less than 0.5 and almost all farms operate under 1 ha land3.  
Poverty is highest among households with little or no land, who obtain their income mainly from 
seasonal  labour.  Resource  poor  rural  households  who  farm  small  plots  are  the  most  food 
insecure4. As the ESIA study reports, in the Project area almost the totality of the households (91 
1 EICV4 2013/2014 and EICV5 2016/2017. Poverty headcount ratio at USD 1.9 a day.  
2 WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda. 
3 EICV4,2014 
4 According to CFSVA (2018) 60% of food insecure households are vulnerable and 30% are extremely vulnerable. 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
per  cent)  own  farmland.  However,  35.7  per  cent  of  the  landowners  claim  that  they  have  not 
completed the process of recognition for the land on which they live and derive their economic 
livelihood5. There are also various cases of land fragmentation, whereby households with mostly 
more than 1.0 ha have sold pieces of their land to households that have migrated into the area. 
Because the fragmentation process is illegal, they have not processed any land titles for the sold 
pieces of land. 
Poverty also relates with households' vulnerability to shocks and with their ability to cope with 
these  shocks.  As  most  of  the  rural  population  is  dependent  on  rain-fed  agriculture  and 
consumption of home-produced food, people’s ability to adequately feed themselves is susceptible 
to shocks from farming and the domestic harvest, that arise as result of periodic droughts and 
floods.  Households'  low  resilience  and  high  vulnerability  to  shocks,  therefore,  constrain  their 
ability to overcome poverty barriers and to improve food security6.  
Table 1. Socio-economic categorization of the target population (Project’s area) 
The Project intervention area comprises nine drought-prone sectors out of the twelve sectors in 
Kayonza District, namely Gahini, Kabare, Kabarondo, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego, Ruramira 
and Rwinkwavu. The nine targeted sectors account for 63,177 households or 283,370 individuals 
(72  per  cent  of  the  overall  district’s  population),  of  which  52  per  cent  are  women7.  In  these 
sectors, 31 per cent of the households are headed by women. The population is mostly young. 
About 63 per cent8 of the resident population is under 25 years old while youth (between 16 and 
30  years  old)  represent  more  than  30  per  cent  of  the  population.  Only  58  per  cent  of  the 
population has primary level education, while only 10 per cent attained secondary education9.  
About 20 per cent of the population of Kayonza is covered by the Ubudehe10 governmental social 
protection  programme  -  safety  nets.  The  Ubudehe  Categories  1  and  2,  the  poorest  ones  and 
5  The  majority  of  the  households  have  purchased  land  but  not  gone  through  the  title  transfer  (mutation)  process  for 
various  reasons,  with  most  attributing  this  to  the  seller  not  being  available  after  receiving  payment.  In  other  cases, 
landowners  have  sold  land  and  migrated  to  other  districts  or  countries,  without  initiating  or  completing  the  land  title 
transfer processes. 
6 Coping strategies during times of food and financial shortages are seeking casual labour and reducing the number of 
meals;  some  households  migrate  out  of  the  area  to  neighbouring  countries  and  districts  to  look  for  food  while 
approximately 25% of the households interviewed for the ESIA study reported that they rely on the government to provide 
food relief during the shortages (ESIA study,2020). 
7  Data provided by the Government of Kayonza district and based on the latest survey of the district population as part 
of the Ubudehe programme system (2016). Compared with the latest national population and housing census (2012) the 
population of the district has increased of about 14 percent% (from 344,157 to 392.676 inhabitants).  
8 Population Census 2012 
9 NISR, 2015, Kayonza District Profile 
10  The  national  wealth  ranking  system  (Ubudehe  system)  classifies  Rwandan  households  into  4  categories.  The  first 
category (i) includes the very poor who do not have a house or cannot to pay rent; have a poor diet; and can hardly 
afford basic needs; (ii) the second one includes those who have a dwelling of their own or are able to rent one but rarely 
get full time jobs; (iii) the third category includes those who have a job and farmers who go beyond subsistence farming 
to  produce  a  surplus,  which  can  be  sold;  (iv)  the  fourth  category  includes  people  who  own  large-scale  business.  The 
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
eligible for the social protection programme, account for respectively 13 per cent and 35 per cent 
of the population in the Project’s area.  
Gender.  A  recent  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (WEAI)  Study11,  carried  out  in 
Rwanda  in  2020,  revealed  that  the  Eastern  province  has  the  lowest  WEAI  score.  The  major 
constraints to empowerment for women are the lack of access to credit (24 per cent), workload 
(21 per cent), and purchase, sale and transfer of assets (21 per cent). For the last two indicators, 
women in Eastern province are much more disempowered than women or men in other provinces. 
Despite achievements at the policy level, gender disparities still persist, especially in rural areas, 
where  traditional  patriarchal  attitudes  continue  to  prevail.  Women  have  equal  access  to  and 
ownership of land than men12, however, this doesn’t necessarily translate into equal access to 
assets, decision making on agricultural choices (what to grow) and control over income resulting 
from the agricultural production. Men have more access and control over agriculture resources at 
household  level  compared  with  women  and  are  more  likely  to  serve  as  active  members  of 
agricultural producer groups, credit or microfinance groups 13. In the Project’s area, the number 
of women in agricultural cooperatives is lower than men (38 per cent)14 and within those, their 
participation into leadership position is low.  
The Agriculture Gender Strategy prepared by MINAGRI in 2010 sets clear steps to ensure that 
programmes and activities targeting the agricultural sector set a strong foundation for equal rights 
and  equal  opportunities  for  both  women  and  men  in  rural  development.  The  Kayonza  District 
Development Plan also aims to enhance equity and equality (men and women participation) in all 
value  chains  of  agricultural  activities,  including  farming,  harvesting  and  processing,  marketing 
and income utilization. However, women’s participation into value chains is found mostly at the 
production  stage.  Gender  disparities  are  also  evident  in  the  value  addition  and  marketing  of 
agricultural commodities where more economic commodities are controlled by men. In general, 
women are associated with marketing small quantities of production while larger quantities are 
marketed by men who also control the income from the sales. 
With low education level and lack of financial literacy, women are less likely to receive government 
extension services and financial services which, in turn, limits their opportunity to engage into 
income-generating activities. Lack of assets challenges women to access financial services and 
products, as they are often not able to satisfy collateral requirements  needed, for  example, to 
receive  a  loan  and  start  a  new  business.  Being  primarily  responsible  for  household  care  work, 
women also face the double burden which challenges their participation into capacity building and 
trainings  and  therefore  the  opportunity  to  improve  their  skills.  In  male-headed  households, 
women work for more hours (15.5 hours) than men (7 hours), spending over three hours more 
on farming activities than the seven hours worked by men, in addition to five hours on unpaid 
reproductive and household work15. Firewood is the main source of energy in the Project area (93 
per cent) and women are the ones responsible for collecting the woods.  
current Ubudehe categories have been in places since 2016. In 2020, MINALOC has revised the categorization unveiling 
five new categories (A, B, C, D and special category E) re-distributing households into their socio-economic welfare status. 
The new categorization system is expected to become effective in 2021. 
11 Source: Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index Study, 2020, Final baseline survey. The report has been prepared 
by  IMC  Worldwide  with  the  assistance  of  the  DFID  and  the  Rwandan  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources 
(MINAGRI) at the national scale. 
12 In Rwanda, the land registration policy and the inheritance law favor equal access to and ownership of land. According 
to the State of gender equality in Rwanda Report, (2019) women had significant access to land in the country. According 
to that source, 58.3 percent of land was owned by spouses, 24 percent by only women and 14 by only men (2 percent by 
others). 
13 NpM, 2020, Financial services for women. Case studies on women’s participation in the maize and bean value chains in 
Rwanda and; DFID, 2020, WEAI Study, Final baseline survey.  
14 In the 54 cooperatives pre-identified in the Project area in the main supported value chains (rice, maize and beans and 
horticulture).  
15 MINAGRI, Agriculture Gender Strategy, 2012 
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
In Rwanda, the Gender Monitoring Office has defined four categories of gender-based violence 
(GBV)16:  (i)  economic  violence  through  denial  of  economic  rights  to  property,  succession, 
employment or other economic benefits; (ii) physical violence as the intentional use of physical 
force with the potential to cause harm, injury, disability or death; (iii) sexual violence as an act 
of forcing another individual, through violence, threats, deception, cultural expectation, weapons 
or  economic  circumstances,  to  engage  in  sexual  behaviour  against  her  or  his  will;  and  (iv) 
psychological violence as a trauma to the victim caused by acts, threats of acts or coercive tactics; 
these threats are  often related to sexual or physical violence. The District of Kayonza includes 
prevention and response strategies to fight GBV into the District Development Strategy’s priorities 
(2017-2024). Yet, few data are available on the gender-based violence cases in the rural areas.  
Youth. Rwanda is a young country, where youth (16 to 30 years old) make up 26.6 per cent of 
the total population, while half of the population is under 20 years. Youths are mostly rural, with 
80 per cent of the young population living in rural areas. In the Project area, more than 60 per 
cent  of  the  resident  population  is  under  25  years  old.  Young  people  are  amongst  the  most 
vulnerable sectors of the population: in Rwanda, almost 30 per cent of young people (16-30) live 
in  households  that  are  below  poverty  line.  Gender  disparities  also  exist,  with  more  females 
extremely poor (12 per cent) compared to males (10,4 per cent) in 2016/201717. 
Young rural people in rural areas are mostly literate (83 per cent, with no significant difference 
between males and females); however, the level of education is low and the percentage of young 
people attending tertiary education and technical or vocational schools is extremely limited (only 
2.8  per  cent  of  the  rural  youth  population)18 which  challenges  their  involvement  in  the  formal 
labour  market.  Indeed,  precarious  forms  of  employment  with  low  level  of  earning  is  the  main 
employment problem for the youth. It is estimated that in Kayonza District almost 30,000 youth 
are not in employment, education or training (NEET).  
More  than  60  per  cent  of  young  people  work  in  agriculture  and  its  sub-sectors  and  their  main 
jobs, mostly engaged as independent farmers (45 per cent in total, of which more than 53 per 
cent  are  women)  than  wage  farmers  (16  per  cent).  As  studies  report19,  root  causes  of 
unemployment in agriculture for rural youth are mostly related to lack of access to productive 
assets and natural resources, goods and services; lack of knowledge and technical and business 
skills; a negative perception of agriculture among youth and  a non-conducive  environment  for 
youth employment. These constraints limit rural youth’s ability to develop successful businesses. 
People  with  Disabilities  (PWD).  Kayonza  District  has  a  large  number  of  vulnerable  groups, 
including  extremely  poor  households,  marginalised  persons  and  genocide  survivors.  There  are 
3,426  disabled  people  in  Kayonza  district  in  total,  1,198  of  them  are  children.  Amongst  the 
population covered by the Ubudehe governmental social protection programme, 4.2 per cent of 
the targeted households are headed by disabled people. In the Project area, 20 per cent of the 
targeted households report having at least one household member living with a disability (mental 
or physical). The households tend to be more food insecure (27 per cent against 18 per for the 
heads  of  households  without  disability).  Furthermore,  disabled  women  and  girls  are  also  more 
vulnerable to sexual violence and abuse. In the Project area, most of the PWDs, especially among 
the younger population are cases of birth deformities such as the blind and deaf cases. KIIWP will 
channel specific services and activities to reach the most vulnerable households.  
16 Violence against women was defined in 1993 by the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against 
Women as “any act of gender-based violence (GBV) that results in, or is likely to result in  physical, sexual or psychological 
harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring 
in  public  or  in  private  life.” Declaration  on  the  Elimination  of Violence  against  Women, adopted by  the  United  Nations 
General Assembly (A/RES/48/104), New York, 20 December 1993. 
17 EICV5, 2016/2017, Thematic Report, Youth.  
18  In the Eastern Province of Rwanda, 83% of the rural youth population is literate and more than 90% have attained 
schools, even from the poorest quintiles; however, only 1.7% attained tertiary education and 2.8 % has attained 
technical and vocational schools. Source: NISR, EICV5, 2016/2017. Education Thematic Report 
19  IFAD, 2019, Creating Employment Opportunities for Rural Youth in Africa: Support to integrated agribusiness hubs, 
Grant Design Report.  
4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Food security and nutrition. About food security, the stability of food throughout the year and 
at all times remains an important constraint in the Project area. Findings from EICV4 (2014/2014) 
and EICV5 (2016/2017) show a correlation between poverty rates with the rise in the price  of 
foods  (especially  staple  vegetables  and  root  crops)  and  the  reduction  of  purchasing  power  of 
households. Household food security is strongly related to food prices with poorer households far 
more  vulnerable  to  fluctuating  prices.  Food  prices  for  staple  commodities,  such  as  maize  and 
beans, are generally increasing at the end of the year, before the harvesting season. This is also 
the time of the year when household food stocks have run out and market dependency is highest. 
Food shortages are also attributed to lack of adequate post-harvest storage facilities which are 
extremely limited in the District. 
In  this  context,  COVID-19  containment  measures  that  restrict  movement  and  trade  may 
aggravate food insecurity. Food prices have been showing an upward trend: in December 2020, 
the Rwanda Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased by 3.7 per cent on annual bases20. The prices 
of staple commodities such as beans, maize, and salt continue to surpass their respective 5-year 
averages.  
Regarding the households’ dietary diversity, it is observed that most of the households feed on 
legumes (60 per cent) and cereals (56 per cent) as their main food on a daily basis. Tubers (30 
per cent), mostly as cassava, are also a main food with a few households reporting consumption 
of vegetables (17 per cent). There is very low consumption of fruits (0.7 per cent) and animal 
protein in  the  form  of  milk  or  beef.  More  specific  to  the  dietary  compositions,  for  many  meals 
most  households  consume  a  mixture  of  beans  and  maize  “imvungure”,  maize  flour  porridge, 
cassava and vegetables including cabbages, eggplants and amaranthus “dodo” mainly produced 
in  home  gardens.  Findings  from  CFSVA  (2018)21  show  a  significant  correlation  between  the 
mother’s food consumption and the child’s food consumption: women’s knowledge and education 
on  food  diversity  has  been  recognized  as  a  significant  factor  impacting  children’s  food 
consumption, especially for achieving the minimum acceptable diet. 
In the Project area, the prevalence of stunting among children under five years was estimated at 
42.4 per cent in 201822, higher than the national rate of 37 per cent. The major underlying causes 
of malnutrition include limited access to nutrient-rich foods, seasonal food unavailability and low 
agricultural  productivity  due  to  climatic  conditions  and  declining  soil  fertility.  In  rural  areas, 
households  practicing  subsistence  farming  on  small  plots  of  land  are  the  most  affected  by 
malnutrition. Poor access to safe and clean water, health services and sanitation facilities (WASH), 
also  compromise  people’s  health  and  their  capacity  to  retain  nutrients.  Water-borne  diseases, 
such as malaria and intestine parasites, are the most prevalent forms of illness in Kayonza; more 
than  40  per  cent  of  the  population  has  no  access  to  improved  and  safe  sources  of  water  for 
domestic use23 
Finally, early childbearing also contributes to malnutrition in Rwanda. By age 19, 21 per cent of 
adolescent girls had begun childbearing (RDHS, 2015). This has serious consequences because, 
relative to older mothers, adolescent girls are more likely to be malnourished and have a low-
birth-weight baby, who is more likely to become malnourished and be at increased risk of illness 
and death than those born to older mothers. 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
Environmental assessment  
Kayonza District hosts a considerable part of the biodiversity of the Eastern Province, including 
half of Akagera national park, vast swamps and a dense hydrographical network composed of a 
multitude of small interior lakes and Lake Muhazi that Kayonza shares with neighbouring districts. 
20 NISR, 2020, Consumer Price Index. https://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/consumer-price-index-cpi-december-
2020  
21 WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda 
22 Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19-2023/24.  
23 NISR, 2012, Kayonza District Profile 
5 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
All the lakes are interconnected with the Kagera River by means of creeks and barely accessible 
marshlands (RNRA, 2015)24.  
The wildlife in the Akagera National Park comprises more than 90 species of mammals, 530 bird 
species and 35 fish species (REMA, 200925). It is reported that the most threatened species are 
rhinoceros and large carnivores, particularly lions. 
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network is 
composed of 9 catchments. Kayonza district is embedded in three catchments: a surface area of 
3,269 km2 in the lower Nyabarongo (NNYL in the figure 1 below), a surface area of 2,939 km2 the 
upper  Akagera  catchment  (NAKU  in  the  figure  1  below),  and  a  surface  area  of  3,223  km2  the 
lower Akagera catchment26 (NAKL in the figure 1 below).  
Figure 1: Localisation of Kayonza district in the lower Nyabarongo (NNYL), lower Akagera (NAKL) and the 
upper Akagera (NAKU) catchments in Rwanda (RNRA, 2015)27 
Kayonza 
The  Nyabarongo catchment has good and deeply weathered  soils with high infiltration rates  in 
narrow valleys with steep gradients. However, there is significant erosion which is related to land 
use in particular agriculture and mining. In the Akagera catchments, the eastern lowlands have 
relatively  fertile  soils.  The  land  covers  of  the  catchments  are  dominated  by  rainfed  agriculture 
and with significant areas of natural open land and forest plantations in the eastern parts. The 
western part of the Akagera floodplain is used for irrigated / agricultural wetland and the central 
and eastern parts are preserved as natural wetland (RNRA, 2015).  
In addition, it is important to emphasize that the Kagera River also comprises significant territory 
in Burundi and Tanzania. These shared catchments require special consideration as part of the 
design  of  the  KIIWP.  Hence,  the  National  Water  Resources  Master  Plan  recommends  closely 
24 Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA/RNRA), 2015, Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan, Appendix 7: 
Upper Akagera Catchment.  
25 REMA (2009): Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report”.  
26 https://esri-rw.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/a0d68c954ec142cda3554681489b3bc2. 
27 https://esri-rw.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/a0d68c954ec142cda3554681489b3bc2. 
6 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
monitoring  all  irrigation  developments,  selecting  the  best  suitable  land  and  promoting  rational 
water  use  in  respect  of  environmental  flow,  transboundary  and  international  water  resources 
management and downstream commitments.  
Considering the high water-demand for irrigation in the drought-prone sectors of Kayonza District, 
increasing irrigation schemes may compromise the availability and quality of water resources and 
sustainability  of  vital  ecosystems.  According  to  the  Rwanda  National  Water  Resources  Master 
Plan, the current level of water use in lower Nyabarongo catchment is very low. The upper Akagera 
catchment (Naku 1 in Figure 1) has a negative seasonal water balance and it is estimated that 
the catchment will begin to suffer from limited water stress from 2020. The water balance for the 
lower  Akagera  catchment  shows  sufficient  resources  up  till  2030  but  will  then  undergo  some 
limited stress during drier years from 2030 onwards (RNRA, 2015). The Project area lies within 
the natural drainage of lower Akagera Catchment characterized by high and sharp ridges on the 
west side and low slope catchments draining to the lakes of Kibare and Nasho. 
The upgraded Seasonal Agricultural Survey28 indicates that the total agricultural land cultivated 
in 2020 in Kayonza district was 93,300 ha. The main crops cultivated during season A were fodder 
crops (29% of cultivated land), beans (19%), cassava (13%), banana (12 %) and maize (12%). 
During season B, the main crop grown were beans (24.7%), sorghum (23.9%), cassava (16.5%) 
and banana (12.1%). During the short season C, only 349 ha are cultivated with sweet potatoes, 
Irish potatoes and vegetables. The use of organic fertilizer varies across the seasons with 37.4% 
of farmers using organic fertilizers during the season A, 27.3% during season B and 83.8% of 
farmers  during  season  C.  The  use  of  inorganic  fertilizer  is  steady  within  season  A  and  B  with 
respectively 21.6% and 20.4% farmers applying chemical fertilizers while during the season C, 
the use of inorganic fertilizers reaches a peak with 94.1 % of farmers applying inorganic fertilizers.  
Since the growing population and associated pressure on agricultural lands, the grazing areas in 
Eastern  Province  are  shrinking  due  to  the  encroachment  for  crop  cultivation29.  Therefore,  the 
livestock sector suffers from lack of feeds due to shortage in pastureland, insufficient and/or non-
controlled commercial feeds. 
Climate trends and impacts  
Climate trends 
Rwanda is ecologically diverse for its size ranging from highland mountain forests in the west to 
savannah grasslands and low altitude marshes in the east. The climate of Rwanda is dominated 
by the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) which passes over the country twice a year and 
is further modified by a widely varying altitude across the country (900 m in south-west, 1500-
2000 m in the south and the centre of the country, 1800-3000 m in the highlands of the north 
and the west and 3000-4507 m in the regions of Congo-Nile Crest and the chain of volcanoes) 
and by the presence of large adjacent water bodies of the great lakes. Most of the country benefits 
from two agriculture rainy seasons (February - May; September – December) (see below figure 
2 on typical seasonal calendar). The duration of the two rainy seasons is increasingly variable, 
ranging from seven to nine months, with an annual rainfall amount up to 1,500 mm. Rainfall in 
the  eastern  part  of  the  country  is  below  the  national  average  of  1,250  mm  per  annum.  For 
instance,  Kayonza  and  Kirehe  districts  receive  the  lowest  annual  precipitation  in  the  country, 
typically between 1,000 mmm to 1,200mm (MIDIMAR, 2015). Based on the WorldClim climate 
database,  the  average  precipitation  in  Kayonza  district  is  951  mm  per  year.  There  is  a  high 
variation throughout the year, with the wettest month receiving an average of 165 mm, and the 
driest month receiving 8mm. The average temperature is 20 degrees Celcius, with a low variation 
throughout the year. 
28 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR). Upgraded Seasonal Agricultural Survey. Annual report, December 
2020. 
29  Eugene  M,  2017,  Characterization  of  cattle  production  systems  in  Nyagatare  district  of  Eastern  Province,  Rwanda, 
Rheol: open access 1:107. 
7 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Below are graphs describing the evolution of average temperature and precipitation from 1986 to 
2005 in the Eastern Province.   
Figure 11: Average precipitation from the period 1986-2005 from the Eastern Province 
Figure 12: Average temperature from 1986 to 2005 for the Eastern Province30 
30 http://regioclim.climateanalytics.org/choices 
8 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 2: Typical agricultural seasonal calendar 
Climate projections 
Key projected climate trends31 are summarized below:  
Average maximum temperatures are projected to increase by 0.44°-0.6° C by 2020 and 1.3°-
1.9° C by 2050 (see below graph): 
Figure 14: Projected change in temperature for 2031-2050 compared to the reference period 1986-200532 
Rainfall is highly variable in Rwanda but average annual rainfall may increase from baseline data 
from 1970 by up to 20% by the 2050s (see below graph):  
Figure 15: Projected change in precipitation for 2031-2050 compared to the reference period 1986-2005 
31 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/rwanda/climate-data-historical  
32 http://regioclim.climateanalytics.org/choices 
9 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
However, for the Eastern Province, RCP4.5 models reached consensus that monthly precipitation 
would decrease from April to July. There was consensus among the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 models 
that monthly precipitation would increase in the period from November to January33.  
Climate change impacts 
In 2016, the Eastern Province was affected by a severe drought which led to the death of 2,417 
heads  of  cattle  as  well  as  poor  crop  yields  during  Season  A34.  As  a  result,  more  than  47,000 
households  in  the  districts  of  Kayonza,  Nyagatare,  Gatsibo  Ngoma  and  Kirehe  became  food 
insecure. The Government of Rwanda had to provide household food relief and water for livestock 
to  support  the  affected  districts.  Rwanda  suffered  from  two  consecutive  years  of  droughts.  In 
2017,  erratic  and  below-average  rainfalls  were  recorded  for  the  rainy  season  spreading  from 
September to December (SOND).  
According  to  the  University  of  Cape  Town  Climate  Risk  Analysis  (2020)35  which  assessed the 
potential impacts of climate change on several crops and commodities in Rwanda, the production 
of  beans,  one  of  the  most  important  subsistence  crops,  is  predicted  to  undergo  a  decrease  in 
annual production ranging from 0.8% in the Western province, up to 8% in the Eastern province. 
In total, it is estimated that the annual production of beans across all provinces will be reduced 
by 30 000 tonnes, resulting in total annual costs of climate-related impacts of US$ 15.9 million. 
Production of maize is predicted to decrease in production ranges from 0 kg to 7 kg in the Kigali 
and Eastern provinces, respectively, equivalent to a total decrease in national maize production 
of 10 692 tonnes and an annual replacement cost of US$ 3.8 million. 
Climate change mitigation 
Potential GHG benefit estimates for mitigation may be generated by: a) reduced soil carbon loss 
through  tree  planting  and  soil  and  b)  regeneration  of  degraded  soils  through  increased 
agroforestry practices. This will be further firmed up through the EXACT36 assessment that will be 
integrated as part of the baseline survey. 
2.3 Target group profiles  
In line with the RB-COSOP targeting strategy, KIIWP will focus on poor and food-insecure rural 
households  with  economic  potential.  Consistent  with  the  national  wealth  ranking  system 
(Ubudehe),  and  on  the  basis  of  access  to  land  and  market,  the  Project  will  directly  target  3 
different categories of beneficiaries, applying complementary approaches aimed at enabling poor 
farmers to graduate from poverty. 
Landless,  near  landless  and  extremely  vulnerable  households,  who  have  very  limited 
productive assets. Approximately 13 per cent of the population in the Project area fall under this 
category (Ubudehe category 1). Those engaged in agriculture have no land or land of small size 
(less than 0.25 ha), grow  fewer  crops, are less likely to have a vegetable garden.  Households 
with people with disabilities (PWD) and those headed by women are amongst the most vulnerable 
ones.  
Subsistence farmers and vulnerable poor who have limited land and access to resources and 
represent approximately 35 per cent of the population in the Project’s area (Ubudehe category 
2). Poor and food insecure households have an average land size of less than 0.5 ha, few active 
33 IUCN, Rwanda, GCF project on Transforming Eastern Province of Rwanda's capacity to adapt to climate change through 
forests and landscapes restoration. 2019. 
34 According to MINAGRI, 23,488 ha of crops were lost during Season A that stretches from October to December. 
35 Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey, K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future Crop 
Suitability  in  Rwanda.  University  of  Cape  Town,  South  Africa,  undertaken  in  support  of  Adaptation  for  Smallholder 
Agriculture Programme’ (ASAP) Phase 2. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome 
36 The Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) is an appraisal system developed by FAO providing estimates of the impact 
of agriculture and forestry development projects, programmes and policies on the carbon-balance. The tool helps project 
designers to estimate and prioritize project activities with high benefits in economic and climate change mitigation terms. 
10 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
members, are more often headed by a person with low level of education, or a single? or a person 
with  disabilities.  They  mainly  depend  on  agriculture  daily  labour,  on  their  own  agricultural 
production, unskilled daily labour, or on external support for their livelihoods. In the area targeted 
by the development of large scheme irrigation infrastructure, approximately 28 per cent of the 
households have less than 0.25 ha and 38 per cent less than 0.5 ha (ESIA, 2020). 
Market-oriented producers (category 3 Ubudehe), account for approximately 52 per cent of 
the  target  population,  are  less  vulnerable  and  go  beyond  subsistence  farming.  These  farmers 
usually have an average of 0.5 ha or more, are already engaged in a more entrepreneurial logic, 
will  be  supported  through  a  combination  of  technical,  business  and  financial  capacity  building 
combined  with  backward  and  forward  market  facilitation.  This  will  be  provided  in  the  scope  of 
innovative value chain arrangements that facilitate the participation of smallholders in commercial 
value chains. In the area targeted by the development of large scheme irrigation infrastructure, 
more than half of the population owns more than half a hectare with at least a quarter  of the 
households owning more than 1.0 ha each (1.0 to 5.0 ha). 
Amongst  the  target  groups,  special  attention  will  be  provided  to  women  and  among  those,  to 
adolescent girls and women heads of households; youth will be another priority target group, as 
well as vulnerable households (category 1 Ubudehe, and households with PWD) 
Rural  women. As described in the previous section, compared to men, women in agricultural 
production are more exposed to vulnerability. Pursuing gender equality, KIIWP will ensure that 
at  least  50  per  cent  of  Project’s  beneficiaries  are  women.  Adolescent  girls  are  even  more 
vulnerable due to early pregnancy (teenage pregnancy in Kayonza reaches 10 per cent, over the 
national average)37. Women headed households are disproportionally faced with the challenges 
of poverty and small-sized land (<0.5 ha), compared to male-headed households, which limits 
their access to productive resources. They also own less or smaller livestock than male headed 
households  and  consume  less  of  their  animal  products  (only  15  per  cent  of  female  headed 
households consume animal products)38. This category will be directly targeted by the Project’s 
interventions; women-headed households are expected to represent 30 per cent of households 
reached.  Through  its  Gender  Strategy,  KIIWP  will  promote  gender  equality  and  women's 
empowerment,  channelling  activities  and  services  to  women  and  strengthening  their  decision-
making role at community and organization level.  
Rural youth (50 per cent women) will represent 30 per cent of the KIIWP’s beneficiaries. Youth 
are found in the above-described target groups, while the higher percentage of them is from the 
very poor and poor categories. Young people have low rate of education (only primary) and limited 
skills on financial services. Overall, this target group includes (i) young men and women who are 
engaged  in  agricultural  activities  at  subsistence  farm  level,  with  an  interest  to  further  expand 
their activities to make it as a business, and (ii) young men and women employed under casual 
or seasonal work at minimum wage, who can be engaged in service provision (e.g., infrastructure 
development); (iii) young graduates, interested to apply their skills in the agriculture sectors as 
service  providers.  Youth  will  be  targeted  as  both  beneficiaries  and  service  providers  of  the 
Project’s supported interventions.  
Child labour in Rwanda. The 2019 report on worst forms of child labor39 highlights that Rwanda 
had  made  moderate  advancement  in its  efforts  to  combat  child labor  in  the  country.  Although 
Rwanda has a high degree of school attendance (89.4%), the report also highlights that children 
are  performing  dangerous  tasks  such  as  street  vending,  construction  (e.g.  brick-laying)  and 
production  (e.g.  applying  fertilizer,  carrying  heavy  loads)    in  agriculture  sector.  It  is  therefore 
recommended  that:  i)  the  project  liaise  with  relevant line  ministries  engaged  in  reducing  child 
labour and assess potential cooperation between agriculture and labour stakeholders and ensure 
coherence of policies and programmes on child labour prevention and; ii) promote the adoption 
37 Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19- 2023/24. 
38 WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda 
39 Bureau of International Labor Affairs, 2019, Findings on the worst forms of child labor, U.S. Department of Labor. 
United States of America. 
11 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
of  safer  agricultural  practices  and  prevent  children  from  carrying  out  hazardous  work  in 
agriculture. Specific measures are recommended in the ESMP.  
Vulnerable households. KIIWP will ensure that at least 10 per cent of the targeted households 
are amongst the most vulnerable category. The poorest and most food insecure households are 
more likely to have women with low level of education and children suffering from undernutrition 
and stunting. Although KIIWP will not directly target children, it is expected that they will benefit 
from Project's initiatives aimed at improving the quality of women and households' diets. To tackle 
the  multiple  barriers  that  traditionally  prevent  very  poor  and  vulnerable  households  from 
improving livelihoods (access to land and assets, lack of capacities, poor culture of saving, lower 
position  and  decision-making  power  in  representing  organization,  etc.)  and  enable  them  to 
gradually improve their livelihoods, KIIWP will deploy a social inclusion strategy, directly targeting 
the poorest households with services and activities. 
All targeted households will benefit from Project’s services that cut across the needs of all types 
of  target  groups.  These  will  be  channelled  through  new  and  existing  organisations  that  will  be 
inclusive of all groups: (i) water infrastructure operation and maintenance and water resources 
protection  and  conservation,  through  Sector  and  District-level  Steering  Committees  and  Sub-
Catchment  Committees,  Water  User  Organisations  (WUOs)  and  Water  for  Livestock  User 
Organisations (WLUOs) (ii) market linkages and extension services through commodities-based 
cooperatives and Farmers Field Schools groups; (iii) linkage with financial services, through the 
strengthening of Community Based Finance Institutions and their active support to the targeted 
cooperatives. Attention will be given to costs/beneficiary contributions, timing and administrative 
procedures required for effective participation of the various target groups.  
Institutional analysis  
Gender  Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) plays a leading role in 
the implementation of the gender agenda in the country. The project, through its 
Gender Specialist, will coordinate with MIGEPROF on initiatives for gender equality 
and women empowerment at the district level (coordinating with the Gender and 
Family Promotion Officers) in particular. 
The  Gender  Monitoring  Office  (GMO)  is  mandated  by  the  Constitution,  along 
with  the  Ministry  of  Gender  and  Family  Promotion,  and  the  National  Women’s 
Council for executing several programs and policies to address these gender gaps 
and  constraints.  Women’s  Council  at  the  district  level  will  be  key  reference  to 
align KIIWP’s gender strategy with the priorities set by Kayonza district on gender 
mainstreaming and to articulate with women’s associations and cooperatives.  
In the Ministry of Agriculture, a Gender Advisor supports capacity building of staff 
through  development  of  performance  contracts  that  address  gender  integration, 
including identification of key gender-responsive indicators. 
Kilimo  Trust  is  an  East  Africa-based  not  for  profit  organization  that  was 
established  in  2005  to  contribute  to  broad-based  wealth  creation  through 
agriculture  and  agribusiness  development.  In  Rwanda,  the  organization  is 
coordinating  a  grant  project,  financed  by  IFAD,  providing  support  to  the 
establishment  of  agribusiness  hubs  to  create  employment  opportunities  for  rural 
youth. The project (R-YES) is implemented by a consortium of institutions including 
the African Agribusiness Incubators Network (AAIN), Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness 
Forum (RYAF) and Rwanda Polytechnic, through its affiliated Integrated Polytechnic 
Regional Colleges (IPRCs). The grant intends to target 1,200 youth,  of which 50 
per  cent  women,  identifying  opportunities  for  youth  employment  along  selected 
value  chains,  providing  capacity  building  (through  VTC  and  colleges)  and  linking 
youth graduated with agribusiness enterprises and BDFs. A network of sub-Hubs 
will be established at the provincial level to facilitate these linkages. KIIWP2 would 
liaise with the grant to identify job opportunities for young people for the supported 
value chains and the provision of capacity building and trainings and link to financial 
Youth 
12 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
services.  Graduate  youth  would  be  also  employed  by  the  Project  as  service 
providers. 
Rwanda Youth Agribusiness Forum (RYAF) is a platform established to bring 
together different youth organizations, individual youth farmers and entrepreneurs. 
RYAF already engaged in IFAD-supported projects PASP and RDDP in the delivery 
of training and extension services, and it could be further involved to engage youth 
in  agriculture,  as  service  providers  as  well  as  beneficiaries  of  capacity  building, 
business and financial services.  
HoReCo is a business company of professionals in agriculture who were trained in 
matters  of  horticulture  development  and  value  chain,  irrigation  and  agriculture 
mechanization  as  well  as  building  capacity  of  youth  in  agriculture. They  may  be 
employed as service providers by KIIWP for the delivery of specific capacity building 
and trainings in areas where the company has recognized professional skills and 
comparative advantages.  
Nutrition   District  Plans  to  Eliminate  Malnutrition  (DPEM).  At  the  district  level,  in 
accordance with the National Decentralization Policy, multi-sectoral committees are 
established to coordinate the implementation of the nutrition programmes. Under 
the  leadership  of  the  District  Major,  these  committees  are  composed  of  district 
directors  of  health,  nutritionists,  women  and  youth’  district  representatives, 
agronomists and social protection, veterinary, and hygiene and sanitation officers. 
The district-level committees oversee the implementation of DPEMs. All 30 districts 
have developed DPEMs that will be key references for the development and delivery 
of nutrition-related activities in the districts targeted by the project. 
National  Early  Childhood  Care  and  Development  Programme  (NECDP), 
which  operates  under  the  Ministry  of  Gender  and  Family  Promotion,  is  a 
governmental programme already partnering with RDDP in the delivery of nutrition 
education. Collaboration will be established to deliver nutrition education to youth 
production groups and cooperatives. 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO).  Potential  partnership  with  FAO, 
particularly on technical assistance (TA) will be pursued due to FAO expertise on 
nutrition  and  social  inclusion.  FAO  together  with  the  World  Bank  is  currently 
implementing  the  GASFP  Sustainable  Agricultural  Intensification  for  Improved 
Livelihoods,  Food  Security  and  Nutrition  Project  (SAIP),  covering  also  Kayonza 
District  and  addressing common  areas  with  KIIWP.  Furthermore,  the  Nutrition-
sensitive Water Productivity (NsWP) IFAD funded grant, implemented by FAO, 
was launched in Rwanda on November 2020 and will be executed during the next 
three  years  in  the  frame  of  KIIWP.  NsWP  aims  to  improve  dietary  quality  by 
strengthening the capacities of smallholders for the adoption of sustainable water 
management  and  nutrition  sensitive  agricultural  practices.  This  will  be  achieved 
through an NsWP methodology that includes the selection of nutrition-smart crops, 
the delivery of nutrition trainings and the CSA practices through the FFS model. In 
this context, KIIWP will be able to rely upon and upscale the NsWP methodology 
and practices.  
WFP will be a key partner to link cooperatives supported by KIIWP with the Home-
Grown School Feeding Programme (HGSFP). In this context, partnership would be 
established  to  further  exchanges  on  nutrition-sensitive  and  climate-smart 
practices, promotion of nutritious foods and market linkages through the HGSFP, 
community mobilization and engagement approach and linking to finance support. 
In early 2020, the former Rwanda Water and Forest Authority (RWAFA) was 
divided  into  Rwanda  Water  Resources  Board  (RWB)  and  Rwanda  Forest 
Authority  (RFA).  Both  institutions  are  agencies  under  the  Ministry  of 
Environment.  The  project  will  interact  with  RWB  to  request  water  permits  and 
water abstractions. With support from the District authorities, SPIU will advocate 
for  including  KIIWP  II  project  areas  into  the  ongoing  national  reforestation 
programme.  Unfortunately,  due  to  limited  budget,  Kayonza  district  was  not 
targeted by the RFA’s pilot programme. Hence, KIIWP II has allocated budget for 
Environ
ment 
and 
Climate  
13 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
upstream  catchment  rehabilitation  to  ensure  that  the  command  areas  will  be 
protected against up-stream erosion and land degradation.  
Under  supervision  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Rwanda  Environment 
Management  Authority  (REMA),  reserves  the  legal  mandate  for  national 
environmental  protection,  conservation,  promotion  and  overall  management, 
including advisory to the government on all matters pertinent to the environment 
and  climate  change.  REMA  aims  at  closely  monitor  and  assess  development 
programs  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  laws  on  environment  during  their 
preparation and implementation. 
The  project  will  explore  potential  partnership  with  the  Rwanda  Center  of 
Excellence  in  Biodiversity  and  Natural  Resource  Management  (CoEB)  for 
monitoring the ecosystems and landscape restoration and rehabilitation measures. 
CoEB will provide technical backstopping to enhance the knowledge of biodiversity 
and  natural  resource  management  for  sustainable  development  and  community 
resilience. As per its mandate, the CoEB will support the project to implement all 
mitigations measures listed under the environment and social management plans. 
National strategies, policies and regulatory frameworks relevant to the project from a safeguard 
and IFAD mainstreaming perspectives are the following: 
Gender 
Youth 
Nutrition  
Nutrition 
coordinatio
n 
mechanism
Agriculture  Gender  Strategy  (2012),  MINAGRI:  provides  guidance  to 
MINAGRI  and  development  partners  to  be  gender  sensitive  in  their 
programming and interventions. 
National Gender Policy (2010) is the guiding framework to mainstreaming 
gender  into  the  national  development  process  and  outcomes.  The  main 
objective  of  the  policy  is  to  integrate  gender  into  critical  areas  such  as 
poverty, health, agriculture and food security and education, among others. 
National  Gender  Coordination  and  Partnership  Strategy  (2016-
2020),  guides  the  coordination  of  gender  promotion,  establishing  a 
framework for stakeholders’ coordination and engagement and set strategic 
priorities for action. 
National  Policy  against  Gender-Based  Violence  (2011)  supports 
gender-based violence prevention and response and provides an opportunity 
for further advancements. Significant steps have been taken in the country 
to  have  dedicated  staff  and  resources  to  provide  services  to  victims  and 
reduce  impunity  for  GBV.  The  existing  One-Stop  Centers  provide  critical 
support to victims of  GBV and can be used as a model for integrated care 
and support.  
National Youth Policy (2015) focuses on youth economic empowerment 
by  addressing  issues  related  to  unemployment  and  underemployment, 
limited skills, low rate of access to finance and markets, among others. 
The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation 4 (PSTA IV), 2018-
2023, introduces improved nutrition amongst its priority areas and outcomes 
and nutrition-sensitive agriculture as one of the main interventions.  
The  National  Food  and  Nutrition  Policy  (2013)  recognizes  the  link 
between  adequate  nutrition  and  household  food  security  and  focuses 
particularly on the “window of opportunity” for preventing malnutrition (from 
conception to the child’s second year of life). The National Food and Nutrition 
Strategic Plan, orients Policy’s implementation focusing on the prevention of 
child  stunting.  The  National  Strategy  for  Transformation  (NST),  2017- 
2024,  social  transformation  pillar  focuses  on  promoting  resilience  and 
eradicating malnutrition. 
Rwanda  joined  the  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  (SUN)  movement  in  2011  and 
since then several multi-stakeholder platforms have been set up at central 
and  local  level  to  scale  up  nutrition.  The  Inter-Ministerial  Coordination 
Committee is the highest-level convening body under the leadership of MOH 
14 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
s  &  multi-
stakeholder 
platform 
Environmen
t 
Climate 
and 
and co-chaired by the  Minister of Finance and the United Nations Resident 
Coordinator.  The  committee  brings  government  and  development  partners 
together.  Staff  from  MOH,  MINAGRI  and  MINALOC,  co-chair  the  Social 
Cluster  Food  and  Nutrition  Steering  Committee  (SCF&NSC).  The  National 
Food and Nutrition Technical Working Group (NF&NTWG) was set up in 
2013  and  is  Rwanda’s  multi-sectoral  nutrition  coordination  platform.  The 
NF&NTWG includes representation from the SCF&NSC, donors, UN agencies, 
civil society, academia and the private sector. UN REACH is working as the 
convener  for  the  UN  Network,  while  the  Donor  Network  is  convened  by 
USAID. 
The  National  Strategy  on  Climate  Change  and  Low-Carbon 
Development  (NCCLCD)  for  Green  Growth  and  Climate  Resilience 
underlines the need to manage the implications of climate variability for the 
social, environmental and economic development of the country. Given that 
Rwanda seasonal agriculture is vulnerable to climate change and population 
pressure,  the  strategy  recognizes  that  slight  changes  in  rainfall  patterns 
would have significant impacts on crop and livestock production. Therefore, 
the  Green  Growth  Plan  fosters  the  development  of  irrigation  infrastructure 
that give farmers more control of the water resource, facilitate diversification 
of  crops,  contribute  to  efficient  land  and  water  usage  and  ensure  water 
availability in dry areas.  
In 2020, Rwanda was the first country to update its Nationally determined 
Contributions.  Within  the  agriculture  and  natural  resource  management 
sectors,  KIIWP  will  contribute  to  the  following  adaptation  interventions:  i) 
Develop  climate  resilient  crops  and  promote  climate  resilient  livestock;  ii) 
develop  climate  resilient  post-harvest  and  value  addition  facilities  and 
technologies;  iii)  strengthen  crop  management  practices;  iv)  develop 
sustainable  land  use  management  practices;  v)  expand  irrigation  and 
improve  water  management;  vi)  expand  crop  and  livestock  insurance;  vii) 
development  of  Agroforestry  and  sustainable  agriculture  and  viii)  promote 
afforestation / reforestation of designated areas.  
In  2015,  the  Ministry  of  Disaster  management  and  refugees  affairs 
elaborated  the  National  Contingency  Plan  for  Drought  that  aims  at 
minimizing drought impacts by improving agency; enhancing monitoring and 
early  warning  capabilities,  water  shortage  impact  assessments  and 
preparations, response, and recovery programs. The crucial objective of the 
drought response system is to promote early mitigation efforts that reduce 
the  time  that  coordination  elapses  between  the  drought  early  warning 
message and the active response at the country level. 
Forest  Sector  strategic  plan  (2018-2024)  provides  Rwanda 
government’s directions on how to achieve the medium to long-term policy 
actions  presented  in  the  2018  National  Forest  Policy  (NFP)  for  the 
development and management of forest  sector. KIIWP  II will contribute to 
the following objectives:  
Biodiversity  and  ecosystems  services  and  values  will  be  enhanced  in 
accordance with national and international agenda; 
The adoption of Agroforestry and Trees Outside Forest (TOFo) techniques will 
be  enhanced  to  contribute  to  overall  forest  resources  and  agriculture 
productivity 
Environmental and social category (A) 
The environmental and social category is A, because KIIWP investments focus on irrigation 
and integrated watershed management and planning, including closely integrated activities and 
investments  on  water  harvesting  and  storage,  irrigation  infrastructure  development  (area 
15 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
>100ha) and marshland development. Despite the proximity to the Akagera national park, the 
area targeted by the project is already transformed to agriculture land.  
According  to  IFAD  guidelines,  all  watershed  management  schemes  (both  hillsides  and 
marshlands) with a command area exceeding 100 ha will be subjected to an Environmental and 
Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  before  funds  are  released  for  the  specific  investments. 
Environmental  and  social  safeguards  will  be  aligned  with  the  national  General  Guidelines  for 
Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (2006)  and  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
Guidelines for agriculture projects (2016). ESIA certificates are site-specific and valid for only 3 
years. Water permits will be requested for each abstraction point and have a validity ranging from 
5 to 10 years for irrigation interventions.  
During KIIWP1, an ESIA and Feasibility Study (FS) were prepared for Ndego and Kabare sectors. 
In November 2020, the Government of Rwanda organized a validation workshop, gathering all 
relevant stakeholders, to formally review both documents. The final FS and ESIA were then shared 
with  IFAD  and  approved  for  disclosure.    In  addition,  the  remaining  FS  and  ESIAs  for  the 
Kanyeganyege and Gishanda schemes, hydro-geological surveys for boreholes drilling and valley 
ponds,  water  permit  requests  and  ESIA  procedures  were  initiated  and  will  be  finalized  in  July 
2021. The additional ESIAs must be shared with IFAD for no-objection and disclosed 120 days 
prior to the construction of the irrigation infrastructures (See below expected timeline for finalising 
the required studies/surveys).   
The already developed FS and ESIAs have identified that no physical involuntary resettlements 
are expected. An abbreviated RAP was included in the ESIA prepared for the Ndego and Kabare 
scheme  and  associated  costs  were  integrated  in  the  cost-table.    The  abbreviated  RAP  will  be 
implemented and all compensation measures provided prior to the construction works or partial 
land take.  
Table 1: Timeline for finalising remaining studies/survey implemented under KIIWP phase I 
Area 
Gishanda 
Activity 
Feasibility study 
ESIA 
Kanyeganyege 
Feasibility study 
ESIA 
Feasibility study 
ESIA 
Pipeline 
for 
5000  ha  in  the 
Eastern Province 
Implementation 
of boreholes 
Valley tanks 
Timeline 
- Contract will be signed in May 2021 
- Final report to be submitted to the SPIU by April 2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalized in January 2022 
- Contract will be signed by July 2021 
- Final report to be submitted by April 2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalized in April 2022 
Contract will be signed in July 2021 
- Final report to be submitted by July 2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalized in July 2022 
To be finalized by May 2021 
Hydrological 
surveys 
Construction phase  10 boreholes to be constructed by August 2021 
10 valley tanks to be rehabilitated by July 2021 
Construction 
Climate risk category (High) 
Because  of  recent  droughts  events  and  the  vulnerability  of  the  Eastern  Province  to  extreme 
events, the climate risk classification is High. Among the climate science community40, there is 
consensus that Rwanda’s future climate will be substantially warmer, increasing between 1.3 °C 
and 1.9 °C by mid-century according to CMIP5 projections. Projections of future precipitation in 
40 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/rwanda/climate-data-projections  
16 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Rwanda are more variable, with estimates of the change in annual average rainfall ranging from 
a 10% decrease to a 22% increase by mid-century. 
 Through  financing  support  from  ASAP  II,  in  2020,  the  University  of  Cape  Town  conducted  a 
detailed  climate  risk  analysis  to  assess  climate  change  effects  and  future  crop  suitability  in 
Rwanda. The assessment examined the impact of climate change on the main subsistence crops 
which are beans, cassava, maize, groundnuts and sweet potatoes. The findings for the targeted 
crops  (beans  and  maize)  are  as  follows.  For  maize,  the  projected  decrease  in  production  is 
expected  to  be  7  kg  per  household  in  Eastern  province,  amounting  to  a  loss  of  2.5  US$  per 
household. For beans, it is predicted that all provinces will experience decreased production. The 
Eastern  Province is likely to be the most affected with an annual decrease in production up to 
8%, representing an annual loss of 38 kg per household and 20 US$ per household. The report 
recommends: i) the promotion of fast-growing varieties, ii) increase technical support for climate 
resilience and management of climate risks and iii) adoption of alternative and climate resilient 
crops such as sorghum, millets or groundnuts. Hence, the project emphasis on risk management 
activities  are  likely  to  increase  resilience  and  adaptive  capacity  of  households,  infrastructure, 
communities, and ecosystems. The project will promote adaptation and mitigation measures in 
terms of: (i) enhancement of agricultural productivity through climate-smart agriculture practices 
through Farmers Field School; (ii) restoration and management of pasture land; (iii) afforestation, 
reforestation  and  forest  conservation  through  synergies  and  coordination  with  Rwanda  Forest 
Authority; (iv) and promotion of appropriate and tested (e.g. under PASP project) innovative and 
climate smart technologies and production systems (e.g. zero energy cooling chambers, metal 
silos or hermetic bags for storing grains/cereals, drying grounds and improved warehouses, etc.). 
Recommendations for Project design and implementation  
Component A: Targeting communities and organizations. The WFP is currently implementing an 
operation in Kayonza (SMART WFP/KOICA funded project) while other IFAD funded projects are 
also on-going (RDDP and PRICE) in the same district. Preliminary consultations have been carried 
out during the project design mission, and further assessments will have to be conducted before 
KIIWP2 starts its operations in order to avoid duplication and overlap of the interventions in the 
same areas/organizations and, in turn, seek to complement efforts.  
For capacity building and vocational training to youth are able to reach young women and men 
from  the  most  disadvantaged  target  groups,  the  Project  should  give  priority  to  NEET  youth  to 
select participants for capacity building and training, thus increasing their employability potential.  
Tailor services and products to women’s needs. Services should be tailored to the needs of women 
and products that take into account their disadvantages. For example, loan provision in a context 
that  is  culturally  easier  for  women  such  as  informal  groups  (VSLAs)  should  be  supported; 
integration of women in all segments of the value chain (not only at the production stage) should 
be also encouraged, for example through their promotion as input dealers.  
Component  B:  Calibrate  beneficiary’s  contribution  based  on  farmers’  socio-economic  profile. 
Beneficiary’s contribution to the operation and maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures will 
have  to  be  tailored  to  the  different  productive,  economic  and  financial  capacities  of  the  target 
groups.  Furthermore,  the  type  of  financial  support  provided  to  target  beneficiaries  should  be 
aligned to their different socio-economic categories.  
Select NEET (not in employment, education or training) youth. To ensure that opportunities 
Promote  effective  partnership  strengthening  and  multi-stakeholder  coordination  for  improved 
nutrition. Link up wit the National School Feeding Programme of the GoR. In Kayonza, there will 
be  schools  receiving  WFP  school  feeding  as  well  as  schools  under  National  School  Feeding 
Programme. Coordination and alignment with FAO and WFP will be key to assess the selection of 
nutritious crops to be promoted. The assessment should take into account both the nutrition value 
of  the  selected  varieties  and  the  market  opportunities,  especially  in  the  frame  of  public 
procurement  (HGSFP).  Through  the  partnership  with  WFP,  it  is  recommended  to  strengthen 
linkages  with  the  HGSFP,  mapping  the  schools  targeted  by  the  Programme  to  whom  KIIWP’s 
beneficiaries  may  sell  their  production.  Multi-stakeholder  coordination,  in  turn,  will  need  to  be 
17 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
ensured  to  work  on  nutrition-sensitive  interventions  at  the  district  level.  Coordination  and 
collaboration with DPEMs are envisaged. At the same time, it is recommended to coordinate with 
the Gender and Family promotion officers at the district level, in order to harmonize actions and 
complement efforts. 
Entry points for mainstreaming gender, youth, nutrition and promoting social inclusion.  
To  foster  rural  poverty  reduction,  gender  equality,  youth  empowerment,  social  inclusion,  and 
improved  nutrition  of  poor  and  food  insecure  rural  farmers,  KIIWP  will  adopt  an  integrated 
approach  that  will  be  deployed  through  a  set  of  inter-related  practices,  activities  and  services 
mainstreamed throughout the Project’s components. 
Under Component A, KIIWP will: (i) create new alternative income generating activities on farm 
and off farm, suitable for near landless and the most vulnerable households, and targeting women 
and youth, in the frame of catchment rehabilitation and protection initiatives, such as afforestation 
and reforestation activities, agroforestry practices, beekeeping, among others; enhance access 
to clean and safe water for human consumption (constructing boreholes and valley tanks to supply 
water  for  domestic  use)  (ii)  implement  kitchen  gardens  and  promote  nutrition  crops  (iron  rich 
beans, orange-flesh sweet potato, green leafy vegetables, moringa and other fruit trees) that will 
be  managed  by  women,  to  improve  access  to  nutritious  food  for  own  households’  own 
consumption while creating new income generating activities for women; (iii) implement Climate 
and  Nutrition  Smart  Technologies  (such  as  storage  facilities,  dryers,  climate  resilient  drying 
grounds and warehouses) to reduce post-harvest losses and improve year-round availability of 
nutritious food crops; strengthen farmers’ knowledge on good nutrition practices and WASH in 
the  frame  of  FFS;  (iv)  support  the  development  of  small-scale  mechanisation  (power  tillers, 
manual drafted tools) directly targeting youth as main service providers, and promoting climate 
smart workload-reducing tools adapted to the needs of women, thus reducing their labour burden 
while decreasing impact on natural resources. 
Furthermore, the adoption of the GALS methodology will offer a framework to implement gender 
transformative approaches by addressing power inequalities between women and men and foster 
women’s decision-making power at the household and community level. To implement GALS, the 
Project will rely upon the capacities installed at the district level under the on-going IFAD funded 
RDDP (GALS master trainers and facilitators already trained and able to provide services), where 
the  methodology  is  being  implemented  in  the  frame  of  the  Livestock  Farmers  Field  Schools 
supported by the project41.  
Under Component B, the Project will: (i) channel capacity building and trainings to women and 
youth  (targeting  respectively  50  and  30  per  cent  of  the  overall  beneficiaries),  as  members  of 
Farmers Organizations, including financial literacy and business skills, leadership trainings, and 
enabling  increases  of  women’s  savings  through  Village  Savings  and  Loans  Associations;  (ii) 
provide  specific  window  opportunities  for  women  and  youth  to  access  to  grants,  with  a  lower 
beneficiary’s contribution, to enhance the adoption of the climate smart agriculture and of small 
scale  irrigation  technologies;  (iii)  support  youth  vocational  and  business  skills,  linkages  with 
markets,  enterprises  and  financial  institutions,  by  leveraging  on  existing  partnership  with  the 
Rwanda  Youth  Agribusiness  Forum  (RYAF)  and  Kilimo  Trust.  To  further  the  creation  of  new 
employment opportunities for young women and men, the Project will rely upon the Agribusiness 
Hubs established in the frame of the on-going R-YES42 grant, financed by IFAD, coordinated by 
Kilimo Trust and implemented through a consortium of organizations. 
Quotas will be established in the frame  of Farmers  Organizations and WUOs to  ensure women 
and youth’s representation and participation in decision making processes. It is expected that the 
water  management  committees  will  comprise  40  per  cent  women  and  25  per  cent  youth.  To 
41  Two  civil  society  organizations  have  been  identified  and  selected  by  RDDP  to  deliver  GALS  trainings;  the  same 
organizations might be recruited by KIIWP by extending their contract to cover additional groups in the same district. This 
will help reducing procurement time and costs and to speed up implementation.  
42 Rural Youth Employment Opportunities: Supported to Integrated Agribusiness Hubs in Rwanda (R-YES) Project.  
18 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
ensure  the  participation  of  women,  attention  to  the  location  and  timing  of  various  Project’s 
activities may increase their opportunity to participate. 
A  Gender  strategy  has  been  drafted  during  KIIWP1.  The  strategy  addresses  gender  disparities 
and the key constraints that limit women’s participation in economic opportunities and provides 
general recommendations to ensure that women will benefit from equal access to assets, services 
and capacity building. The Project gender strategy will be revised to embed new initiatives that 
will be promoted during the second phase of the Project. The strategy will peruse the following 
objectives:  (i)  expand  women's  economic  empowerment  through  access  to  and  control  over 
assets and resources; (ii) strengthen women's decision-making role in the community and their 
representation in membership and leadership of sub-catchment management committees, WUOs 
and Farmers Organizations; (iii) achieve a reduced workload and an improved equitable workload 
balance between women and men, girls and boys. 
Entry  points  for  mainstreaming  environment  management  and  climate  change 
adaptation and mitigation  
Sub-component  A.1:  Catchment  Rehabilitation  and  Protection.  The  expected  outputs 
would be investments integrated land and water resources management (ILWRM) interventions 
(in addition to those financed under KIIWP1) in order to enable stakeholders of upstream (rainfed 
areas) and downstream areas (irrigation schemes) to work together for the better utilization and 
management of their land and water resources. Catchment rehabilitation and protection measures 
including afforestation, reforestation, agro-forestry and grasses will be favourable to biodiversity 
and increases habitat to living organisms as well as tree cover in the area. In addition, the creation 
of balancing storages may also provide opportunity to aquatic biodiversity. 
The catchment rehabilitation and protection approach includes the following steps: i) community-
based participatory sub-catchment planning; ii) land husbandry in rainfed areas43; iii) construction 
of  boreholes  and  valley  tanks  to  supply  water  for  livestock  and  domestic  use44;  and  iv) 
reforestation / afforestation with both fruit trees and native species. The WFP’s community-based 
participatory planning methodology will be adopted as part of the sub-catchment planning and 
will be crucial to ensure that the needs of all communities’ representatives are taken into account, 
including  the  most  vulnerable  households,  avoiding  elite  capture,  and  that  women  have  equal 
representation in decision making.  
The community competition (Inteko y’Imihigo), successfully implemented under KWAMP, will 
be scaled up. The competitive system is a tool to mobilize the community for a better involvement 
in the sustainable development and management of watersheds. Under this intervention, the local 
community members (groups or villages) will submit Business Plans that aim at preserving natural 
resources  in  their  respective  sub-catchments.  Potential  projects  to  be  financed  could  include 
beekeeping,  provision  of  energy  saving  stoves,  rainwater  harvesting  structures,  sustainable 
production of charcoal as a youth business, eco-tourism, and biodiversity conservation through 
plantation of endemic trees species on their farm.  
Environnemental Management Plan. Under this Sub-component45, Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMPs) identified by the  ESIAs for Kibare, Nasho,  Ihema, Kanyeganyenge 
and Gishanda command areas will be implemented.  
Overall, the ESMP  for the full project  recommends to: i) conduct  rapid site biodiversity survey 
prior  to  construction  of  irrigation  infrastructure  to  ensure  that  the  Project  will  not  have  any 
negative  impact  on  ecosystems  (flora  and  fauna);  and  ii)  elaborate  an  Integrated  Pest 
43 Farmland protection and rehabilitation techniques will allow to reduce runoff of rainwater and stimulate infiltration. This 
will be combined with land husbandry practices geared towards increasing vegetative cover and increasing soil fertility. 
The recommended technologies include drainage, land levelling (terracing), contour buffer strips, contour ditches, contour 
bunds, contour ploughing, silt traps and application of lime, mulching and compost. Where needed, slowing down runoff 
by  construction  of  check  dams,  gabions,  and  side  drains  will  be  implemented.  These  will  be  complimented  with  agro-
forestry, including planting of trees, shrubs and grasses as well as pastures.  
44 20 solar-powered boreholes and 15 valley tanks in Ndego, Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi sectors. 
45 ESIAs and feasibility studies were prepared during KIIWP phase I. 
19 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Management Plan for the entire Project as part of the detailed design of each irrigation scheme. 
Specific  ESMPs  were  developed  for  each  command  areas  to  tackle  the  following  key  adverse 
impacts associated with design and management of irrigation system:  
  Reduction in downstream flow as a result of diversion of water, which could compromise 
water availability downstream to satisfy human and livestock demand and affect aquatic 
habitats and biodiversity (ie. environmental flow);  
  Soil erosion caused by scheme excavation works (including access/scheme roads, dams) 
and  poorly  managed  upper  catchment  areas,  leading  to  loss  of  cultivable  land  and/or 
siltation of canals;  
  Soil  degradation  and  salinization  due  to  improper  application  of  agrochemicals, 
overwatering and poor drainage;  
  Reduction in water quality due to application of agrochemicals or oil spills, affecting water 
for domestic and livestock use downstream, as well as causing poisoning of aquatic fauna;  
  Loss  of  biodiversity  and  ecological  imbalances  caused  by:  clearing  land  for  agriculture, 
installing irrigation infrastructure (eg. intakes in wetlands or lakes), poaching as a result 
of the schemes’ proximity to the Akagera National Park, and from pesticides poisoning of 
non-target species, particularly bees and other beneficial insects. 
The already developed Feasibility Studies and ESIAs for Ihema, Kibare and Nasho command areas 
have  identified  that  no  physical  involuntary  resettlements  are  expected,  but  around  200 
households will lose part of their land and another more than 1,200 households will lose income 
during land husbandry work, as they may miss one or more agriculture seasons. The Resettlement 
Action  Plans  (RAPs)  shall  be  prepared,  implemented  and  all  compensation  measures  provided 
prior to the construction works or land take. The final budget for resettlement compensation will 
be confirmed after detailed engineering design and detailed resettlement action Plan.  
The  Project  shall  implement  the  Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  Plan  procedures 
developed  in  2018,  as  Annex  5  of  the  PDR,  within  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
Framework (ESMF) to guide the various and required consultations processes (RAPs) and ensure 
proactive approach to identify development pathways with local communities and build ownership 
on project initiatives.   
Grievance  Redress  Mechanism.  Establishment  of  irrigation  schemes  could  raise  complaints 
among  local  communities  mainly  due  to  conflict  among  water  users,  resettlement,  conflict 
between workers and local community, etc. In this situation, Grievance procedures are required 
to ensure that Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are able to lodge complaints or concerns, without 
cost, and with the assurance of a timely and satisfactory resolution of the issue. The procedures 
also  ensure  that  the  entitlements  are  effectively  transferred  to  the  intended  beneficiaries. 
Stakeholders will be informed of the intention to implement the grievance mechanism, and the 
procedure will be communicated at the time that the RAPs are finalized. Grievances may arise 
from  members  of  communities  who  are  dissatisfied  with  eligibility  criteria  use,  community 
planning and actual implementation or compensation. In the case an agreement was not reached 
through the project-level GRM, the Project Affected Persons may contact IFAD via the following 
email  address  (SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org)  or  send  a  complaint  form  to  IFAD  headquarters 
physical  address.  IFAD  complaints  mechanism  are  further  explained  on  the  IFAD  website46.  
Specific procedures related to the project are detailed in the PIM. 
7. Further studies needed 
Minimum Dietary Diversity Score – Women (MDD-W): at inception phase (baseline study), and 
completion. This activity has been included in a separate budget line.  
Rapid biodiversity survey for each irrigation command areas.  
46 https://www.ifad.org/en/accountability-and-complaints-procedures  
20 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
8. Monitoring and evaluation  
SECAP  procedures.  During  the  preparatory  phase,  one  ESIA  was  completed  and  resulted  in 
three preliminary ESMPs (see appendix 1). These plans will be further refined during the design 
of irrigation schemes. The existing ESMPs include several interventions that aim at tackling the 
main  environmental  and  social  issues  identified  during  the  environmental  and  social  impact 
assessment  conducted  in  early  2020,  such  as:  i)  potential  loss  of  native  flora  and  fauna,  ii) 
infestation  by  alien  species,  pollution  and  contamination  from  spillages  and  the  use  of  agro-
chemicals, iii) water loss; iv) sedimentation and erosion, v) loss of ecosystems services and vi) 
increased risk of water borne diseases. The monitoring of project interventions and their potential 
impact on natural resources bases will be crucial during the construction as well as operational 
phase  of  the  irrigation  schemes.  The  capacity  building  of  local  communities  will  be  critical  for 
achieving sustainability and household resilience.  
Monitoring sustainability. With support from CoEB, the Project will mobilise several tools for 
evaluating  and  documenting  progress  in  improving  ecosystem  services  including  a  rapid 
biodiversity survey for each irrigation scheme and satellite imagery for assessing impacts of soil 
and water conservation measures.  
Monitoring resilience. Because of the recent droughts (2016, 2017), high dependence on rain-
fed  agriculture,  crop  failure  and  poor  markets  linkages,  the  population  of  Kayonza  district  has 
recently suffered from severe food and nutrition insecurity. KIIWP2 will tackle climate risks, food 
insecurity and nutrition issues through the production pathway, identifying key climate smart and 
nutrient  rich  crop  varieties  that  would  be  promoted  for  both  household’s  consumption  and  for 
sale.  To  monitor  progress  and  support  adjustments  along  the  line,  the  project  will  adopt  the 
resilience framework recently developed by IFAD, which aims at measuring the number of people 
with  improved  resilience  due  to  a  project  intervention.  The  framework  proposes  a  scorecard 
matrix, the Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool (RMDT), to support the design and monitoring 
of project interventions47. This framework operationalizes resilience as a set of three interrelated 
capacities  (3ACs)  possessed  by  each  household  that  make  them  able  to  anticipate  (prevent 
impacts), absorb (recover and withstand) and adapt (build back better) to the stresses and shocks 
to which they are likely to be exposed (Bahadur et al. 2015)48. Tailored to the project’s activities, 
the resilience scorecard will monitor household resilience through a set of questions and relative 
answers that will be defined at project start up, with technical assistance from IFAD- Sustainable 
Production Markets and Institutions Division (PMI) and the IFAD- Environment, Climate, Gender 
and Social Inclusion Division, and together with PMUs and project implementers. Answers will be 
gathered  through  surveys  as  part  of  the  baseline,  midterm  and  end  term  surveys  in  order  to 
evaluate resilience by comparing results in different stages of the project implementation. The 
RMDT (see Appendix 2) measures the improvement of resilience by looking at two factors: (i) if 
the project interventions aimed at increasing one or more 3 ACs have been adopted; and (ii) if 
according to the perceptions of beneficiaries, the adoption of these interventions have produced 
the expected results on one or more of the 3  ACs. Each one  of these factors corresponds to a 
linked  i)  “adoption”  and  ii)  “result”  question,  for  each  of  the  project  interventions  aimed  at 
enhancing one or more of the 3ACs. KIIWP2 will develop only one module of the RDMT, namely 
the to “Climate and degraded ecosystems” risk cluster, to monitor increased resilience in terms 
of climate variability and change. 
47 See IFAD, forthcoming. How to do Note on Designing Resilience: resilience analysis and monitoring for rural poor 
household in IFAD projects. 
48 As per Bahadur et al. definitions (2015), the 3 Adaptive capacities are : (i) Anticipatory Capacity which is the ability of 
people to recognize or predict shocks and stresses and take proactive steps to prevent them and/or protect 
themselves; (ii) Absorptive Capacity perceived as the ability of communities to access and deploy tangible assets such 
as savings and intangible assets like social networks and community support to help them survive intensive shocks and 
maintain levels of wellbeing; and (iii) Adaptive Capacity which is the capacity to take deliberate and planned decisions 
to achieve the desired state even when conditions have changed or about to change.  
21 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
9. References  
Reference for Gender, nutrition and youth sections: 
Africa SDG Index and Dashboards Report, 2018  
Agricultural Households Survey, Rwanda, 2017 
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), 2018, Rwanda, WFP/NISR 
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), 2015, Rwanda, WFP/NISR 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS2) 
Fourth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, 2012 
Global gender Gap Report, World Economic Forum, 2020 
Government of Rwanda, 20120, National Gender Policy 
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) 
Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey (RDHS), 2014-2015 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV5) 2016-17, Thematic Report, Education 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV5) 2016-17, Thematic Report, Gender 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV5) 2016-17, Thematic Report, Youth 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV5) 2016-17, Poverty profile report 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV4), 2013-2014, Poverty profile report 
Kayonza District, District Profile, 2015 
Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19- 2023/24 
Kayonza District development Strategy, 2013-2018 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
2018, Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation 4 (PSTA 4) 2018- 2024 
2012, Agriculture Gender Strategy 
Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN), 2013, Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
(EDPRS2), 2013-2018 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) 
2016, National Gender Coordination and Partnership Strategy, 2016-2020 
2010, National Gender Policy 
Ministry of Health (MOH) 
National Food and Nutrition Strategic Plan, 2013-2018 
National Food and Nutrition Policy, 2013 
Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC), 2011, National Social Protection Strategy 
Ministry of Youth, 2015, National Youth Policy 
NpM, 2020, Financial services for women. Case studies on women’s participation in the maize and 
bean value chains in Rwanda. 
The cost of hunger in Rwanda, 3rd National Food and Nutrition Summit 2014, Kigali 
Women’s Empowerment Agriculture Index Study (WEAI), 2020, Baseline report, DFID 
Environment and climate  
Bahadur, A., Peters, K., Wilkinson, E., Pichon, F., Gray, K., Tanner, T., 2015. The 3As: Tracking 
Resilience Across BRACED. ODI, London. 
Black, 2005, “The relationship between Indian Ocean sea surface temperature and East African 
rainfall”, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., A.,N 363, 43-47. 
Eugene M, 2017, Characterization of cattle production systems in Nyagatare district of Eastern 
Province, Rwanda, Rheol: open access 1:107. 
https://esri-
rw.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/a0d68c954ec142cda3554681489b3bc2. 
https://esri-
rw.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/a0d68c954ec142cda3554681489b3bc2. 
22 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
IFAD  (2017).  Kirehe  Community-based  Watershed  Management  Project  (KWAMP),  Project 
Completion IFAD (2017). PASP Mid Term Review, April 2017  
IFAD (2017). Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures 
IFAD (2018). Kayonza Integrated Irrigation and Watershed Protection Project. Environment and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Kayonza District. 2018. Second District Health Strategic Plan 2018/19 – 2023/24. 109p  
MINAGRI  (2010).  Rwanda  Irrigation  Master  Plan  (RIMP).  Ebony  Enterprises  Ltd  and  the  World 
Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF).  
MINAGRI. 2018. Strategic plans for agriculture transformation 2018-24 
Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA/RNRA), 2015, Rwanda National Water Resources Master 
Plan, Appendix 7: Upper Akagera Catchment.  
RAB (2020). Kayonza Integrated Irrigation and Watershed Protection Project. Environment and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
REMA (2006). General Guideline and Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment.  
REMA (2009). State of the Environment Report 2009.  
REMA (2009): Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report”.  
REMA (2011). Atlas of Rwanda’s Changing Environment.  
REMA (2015). Baseline Climate Change Vulnerability Index.  
REMA (2015). State of the Environment and Outlook Report. 
REMA (2017). State of the Environment and Outlook Report: Achieving Sustainable Urbanisation. 
Report: Main report and appendices.  
Republic of Rwanda (2003). Rwanda Environment Policy. 
Republic of Rwanda (2018). National Agriculture Policy.  
Republic of Rwanda (2018). Strategic Plan Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4). 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2018).  Third  National  Communication:  Report  to  the  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Republic of Rwanda, Kigali 
SMEC,  2020.  Feasibility  Study  and  Detail  Study  of  2010  ha  net  Hillside  Irrigation  at  Ndego  in 
Kayonza District, Eastern Province, 336p.  
WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda
23 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 1: Environnent and Social Management Plan Matrix49 
ESMP Matrix 
Environmental/So
cial  and  climate 
Impacts  
Loss of native flora 
and fauna 
Threats  to  aquatic 
and 
terrestrial 
biodiversity  in  lake 
systems  and  rivers, 
particularly in the dry 
seasons 
Water Loss 
Over-abstraction  of 
water  from  sources 
(rivers, 
lakes, 
groundwater 
Soil  erosion  due  to 
excavation 
and 
clearing activities for 
roads, 
canals, 
workshops.  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Activities 
Consultation 
Assess  impacts  of  over-abstraction  on 
biodiversity  and  ecosystem  services  in 
lakes  and  rivers,  and  propose  necessary 
mitigation 
Maintain environmental flow. 
Rapid  biodiversity  survey 
as  part  of  design  of  the 
irrigation scheme 
Responsible 
in 
Institution 
Implementation 
Phase 
SPIU/ 
water 
REMA 
Rwanda 
Board/ 
of 
Means 
Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Survey  
Frequency  of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Baseline/mid-
term 
and 
completion  
review 
Included 
in 
ESMP 
each 
Install  water  abstraction  monitoring 
infrastructure (gauges) 
Install  infrastructure  to  measure  flow 
levels in rivers 
Train  IWUOs 
in  keeping  monitoring 
records for abstraction and river flow, and 
to  manage  use  of 
irrigation  water 
requirements,  particularly  during  dry 
seasons.  
Determine  and  maintain  environmental 
flow  requirements  for  rivers  taking  into 
account 
Control earthworks 
Install  and  maintain  drainage  structures 
to regulate storm water and runoff/run on 
Install  and  maintain  erosion  control 
measures 
Use zero-till/reduce till methods for land 
preparation 
Awareness  of 
farmers 
during  the  formation  of 
WUOs 
SPIU, RAB, District  Water 
permits, 
records  of  water 
use per scheme 
Seasonally  (3 
times 
per 
year) 
Included 
in 
ESMP 
each 
SPIU 
Contract of the contractor 
include  all  these 
shall 
conditions 
be 
to 
considered before, during 
and after construction 
Contract 
contractor 
charge  of 
construction 
works 
of 
in 
the 
Continuous  
Included 
in 
design 
the 
49 This is a general ESMP to provide guidance on overall implementation of project’s interventions. Specific ESMP were developed for each irrigation scheme.  
24 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Removal 
of 
vegetation (including 
riparian  vegetation) 
for clearing land 
due 
Pollution 
to 
leaching, seepage or 
transmission 
of 
agrochemicals 
through  the  soil  into 
water sources 
generated 
Waste 
during  construction 
operation,  e.g.  food 
waste, 
packaging, 
scrap  metal,  etc. 
a 
may 
proliferation  of  pests 
and  vermin  (snakes, 
rats,  mosquitoes) 
posing health risks to 
communities 
lead 
to 
required 
catchment 
that  only  areas 
and 
Existing  riparian  vegetation  should  be 
maintained (not cleared) 
Careful  supervision  of  clearing  activities 
for 
so 
infrastructure 
agricultural 
infrastructure are cleared.  
Assess  impacts  of  land  inundated  by 
dams on vegetation 
Conserve/maintain  woodlands  or  forest 
areas  within  schemes 
to  preserve 
biodiversity 
Implement 
protection 
under KIIWP  
Conservation  of  woodland  patches, 
especially for native species 
Minimise  use  of  agrochemicals  through 
agriculture 
adopting 
techniques, 
organic/natural 
fertilizers, agrochemicals 
Manual removal of weeds 
Establish aquatic ecological baseline 
rivers, 
Monitor  water 
downstream  of  diversion  weirs  and 
abstraction points 
rehabilitation/ 
interventions  as  proposed 
conservation 
explore 
quality 
in 
Dispose  of  construction  waste  and  solid 
waste  as  per  REMA’s  Solid  Waste 
Guidelines 
Sensitize farmers on waste management 
practices 
Recycle, reuse, recover and reduce waste 
Contract for the construction of irrigation 
scheme and dams shall include a section 
on waste management and recycling and 
reuse of materials when possible 
Training  of  farmers  and 
local communities as part 
of 
of 
implementation 
catchment  management 
plans 
SPIU/ RAB/District  Contract 
contractor 
charge  of 
construction 
works 
of 
in 
the 
Start-up 
phase 
continuous 
monitoring 
and 
the 
Included 
in 
project 
cost 
Training  of  farmers  as 
the  FFS  and 
part  of 
climate  smart  agriculture 
practices 
SPIU/RAB 
Baseline data 
annually 
on 
waste 
Training 
management  as  part  of 
Climate Smart practices 
SPIU/ RAB 
contract 
Continuous  
Included 
in 
ESMP 
each 
Included 
in  project 
costs 
25 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Soil  degradation  due 
to  poor  cultivation 
practices,  eg.  tilling, 
excessive  use  of 
inputs, 
chemical 
mono-cropping 
for 
long periods of time 
Chemical pollution of 
soils, 
groundwater 
and surface water 
Loss  of  biodiversity 
and 
ecosystem 
services  due  to  the 
proximity of schemes 
to  national  park, 
woodlands/forests  - 
leading 
illegal 
to 
felling  of  trees  for 
charcoal production 
to 
soil 
select 
natural 
strengthen 
conservation 
Use  best  practices  for  growing  crops 
recommended  conservation  agriculture 
techniques,  such  as  zero  tillage  or 
reduced tillage, 
Intercropping 
structure; 
Green  fertilization  and  green  harvesting 
to cover soil with crop residue. 
Implement  Integrated  Soil  Conservation 
and Nutrient Management systems 
Minimise  use  of  agrochemicals  through 
agriculture 
adopting 
techniques, 
organic 
alternatives 
Careful  supervision  of  application  of 
agrochemicals 
Use  agrochemicals  approved  by  MOA, 
WHO and FAO 
Train farmers in in proper use, handling, 
storage, and disposal of agrochemicals. 
Ensure chemical containers are disposed 
of as hazardous waste 
records  of 
Keep 
application amounts. 
Establish 
plantations 
Conserve/maintain existing forest stands 
to preserve biodiversity 
Provide buffer zone between scheme and 
national park, wetlands, woodland/ forest 
based  on  discussions  with  ANP  and  on 
REMA regulations, applying precautionary 
principle  for  maximum  buffer  width  for 
ANP and wetlands  
Assess impacts of locating intake works in 
wetlands  or  lakes  on  biodiversity  and 
ecosystem 
propose 
necessary mitigation 
chemicals  used, 
community 
fuelwood 
services, 
and 
of 
farmers 
Training 
through 
thematic  FFS 
(e.g.  CSA,  conservation 
agriculture, etc.) 
SPIU/RAB 
Training modules  Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
costs 
Training  of  farmers  as 
part of the FFS/ WUOs 
Elaboration 
integrated 
Management (IPM) 
an 
Pest 
of 
RCA/ SPIU/ RAB 
Training modules 
IPM  mitigation 
measures  
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Rapid  biodiversity  survey 
to be done as part of the 
irrigation 
design 
schemes and construction 
of dams 
of 
SPIU/RAB 
Survey 
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
26 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Grazing  land  being 
taken for agriculture, 
consequently 
less 
land  available  and 
large  numbers  of 
livestock.  
Access  to  water  and 
pasture  for  livestock 
(eg.by 
blocked 
cultivated 
fields, 
canals, or dams). 
Abstraction 
upstream  of 
river 
source  resulting  in 
insufficient  flow  left 
in rivers downstream 
In-migration  due  to 
job 
potential 
and 
opportunities 
spin  off  employment 
activities. 
Setting 
Workman’s 
Contractor’s camp 
up 
/ 
with 
farmers 
between 
upstream 
consultations 
and 
Install  water 
infrastructure 
Develop land use plans that provide land 
for livestock grazing and watering points 
 Allow  livestock  access  routes  to  water 
sources and grazing pastures.   
Alternatively  provide  watering  points  for 
livestock 
located  along  on  existing 
livestock routes to water and pasture, and 
through 
the 
communities  
Sensitize  communities  on  preventing 
livestock  from  drinking  from  canals  and 
damaging irrigation infrastructure 
Establish  local  monitoring  system  to 
reduce  conflicts  and  manage  them  at 
early stage 
Conflicts 
downstream 
abstraction  monitoring 
(gauges) 
Install  infrastructure  to  measure  flow 
levels in the river. 
Determine  and  maintain  environmental 
flow  requirements  taking  into  account 
human, livestock and ecological needs. 
Growth of settlements due to induced in-
migration  
Plan 
consequent demand on public utilities 
Initiate 
HIV/AIDS 
awareness, 
prevention, security, etc 
Pressure  on  water  sources,  fuelwood 
/energy 
sources  and  other  public 
services. 
Develop  clear  specifications  for  camps 
facilities, 
with 
accommodation,  provision  of  water, 
health and safety, etc. 
campaigns 
drug 
for  population 
increase  and 
to  sanitation 
for 
abuse 
educational 
regard 
construction  of  boreholes 
and valley tanks to supply 
water  for  livestock  and 
domestic use 
Training  of 
Livestock  
FFS 
for 
SPIU/RAB 
Baseline data 
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
SPIU/ 
District 
Authority/ Rwanda 
Water Authority 
Water permits 
Continuous  
SPIU/ 
Authority 
District 
District Reports  
Construction 
phase  
SPIU/RAB 
Contractor 
contracts 
Construction 
phase 
the 
Included 
in 
project 
cost  
the 
Included 
in 
project 
cost 
Included 
in  project 
cost 
and 
Train  IWUOs  in  keeping 
for 
monitoring  records 
river 
abstraction 
flow,  and  manage  use  of 
irrigation 
water 
requirements  during  dry 
seasons 
Dialogue  between  local 
leadership,  farmers  and 
immigrants 
Awareness  campaign  on 
employment  preference 
to  members  of 
local 
communities  
Consult cell authorities to 
identify camp location. 
27 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Temporary 
acquisition  of 
for 
camps 
land 
construction 
Cash  crops  grown  in 
preference  to  food 
crops  on 
irrigated 
schemes. 
Climate 
change 
resulting  in  reduced 
rainfall,  which  may 
affect  availability  of 
water  for  irrigation 
and 
downstream 
use,  particularly  in 
the dry season 
Elite capture in water 
management  
works, 
including 
rehabilitation 
land 
of 
for  construction 
Loss of land, (including agricultural land), 
structures, trees and crops 
Compensation to be paid for all property 
on  land  to  temporarily  acquired  for 
scheme 
road 
construction and dam construction  
Restoration/ 
acquired  temporarily 
purpose 
Promote  production  of  food  crops  in 
parallel with cash crops 
Provide  support  to  farmers  to  improve 
food crop production 
Introduce  cash  savings  from  crop  sales 
for  purchasing  food  especially  during 
times of food shortages 
If  feasible,  design  and  install  off  river 
storage facilities to capture spate water. 
Design  and 
install  water  harvesting 
techniques to capture run off and run on. 
Train IWUOs to manage use of irrigation 
water requirements during dry seasons. 
Public  consultations  as 
part  of  Free,  Prior  and 
Informed  Consent  (FPIC) 
Plan  and  Resettlement 
Action Plan 
of 
local 
/ 
of 
Government 
Rwanda/ 
authorities 
Ministry 
Environment( 
Land Department) 
Reports 
Included 
in  project 
cost 
with 
Construction 
phase 
continuous 
monitoring 
during 
operation 
phase  
Promotion  of  nutrition-
sensitive  value  chains  as 
part of FFS modules 
SPIU/RAB 
reports 
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Training of WUO and FFS 
groups  on  water  use 
efficiency 
SPIU/RAB 
FFS 
reports 
modules/ 
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Participatory  processes  and  methods 
employed  in  the  development  of  sub-
catchment  plans,  will  ensure  that  needs 
of  all  communities’  representatives  are 
taken  into  account  including  the  poorest 
households. 
WUOs will be representatives of all socio-
economic categories of beneficiaries. 
sub-
Community-based 
participatory 
catchment planning 
Quotas/selection  criteria 
introduced  in  WUOs  to 
ensure  representation  of 
all 
socio-economic 
categories of beneficiaries 
SPIU/RAB 
Reports 
Continuous  
Lack  of  ownership 
and sustainability 
Involve community members at all stages 
of the development of project’s activities, 
including siting of water infrastructure.  
Consult beneficiaries on their capacity to 
contribute  and  the  modalities  of  their 
Public 
involving 
leaders 
authorities 
consultations 
community 
district’s 
and 
SPIU/RAB 
Reports 
Continuous  
28 
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Children 
may 
perform  dangerous 
tasks in agriculture 
contributions  (cash,  in  kind)  and  tailor 
their  contribution  to  the  productive, 
economic  and  financial  capacities  of  the 
different target groups 
Focus  on  women,  youth  and  vulnerable 
households as priority target groups 
Promote the adoption of safer agricultural 
practices and prevent children from 
carrying out hazardous work in 
agriculture. 
Promote cooperation between agriculture 
and labour stakeholders and ensure 
coherence of policies and programmes on 
child labour prevention. 
Promote youth employment opportunities 
in agriculture.  
Integrate child labour concerns in the 
project grievance Redress Mechanisms 
Project’s 
activities 
targeting directly women, 
youth  and  vulnerable 
households 
Awareness  campaign  on 
worst  type  of  agriculture 
practices  through  public 
consultations 
involving 
community  leaders  and 
district’s authorities 
SPIU/RAB/  with 
support 
from 
Ministry  of  Public 
Service 
and 
Labour 
FFS 
reports 
modules/ 
Continuous  
Included 
in  project 
cost 
Include  a  session  in  FFS 
module  to  discuss  about  
danger  of  child  labour 
within 
the  agricultural 
sector 
Update 
the  Grievance 
Redress mechanisms and 
address 
issues 
any 
related to child labour 
29 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 2:  Resilience scorecard Matrix 
A. 
 Risk Type 
B. 
Specific 
risks 
(Step 1) 
C. 
Vulnerability 
(Step 2) 
D. 
Project 
interventions 
(Step 3) 
E. 
Expected 
results (Step 4) 
G. 
Adoption score 
(AS) 
F. 
Adoption 
monitoring 
questions 
(Step 5) 
H. 
Resilience 
capacity 
monitoring 
question 
(Step 6) 
I. 
Results 
score 
J. 
Combined 
Resilience 
Score (CBS) 
K. 
ToC 
 Index (TOCi) 
Climate and 
degraded 
ecosystems 
Lack of governance 
and insecure access 
and tenure to land 
and other natural 
resources; 
30 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Social and cultural 
exclusion drivers 
limiting women, 
youth, indigenous 
peoples and other 
vulnerable groups' 
participation in 
economic and 
livelihood 
development 
activities 
Health risks linked 
to poor nutrition 
and exposure to 
diseases outbreaks 
Insecure access to 
markets, market 
fluctuations and 
other economic 
factors 
31 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
 Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIWP 
II)  ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET 
for 18 Months' Period from January 2022 to June 2023 
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD Categ 
Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2021/22 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Q2
Q3
Q4
C1
C10
C11
C110
C11001
C11002
COMPONENT I : Strengthening resilience to droughts 
I. Investment Costs
S/Comp 1 :Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
Awareness compain and capacity building 
 Mobilization of local authorities, opinion leaders, farmers and local 
financial institutions 
 Mobilization and training of farmers on land husbandry guidelines 
specific to each agro climatic zone 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 IV 
 IV 
 Lumpsum 
             1 
                   1                     2 
            1 
            1 
           1 
                  1 
4
           2,000 
                    4,000 
8,000
 Farmers 
            -                   100 
               100 
        100 
        100          100 
              100 
400
                25 
                    2,500 
10,000
C11003
 Community training in land husbandry technology implementation 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 IV 
 Farmers 
            -                     -   
                 -   
           -            250          250 
                 -   
500
              100 
                          -   
50,000
C11004
 Refresher course on land husbandry for service provider technicians 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 IV 
 Number 
            -                     25                   -   
          25 
          25 
          -                     -   
50
                20 
                          -   
1,000
12,000
12,500
50,000
1,000
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
2,500
0
500
2,000
2,500
0
500
2,000
2,500
2,000
2,500
25,000
25,000
500
0
2,000
2,500
0
0
 Subtotal awarness comapign and training 
C111
 Establishment of land husbandry techniques 
C11101
 Establishment of  land husbandry techniques including agroforestry 
trees in Ndego and Kabare sectors 
 SPIU-IFAD 
C11102
 Acquisition of inputs (lime,Organic manure ) 
 SPIU-IFAD 
Subtotal land husbandry techniques
C112
C11201
C11202
C11203
 Upstream protection for main irrigation infrastructures 
(Reforestation) 
 Preparation and production of seedlings ( callistris robusta, Pinus 
patula, Eucalyptus  varieties, etc) 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 Plantation of forest trees 
 Technical support in quality ensurance for tree seedlings/ICRAF 
 SPIU/ICRAF 
 II 
 I 
 III 
 III 
 III 
6,500
69,000
75,500
2,000
5,000
5,000
30,000
29,500
4,500
 Ha 
            -                   200 
               200 
           -            200          200 
              200 
600
           1,867 
                373,396 
1,120,189
1,493,586
 tone 
            -                2,500 
            2,500 
           -         2,500 
     2,500             2,500 
7,500
                50 
                125,000 
375,000
500,000
            2,700 
-
                498,396 
1,495,189
1,993,586
 seedlings 
            -         2,000,000 
     2,000,000 
           -              -   
          -   
     3,000,000 
3,000,000
             0.05 
                  90,000 
135,000
225,000
 ha 
            -                     -   
                 -   
-
        800 
          -   
                 -   
800
495
                          -   
396,000
 Lumpsum 
            -                     -   
                 -   
            1 
          -   
          -   
                 -   
1
         30,000 
                          -   
30,000
396,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
373,396
125,000
498,396
90,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
373,396
373,396
373,396
125,000
125,000
125,000
498,396
498,396
498,396
0
396,000
0
0
0
0
135,000
0
0
                  90,000 
                 561,000 
                  651,000 
                      -                   90,000                 30,000 
              396,000 
                      -                135,000 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 I 
 number 
            -                       5                     5 
            2 
            5 
           5 
                  3 
15
           5,000 
                  25,000 
75,000
100,000
0
25,000
10,000
25,000
25,000
15,000
                 -   
-
                  25,000 
                   75,000 
                  100,000 
                      -                   25,000                 10,000 
                25,000 
              25,000 
              15,000 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 III 
 Lumpsum 
             1 
                   1                     2 
            1 
            1 
          -                     -   
 SPIU-IFAD 
 III 
 Lumpsum 
            -                     -   
                 -   
            1 
            1 
           1 
                  1 
2
4
       150,000                  300,000 
300,000
600,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
0
0
       100,000 
                          -   
400,000
400,000
0
0
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
                300,000 
                 700,000 
               1,000,000 
             150,000               150,000 
             250,000 
              250,000 
            100,000 
            100,000 
           919,896.38 
         2,900,189.14 
          3,820,085.52 
        152,000.00          768,396.38 
        295,000.00 
      1,199,396.38          652,896.38          752,896.38 
III
III
II
II
II
III
III
III
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Study
Study
Lumpsum
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
                   1 
-
                   1 
1
-
-
-
-
-
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
1
1
                   2 
                 -   
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
-
-
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
                   1 
1
1
1
-
-
                 -   
-
         60,000 
                  60,000 
0
                 -   
1
       500,000 
                250,000 
250,000
                310,000 
250,000
60,000
500,000
560,000
0.5
               0.5 
0.5
               0.5 
               1.0 
  10,170,600 
                          -   
8,136,480
8,136,480
    2,653,200 
                          -   
1,061,280
1,061,280
       830,000 
                          -   
166,000
166,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
0
250,000
250,000
310,000
250,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,034,120
2,034,120
2,034,120
2,034,120
265,320
265,320
265,320
265,320
0
0
0
166,000
                          -                  9,363,760 
               9,363,760 
                      -   
                      -              2,299,440 
           2,299,440 
         2,299,440 
         2,465,440 
187,500                           -   
750,000
18,750                           -   
75,000
750,000
75,000
0
0
0
0
30,000                   60,000 
120,000
180,000
30,000
30,000
187,500
187,500
187,500
187,500
18,750
30,000
18,750
30,000
18,750
30,000
18,750
30,000
                  60,000 
                370,000 
                 945,000 
            10,558,760 
               1,005,000 
             10,928,760 
               30,000                 30,000 
               30,000               340,000 
             236,250 
          2,785,690 
              236,250 
           2,535,690 
            236,250 
         2,535,690 
            236,250 
         2,701,690 
2
2
1
4
4
4
-
1
1
1
1
1
C13001
 Formation  and support operationalization of catchments Committee 
at District level 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 IV 
Lumpsum
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
4
1,500 
                    1,500 
6,000
7,500
0
1,500
1,500
1,500
1,500
1,500
March 2020
 Sub-Total upstream protection 
C113
Implentation of watershed management plans
C11301
Operationalization of Community competition grants  for Natural 
Resources Management
Sub-total Implentation of watershed management plans
C114
 Horticulture farming 
C11401
C11402
 Management and maintenance of 900 ha of fruit orchard in Murama 
and Kabaro Sectors 
 Follow up the sustainability  of 900 ha of fruit orchard in Murama and 
Kabaro Sectors 
Subtotal of Hort farming 
Total Sub-comp 1.1 : Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
Sub–component 1.2: Irrigation Development
 Detailed Design for projects with Feasibility Studies (FS) 
completed in KIIWPI 
 Undertake Detailed design for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation 
system (150ha) 
 Detailed design for  pipeline  5000 ha net Command Area in Eastern 
Province of Rwanda 
 SUB-Total detailed design study 
 Infrastructure development 
 Civil works for bulk Irrigation Infrastructure in Kibare, Ihema and 
Nasho 
 In-field irrigation installation in Kibare, Ihema and Nasho 
C12
C120
C12001
C12002
C121
C12101
C12102
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD 
C12103
 Civil Works for Gishyanda Dam and irrigation infrastructure (125ha) 
 SPIU-IFAD 
C122
C12201
 Sub-Total Infrastructure Development 
 Work supervision 
 Supervision work for Nasho, Kibare and Ihema schemes 
C12202
 Supervision work for Gishanda  
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD 
C12203
 International technical assistance (irrigation expert) 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 Sub-total work supervision 
Sub–total C 1.2: Irrigation Development
C13
Infrastructure management institutions
C130
Formation and strengthening sub-catchment committees
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef In-cash)
Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)
Benef (In kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In cash)
Benef (In Kind)
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
12,000
12,500
50,000
1,500
12
13
52
2
76,000
79
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1,493,586
1,548
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
500,000
518
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
3.7%
3.7%
76.7%
76.7%
18.0%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
1,993,586
2,066
225,000
396,000
30,000
233
410
31
651,000
675
100,000
                 100,000 
104
104
600,000
622
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
400,000
415
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
              1,000,000 
1,036
         3,820,585.52 
      3,959.16 
60,000
500,000
62
518
560,000
580
8,136,480
0
8,432
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
1,061,280
1,100
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
166,000
172
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
              9,363,760 
9,703
750,000
75,000
180,000
777
78
187
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
1.6%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
1.3%
444
463
2,160
2,250
9,204
9,588
1,850
9,000
38,350
56
270
1,151
2,812
13,680
58,292
55,263
268,845
1,145,580
18,500
90,000
383,500
73,763
358,845
1,529,080
8,325
40,500
172,575
14,652
1,110
24,087
3,700
3,700
71,280
5,400
303,732
23,010
117,180
499,317
18,000
18,000
76,700
76,700
22,200
108,000
460,200
14,800
72,000
306,800
37,000
141,362
180,000
687,705
767,000
2,930,389
16,200
10,620
32,400
135,000
88,500
270,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
192
200
800
24
1,216
0.5
0.5
1.9
0.1
2.9
2.2
2.3
9.3
0.3
9.5
9.9
39.7
1.2
14.2
60.4
23,897
57.3
278.6
1,187.1
8,000
19.2
93.3
397.4
31,897
76.4
371.9
1,584.5
3,600
6,336
480
10,416
1,600
1,600.0
9,600
6,400
16,000.0
61,129
780
6,500
8.6
15.2
1.2
25.0
3.83
3.8
23.0
15.3
38.3
146
42.0
73.9
5.6
178.8
314.7
23.8
121.4
517.4
18.65
79.48
0
18.7
79.5
111.9
476.9
74.6
317.9
186.5
713
794.8
3,037
16.79
11.01
33.58
139.90
91.71
279.79
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0.20
0.21
0.83
0.02
1.3
24.8
8.3
33.1
3.7
6.6
0.5
10.8
1.7
1.7
9.9
6.6
16.6
63
0.81
6.74
           151,200               99,120 
            302,400 
                      -                            -   
                         -                        7,280                        157 
              103 
              313 
               -                                 -                              -                                7.5 
                -   
                -   
2,196,850
1,440,157
4,393,699
286,546
187,847
573,091
44,820
29,382
89,640
-
-
-
-
-
-
        2,528,215          1,657,386 
         5,056,430 
                      -                            -   
202,500
132,750
405,000
20,250
48,600
13,275
31,860
40,500
97,200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
105,774
2,276.53
1,492.39
4,553.06
13,797
2,158
296.94
194.66
593.88
46.45
30.45
92.89
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
109.61
14.30
2.24
                121,729 
                   2,620 
           1,717 
           5,240 
               -                                 -                              -                            126.1 
                -   
                -   
9,750
975
2,340
210
21
50
138
14
33
420
42
101
10
1
2
              1,005,000 
            10,928,760 
1,041
11,325
                           -                             -   
           271,350             177,885 
        2,950,765          1,934,391 
            542,700 
         5,901,530 
                      -                            -   
                      -                            -   
                  13,065 
                         -                    142,074 
281
                   3,058 
184
           2,005 
562
           6,116 
14
               -                                 -                              -                               147 
                             -                              -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
7,500
8
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
1,245
6,255
-
-
1
6
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
2
March 2020
Comments
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD Categ 
Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2021/22 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Q2
Q3
Q4
-
-
-
1.0
1.0
-
-
-
C13002
C13003
C131
C13101
Formation and support operationalization of  Sub Catchment 
Committee at Sector level
Training and coaching of catchment management committees
Sub-total sub-catchment committees
Irrigation infrastructures management committees
 Support cooperatives to establish professional committee in charge of 
operationalization,  management and maintenance of infrastructures 
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU 
 IV 
 IV 
sessions
number
SPIU-IFAD
 III 
Number
C13102
 Production of training Manual on O&M of  irrigation infrastructures   
(pumped and dam schemes) 
SPIU-IFAD
 III 
lampsum
C13103
 Layout and printing of O&M and maintenance manuals 
SPIU-IFAD
C13104
 Training of infrastructures management committee   
C13105
 Organization of workshop at district level ( infrastructure 
management committees and other stakeholders) 
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
lampsum
Numbers
Lumpsum
C13106
Study tour
Sub-total irrigation infrastructure management committees
Sub Total 1.3 Infrastructure Management institutions
C14
sub-component A4: enhancing climate smart agriculture practices 
and technologies
C140
Farmer Field School
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Number
C14001
Identification and validation of new FFS facilitators (preliminary workshop to estabish EFFS  model) IV 
Sessions 
C14002
Update of existing FFS  training modules and  translation
C14003
Layout and printing of FFS booklets and leaflets
C14004
FFS facilitators training  on its general approach and methodology and 
CSA and GAP 
C14005
On  field Study for FFS facilitators
C14006
Follow up and technical backstoping of FFS groups 
C14007
Study tour for FFS facilitator
C14008
Bicycles 
C14009
C141
C14101
C14102
C14103
C14104
C14105
C14106
C14107
C14108
C142
C14201
C14202
C14203
C14204
C14205
C14206
C143
C14301
C14302
C14303
C14304
C14305
C14306
C14307
C14308
Recruitement of service provider to roll out PICSA training
Sub-total FFS
Farmers promoters and demonstration plots
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at  both RAB stations and 10  cassava 
FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10  maize 
and beans FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10  banana 
FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10 
Vegetables  FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10 Orange 
sweet potato  FFS in kayonza
FFS training on orchard management 
Refreshment trainings  farmer promoters
Exchanges and local visits  of farmer promoters
Sub-total Farmers promoters and demonstration plots
Support to sustainable mechanization
Mechanization technical advser
support reseach and construction of best adapted tools
trainng to youg artisans
local exchange and visits
international exchange trainings for local TOT manufacturers
Training to young service providers
Sub-total support to sustainable mechanization
Inputs for farmer's initial support
Acquisition and distribution of  orange sweet  potato vines
Acquisition and distribution  of  iron fortified beans seeds
Acquisition and districbution  of kale seed 
Acquisition and  distribution of   pumpkin seed 
Acquisition of improved seed
Acquisition of fertilizers
Acquisition of manual tools for women and most vulnerable
Preparation and production of fruit seedlings for Kabare, Ihema and 
Nasho blocks and Home gardens (Avocado, Mango, Papaya, passion 
fruit)
Sub-total inputs for initial support
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU/RAB
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU
SPIU
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
sessions
Lumpsum
visit
sessions
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
 I 
III
I
I
I
I
I
IV
IV
IV
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
lumpsum
number
Sessions 
Lumpsum
number
number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
number 
sessions
vines
kg
HH
HH
kg
lumpsum
lumpsum
number 
-
500
227
-
-
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
153
3
-
-
1
1
1
1
-
-
1
153
-
1
200
200
1
1
-
-
1
7
1
1
1
1
227
-
-
1
7
1
1
1
1
1
                   2 
                 -   
1
1
                   2 
                 -   
                -   
                 1 
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
                 -   
     2,100,000 
            6,000 
               600 
               600 
1
6,000
300
300
2,100,000
-
300
300
-
-
                 -   
-
200
200
14,000
1
700
200
200
200
200
300,000
-
800
800
14,000
1
700
300,000
27
27
3
1
33
1
65
108
108
13
1
86
65
1
65
1
1
500
227
27
                 27 
                 -   
27
27
                 -   
2
                   1 
                   1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
27
27
4
1
27
27
4
85
33
1,620 
                  43,740 
174,960
100 
                          -   
10,800
218,700
10,800
45,240
191,760
237,000
100
                          -   
1,300
1,300
0
0
0
-
5,000
                    5,000 
5,000
10,000
5,000
12
                         12 
1,032
25
                          -   
1,625
2,000
                          -   
2,000
50
                          -   
                    5,012 
3,250
                   14,207 
1,044
1,625
2,000
3,250
12
0
0
0
                    19,219                   5,012 
43,740
43,740
2,700
43,740
2,700
43,740
43,740
2,700
2,700
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,240
47,940
47,940
47,940
47,940
200
400
400
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
1,020
813
0
300
0
12
813
2,000
0
0
                      -                        200                    5,400 
0
0
                2,233 
3,250
                6,375 
                  50,252 
                 205,967 
                  256,219                   5,012                 45,240                 48,140 
                53,340 
              50,173 
              54,315 
1
                   1 
-
                 -   
-
-
-
-
5,000
                    5,000 
3,000
                          -   
8
                          -   
10
                          -   
5,000
3,000
4,000
2,270
1,362
1,362
2,724
4
                          -   
10,896
4
2
15,000
                  30,000 
60,000
3,000
                          -   
6,000
227
105
                          -   
23,835
10,000
3,000
4,000
2,270
10,896
90,000
6,000
23,835
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
5,000
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
4,000
2,270
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,448
15,000
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
5,448
15,000
3,000
23,835
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
305
17
-
-
1
1
2
1
2
0
25,000
                          -   
                  35,000 
25,000
                 140,001 
500
                          -   
500
500
                          -   
500
500
                          -   
500
500
                          -   
500
500
                          -   
500
1,197
10
                    2,394 
                          -   
                          -   
                    2,394 
4,788
3,050
0
                   10,338 
                  175,001                 15,000                 20,000                 23,000 
25,000
                46,270 
0
              23,448 
0
              47,283 
500
500
500
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
500
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,182
3,050
0
1,197
0
0
                    12,732                   1,197                   1,197                   2,722                    5,222 
1,197
0
0
1,197
1,525
0
1,197
1,525
0
1,197
0
0
                1,197 
1,197
0
0
                1,197 
40,000
16,667
26,667
3,750
3,750
20,000
0
1
0
1
10
45,000
50
1
                  40,000 
                          -   
                          -   
                          -   
                          -   
                          -   
                  40,000 
                          -   
                  31,500 
                    7,200 
                       240 
                       600 
                          -   
                          -   
                          -   
                          -   
0
16,667
26,667
7,500
3,750
40,000
                   94,583 
0
0
0
320
800
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
40,000
16,667
26,667
7,500
3,750
40,000
                  134,583 
0
31,500
7,200
560
1,400
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
16,667
0
0
0
0
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
                      -                   40,000                 16,667 
0
31,500
0
120
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
120
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
0
0
0
26,667
0
0
0
                26,667 
0
0
0
3,750
0
20,000
              23,750 
0
0
0
3,750
3,750
20,000
              27,500 
0
0
80
200
140,000
45,000
35,000
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
270,000
                  39,540 
                 221,120 
                  530,660                   7,620                 31,920                      280 
              220,280 
                   280 
                   280 
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
3
March 2020
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef In-cash)
Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)
Benef (In kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In cash)
Benef (In Kind)
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
Comments
218,700
10,800
237,000
227
11
246
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
-
1,300
1
83.4%
16.6%
10,000
10
83.4%
16.6%
36,304
182,396
1,793
39,342
9,007
197,658
216
1,084
1,660
8,340
173
270
332
871
1,355
1,668
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
38
2
41
0
2
0
0
0
189
9
205
1
9
1
1
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
540
               3,190 
2,711
              16,029 
                      -                            -   
                         -   
                         -   
1
                        -                      3 
3
                17 
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
              -   
                           -                             -   
                    -                 42,532 
            213,687 
                      -                            -   
                         -   
                         -   
                        -                    44 
              221 
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
1,044
1,625
2,000
1
2
2
3,250
                   19,219 
                 256,219 
3
20
266
10,000
10
3,000
4,000
2,270
10,896
90,000
6,000
23,835
25,000
                 175,001 
500
500
500
500
500
7,182
3,050
-
                   12,732 
40,000
16,667
26,667
7,500
3,750
40,000
                 134,583 
31,500
7,200
560
1,400
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
3
4
2
11
93
6
25
26
181
0
1
1
1
1
1
7
3
0
13
41
17
28
8
4
41
139
33
7
1
1
145
47
36
280
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
1,530
459
612
347
1,667
13,770
918
3,647
8,470
2,541
3,388
1,923
9,229
76,230
5,082
20,188
2
0
1
0
2
14
1
4
9
3
4
2
10
79
5
21
3,825
                    -                 26,775 
21,175
            148,226 
                        -   
                         -   
4
                        -                    28 
22
              154 
                             -                              -   
                -   
                -   
77
77
77
77
77
1,099
467
0
                         -   
                    -                   1,948 
6,120
2,550
4,080
1,148
574
6,120
20,591
4,820
1,102
86
214
21,420
6,885
5,355
41,310
424
424
424
424
424
6,083
2,583
0
              10,784 
33,880
14,117
22,587
6,353
3,176
33,880
113,992
26,681
6,098
474
1,186
118,580
38,115
29,645
228,690
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
                        -   
                         -   
                        -                      2 
6
3
4
1
1
6
21
5
1
0
0
22
7
6
43
84
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
0
0
0
0
6
3
0
                11 
35
15
23
7
3
35
118
28
6
0
1
123
39
31
237
466
                             -                              -   
                -   
                -   
March 2020
                 530,660 
550
81,191
449,469
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
C21005
Exchange visits / study tours for cooperative leaders
SPIU
IV
sessions
1
5,000
                          -   
10,000
10,000
             1,837,275 
                 254,550 
               2,091,825 
          1,837,275 
                      -                   25,000 
                63,275 
              77,000 
              89,275 
Lumpsum
numbers
Lumpsum
1
91
91
0
0
0
                   1 
                 91 
                 91 
0
0
1
2
15,000
                  15,000 
30,000
45,000
15,000
182
25
                    2,275 
4,550
6,825
2,275
4
20,000
             1,820,000 
80,000
1,900,000
1,820,000
IV
numbers
20
50
2,600
                          -   
130,000
130,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
2,275
0
0
15,000
2,275
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
26,000
52,000
52,000
5,000
0
5,000
0
0
0
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2021/22 
                 -   
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
0
1
1
                116,934 
                 466,042 
                  852,976                 23,817                 93,117                 42,669 
              298,439 
              48,675 
              76,260 
1
1
1
3
54,000
                          -   
54,000
54,000
                          -   
54,000
32,000
                          -   
32,000
4,000
                          -   
12,000
54,000
54,000
32,000
12,000
                          -   
152,000
152,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4,000
4,000
0
0
0
4,000
4,000
54,000
54,000
32,000
4,000
144,000
             1,457,082 
            14,282,958 
             16,010,041 
             210,829            1,246,753 
          3,171,499 
           4,090,865 
         3,291,434 
         3,729,161 
1
1
1
1
1
91
1
1
91
1
10
0
0
1
20
1
1
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD Categ 
Unit
Sub Total sub-component A4: enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies
C15
C1501
C1502
C1503
C1504
C2
C20
C21
Sub-component A5: Environmental and social management plan
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Nasho irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Kibare irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Ihema irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environmental management plan linked with other 
project activities 
Sub-total  Environmental and social management plan
SPIU/contractor
SPIU/contractor
SPIU contractor 
SPIU 
Sub-Total Component 1:Strengthening resilience to droughts
Component 2: Support to Farm Business Development
I. Investment cost
Sub-component B1: Developing Farming as business skills (  FaaB)
C210
Capacity building of cooperatives
C21001
Recruitment of service provider to build capacity of  
farmers'cooperatives on Global GAP  certification
SPIU/SP
C21002
Refreshment  allowance for farmers  during training on GAP standards 
SPI
C21003
C21004
Monitoring and follow-up the activity of  capacity building of farmers 
on GAP standards
Training and coaching of existing cooperatives on cooperative 
organization and management
SPIU/NAEB
SPIU/Service 
provider
III
III
III
III
III
V
III
Sub-total Capacity building of cooperatives
C211
C21101
Business development service 
 Preparation of Business Plans
C21102
C21103
C21104
Recruitment of TA for preparing of Farming as a Business (Faab) 
curriculum
Recruitment of BDSPs services for capacity building on FaaB, 
integrated to FFS sessions
 Farmers refreshment during training  of farmers on FAAB skills
Sub-total busness development  services
Sub-total Developing Farming as business skills (  FaaB)
Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and 
irrigation kits
 Small Equipment Investments for individual men (>30)
 Small Equipment Investments for individual women & youth (<30)
C22
C2201
C2202
C2203
Cooperative microprojects on post-harvest management facilities
SPIU/Service 
provider
SPIU/ICCO
SPIU/ICCO
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
III
III
III
V
I
I
I
numbers
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
numbers
C2204
C23
C230
C23001
C23002
C23003
C231
C23101
C232
C23201
C23202
C23203
C3
C31
C310
VI
SPIU
BDF grant management fee (about 7.35 % of total grants)
Sub-total Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation kits
Supporting backward and forward market linkage
Market Access
Conduct pre-season meetings for cooperatives
Supporting farmers to participate in in fairs/ shows
Supporting farmers cooperatives in signing contracts
Sub total  market access
Facilitating Public Private Producers Partnerships
Conduct  workshop among different actors in value chain/value chain platform ( maize and beans, vegetables, fruits and roots and tubers)
Sub total  faciliting 4Ps
Access to Finance
Recruitment of TA for development  of tailored agrifinance products  
for PFIs ( SACCO, MFIs)
recruitment of service provider to conduct financial literacy training 
among farmers cooperatives and facilitate PFIs to access credit line 
sessions 
sessions 
number
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
IV
IV
IV
lumpsum
lumpsum
sessions 
ICCO
ICCO
SPIU
IV
III
III
1
Recruitment of SP to support  access to agricultural insurance among 
KIIWP beneficiaries as well as training of NAIS stakehilders 
SPIU
III
lumpsum
Sub-total access to finance
Sub-Total sub-component C3 : Supporting backward and forward market linkage
Sub-Total Component 2
Comp 3:Institutional development and project coordination
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and insitutional development
A.Policy support and implementation
I. Study
2
1
20
20
6
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2,760
                          -   
2,760
2,760
1
13,000
                          -   
13,000
1
150,000
                          -   
150,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,760
13,000
150,000
0
7,500
7,500
13,000
150,000
15,000
300
300
600
25
                          -   
15,000
5
5
1
1
1
1
5
5
2
1
1
10
10
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
                1 
                   1 
                   1 
                   1 
                   1 
                   1 
                          -                     180,760 
                 435,310 
             1,837,275 
                  180,760 
               2,272,585 
                      -   
          1,837,275 
                      -   
                      -   
                      -                   25,000 
                       -                157,500 
            234,500 
                63,275 
              23,260 
            112,535 
5,000
5,000
                          -   
100,000
                          -   
100,000
30,000
                          -   
180,000
25,500
                          -   
25,500
100,000
100,000
180,000
25,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
50,000
50,000
0
120,000
25,500
0
25,000
25,000
60,000
0
                          -                     405,500 
                  405,500 
                      -   
                      -   
                      -                    75,500 
            220,000 
            110,000 
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
10,400
                2,000 
                    2,000 
                    2,000 
                    6,000 
4,000
2,000
4,000
                   10,000 
                    2,000 
                    2,000 
                          -   
                  10,400 
4,000
                     4,000 
0
0
8,667
                    8,667 
0
6,000
4,000
6,000
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
0
2,000
                    16,000                   2,000                   4,000 
                      -                      4,000 
2,000
0
2,000
                4,000 
0
2,000
0
                2,000 
6,000
                      6,000 
0
2,000
0
2,000
0
2,000
                      -                     2,000 
                      -                      2,000 
                      -                    2,000 
10,400
8,667
0
0
0
10,400
8,667
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300,000
0
0
0
1
300,000
                          -   
300,000
300,000
                  19,067 
                  27,067 
         1,864,342 
                 300,000 
                 314,000 
         1,154,810 
                       -                300,000 
                  319,067 
                      -                   19,067 
                  341,067                   2,000                 25,067 
            304,000 
          3,019,152        1,839,275             25,067             25,000            144,775          758,500 
                      -   
                      -                      6,000 
                      -   
                4,000 
        226,535 
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
5
March 2020
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef In-cash)
Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)
Benef (In kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In cash)
Benef (In Kind)
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
Comments
                 852,976 
              884 
                -   
            -   
              -   
            -   
                           -                             -   
                             -   
                    -               130,505 
            722,471 
                      -                            -   
                         -   
                         -   
                        -                  135 
              749 
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
54,000
54,000
32,000
12,000
56
56
33
12
152,000
158
52.6%
47.4%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
25,596
8,262
4,896
1,836
28,404
45,738
27,104
10,164
40,590
111,410
0
0
0
0
0
27
9
5
2
42
29
47
28
11
115
            16,010,541 
         16,591 
                -   
            -   
              -   
            -   
                           -                             -   
                             -            3,092,127          2,835,724 
         9,879,487 
                      -                            -   
                         -                    203,203 
                   3,204 
           2,939 
         10,238 
               -                                 -                              -                               211 
                -   
                -   
45,000
6,825
47
7
72.3%
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
1,900,000
1,969
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
130,000
135
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
10,000
10
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
              2,091,825 
2,168
2,760
3
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
13,000
150,000
15,000
                 180,760 
              2,272,585 
100,000
100,000
180,000
25,500
13
155
16
187
2,355
0
104
104
187
26
72.3%
72.3%
72.3%
55.2%
55.2%
55.2%
55.2%
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
0.0%
8.3%
8.3%
8.3%
8.3%
36.5%
36.5%
36.5%
36.5%
11,385
1,727
480,700
32,890
2,530
529,232
698
3,289
37,950
3,795
45,732
574,964
32,535
1,080
4,934
164
1,373,700
45,600
93,990
3,120
7,230
1,512,389
240
50,204
66
312
3,600
360
4,338
54,542
-
-
1,995
9,399
108,450
10,845
130,689
1,643,079
55,200
55,200
99,360
                    -   
14,076
12
2
498
34
3
548
1
3
39
4
47
596
-
-
-
34
5
1,424
97
7
1
0
47
3
0
1,567
52
0
0
4
0
4
57
2
10
112
11
135
1,703
57
57
103
                -   
15
-
-
-
9
9
15
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8,300
8,300
14,940
2,117
36,500
36,500
65,700
9,308
-
-
38
38
68
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
                -   
                -   
                 405,500 
              420 
            -   
              -   
            -   
                             -               223,836 
                    -                          -                          -                    33,657 
                148,008 
                         -                          232 
                -   
                -   
               -                                35 
                       153 
                              -   
                -   
                -   
6,000
4,000
6,000
                   16,000 
6,000
                    6,000 
10,400
8,667
6
4
6
17
6
6
11
9
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
6.5%
6.5%
6.5%
9.8%
9.8%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
5,022
3,348
5,022
13,392
5,022
5,022
8,705
7,254
390
260
390
1,040
390
390
676
563
-
-
588
392
588
1,568
588
588
1,019
849
                        -   
                         -   
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
3
5
14
5
5
9
8
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
-
-
300,000
311
83.7%
6.5%
9.8%
251,100
19,500
29,400
260
20
                             -                              -   
                -   
                -   
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
                -   
-
1
0
1
2
1
1
1
1
30
              331 
                 319,067 
                 341,067 
              353 
         3,019,152          3,129 
                -   
             -   
            -   
          -   
              -   
           -   
            -   
          -   
                           -                             -   
                           -                             -   
                      -   
                             -               267,059               20,739 
                             -               285,473               22,169 
                     -                             -        2,152,388           76,711 
                        -   
                      -                   31,269 
                      -                   33,425 
                        -   
                  -             608,389              33,657 
                         -   
                         -   
           148,008 
                21 
                         -                          277 
                         -                          296 
                23 
                     -                   2,230               79 
                -                  32 
                -                  35 
             -             630                          35                     153 
                             -                              -                                  -   
                             -                              -                                  -   
                         -   
                -   
                -   
             -   
                -   
                -   
             -   
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
6
March 2020
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD Categ 
Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
C31001
C31004
C31006
C311
C31101
C31103
C31104
C31105
C31106
C32
C3201
C3202
Start-up workshop
Policy assesment and regulation studies /a
Nutrition studies for baseline  (MDD-W)
Subtotal
II. Support to multistakeholder dialogue
Forums and workshops  for policy dialogue
Support dialogue and advocacy for Cooperatives unions of Kayonza 
and National level Federations /d
Support dialogue and advocacy for WUO and WLUO
Gender learning and sharing events (multi stakeholder coordination)
Nutrition multi stakeholder coordination
Subtotal
Subtotal Sub-component 3.1: Policy and institutional development
Sub-component 3.2: Project management and coordination
Office equipment and furniture
Outcome survey
C3203
Knowledge Management
C3204
Capacity building of SPIU Staff
C3205
Promotion materials
Lumpsum
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C3206
Preparation and validation of ToRs for different studies
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321
C3210
C321001
Sub-total Investment cost
Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowancies
A.New staff
1.Central Level
Operations Manager
C321002
Irrigation Specialist
C321003
Climate and Environment Specialist
C321004
Civil Engineering Specialist
C321005
Cooperative Development Specialist
C321006
Social Safeguard and Compliance Specialist
C321007
Access to Finance Specialist
C321008
Accountant
C321009
Procurement Specialist
C321010
M/E  Specialist
C321011
Drivers
Subtotal
2.District Level
Watershed Management Officer
C321012
C321013
Value Chain Development/Agribusiness Specialist
C321014
Electromechanical Engineering
C321015
Senior Agronomist and FFS Specialist
C321016
Land Husbandry Specialist
C321017
Accountant for KIIWP transaction at District
C321018
Irrigation Technicians /a
C321019
Water Users’ Association Specialist
C321020
Horticulture Specialist
C321021
Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist
Subtotal
B.Shared SPIU Staff
SPIU Coordinator
C321022
C321023
Head of Procurement
C321024
Head of MIS
C321025
Chief Accountant
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
IV
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
I
III
III
IV
I
III
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2021/22 
1
                   1 
1
1
0
1
1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
                   1 
1
                   1  1
1
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                   1 
                   1 
1
                   2 
                   1 
                 -   
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Lumpsum
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
12
12
                 24 
12
12
12
12
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
-
-
-
-
1
1
3
4
2
1
2
1
1
3
4
3
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
25,000
80,000
25,000
                  25,000 
                          -   
                          -   
                  25,000 
0
80,000
25,000
                 105,000 
25,000
80,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
                  130,000                 25,000 
0
0
0
                      -   
0
0
0
                      -   
Q2
0
0
0
Q3
Q4
0
0
25,000
0
80,000
0
              80,000 
                       -                  25,000 
5,000
                    5,000 
15,000
5,000
                          -   
20,000
5,000
2,800
1,400
                    5,000 
                          -   
10,000
2,800
                          -   
                  10,000 
                  35,000 
2,800
                   50,600 
                 155,600 
20,000
20,000
15,000
2,800
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
5,000
0
0
5,000
5,000
0
5,000
5,000
0
2,800
5,000
5,000
0
0
5,000
5,000
5,000
0
0
2,800
                    60,600 
                      -                   10,000                 11,400 
                  190,600                 25,000                 10,000                 11,400 
1,400
0
0
                12,800 
                12,800 
0
              10,000 
              35,000 
1,400
              16,400 
              96,400 
10,000                           -   
40,000                           -   
10,000
40,000
10,000                   10,000 
30,000
10,000                   10,000 
40,000
2,000                     4,000 
6,000
5,196                     5,196 
0
10,000
40,000
40,000
50,000
10,000
5,196
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
4,000
5,196
0
0
0
0
10,000
0
0
10,000
40,000
10,000
10,000
2,000
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
2,000
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
2,000
0
                  29,196 
                 126,000 
                  155,196                   5,196                 24,000                 10,000 
2,216
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,449
1,449
1,449
312
1,449
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,449
1,449
1,782
1,782
1,782
2614
2216
2216
1782
13,294
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
8,692
8,692
8,692
7,493
26,588
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
17,385
17,385
17,385
14,986
39,882
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
26,077
22,478
111,008
222,016
333,024
8,692
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
8,692
8,692
10,691
10,691
10,691
17,385
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
17,385
17,385
21,381
21,381
21,381
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
100,912
201,824
302,735
15,684
13,294
13,294
10,691
31,368
26,588
26,588
21,381
47,052
39,882
39,882
32,072
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
                72,000 
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
              22,000 
              22,000 
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
March 2020
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
Comments
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef In-cash)
Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)
Benef (In kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In cash)
Benef (In Kind)
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
25,000
80,000
25,000
                 130,000 
26
83
26
              135 
20,000
20,000
15,000
2,800
2,800
21
21
16
3
3
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
                   60,600                  63 
              198 
                 190,600 
                -   
            -   
              -   
            -   
10,000
40,000
40,000
50,000
10,000
5,196
10
41
41
52
10
5
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
2,625
8,400
2,625
                             -               116,350               13,650 
22,375
71,600
22,375
                         -   
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
23.19
74.20
23.19
                         -                       120.6 
2.72
8.70
2.72
             14.1 
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
17,900
17,900
13,425
2,506
2,100
2,100
1,575
294
19
19
14
3
2
2
2
0
                           -                             -   
                           -                             -   
294
2,506
                             -                54,237 
               6,363 
                             -               170,587               20,013 
                      -                          -                            -   
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
                         -   
0
                         -                            56                    7 
                21 
                         -                          177 
3
                -   
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
8,950
35,800
35,800
44,750
8,950
4,651
1,050
4,200
4,200
5,250
1,050
546
9
37
37
46
9
5
                 155,196 
              358 
                           -                             -   
                             -               138,901               16,296 
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
                         -                          321 
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
39,882
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
26,077
22,478
41
33
33
33
33
33
33
27
27
27
23
333,024
345
-
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
27
33
33
33
33
27
27
33
33
33
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
39,882
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
26,077
22,478
41
33
33
33
33
33
33
27
27
27
23
333,024
-
-
-
-
-
-
345
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
27
33
33
33
33
27
27
33
33
33
302,735
314
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
302,735
0
0
0
0
0
0
314
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-
47,052
39,882
39,882
32,072
49
41
41
33
100%
100%
100%
100%
47,052
39,882
39,882
32,072
41
41
33
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
8
March 2020
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD Categ 
Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2021/22 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
C321026
Administrative and logistic Specialist
C321027
Internal Auditor
C321028
ICT and data officer
C321029
Administrative Assistant
C321030
Messenger
Subtotal
Sub-total Salaries and Allowances
Operational costs
Field visit of KIIWP activities
C3202
C320201
C320202
Communication fees 
C320203
Office supply / consumable 
C320204
Announcements and advertisements
C320205
Hiring a vehicle for field visits
C320206
Codification of KIIWP equipments
C320207
Steering/technical comittee meetings
C320208
Allowances for procurement tender committee
C320209
Advertisement and TV talk show's
C320210
Participation in  Agrishow
C320211
Courier dispatching services
C320212
Refreshment service (different meetings& workshops) 
C320213
 Computer accessoires
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C320214
Vehicle hire for office administration transport services in Kigali City
 SPIU-IFAD  
C320215
Car wash cleaning services
C320216
Sport for SPIU Personnel
C320217
Cleaning service fees
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C3203
C320301
 Subtotal Operational costs
Institution Support
Institutional Support to MINAGRI  to perform the ministerial 
supervisory role on the project
 MINAGRI/SPIU-
IFAD  
C320302
Suppot to MINAGRI to the operationalization of MINAGRI 
Knowledge Manamagent & communication Strategy
 MINAGRI/SPU-
IFAD 
C320303
Institutional Support to RAB
 RAB/SPIU-IFAD  
C320304
Support RAB in Agrishow
C320305
Coomunication fees for RAB Focal Point following MoU between 
RAB and SPIU
C3204
C320401
C320402
C320403
C320404
C3205
C320501
C320502
C320503
C320504
C320505
C320506
C320507
Subtotal Institution Support
Vehicles operation & Maintenance
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups  
Maintenance fees for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Tyre purchasing
Subtotal Vehicle Operation & Maintenance
Bank charges and commission
(cid:9)Bank charges
(cid:9)Purchase of Cheque and Op books
(cid:9)Bank statement fees
(cid:9)Money transfer fees
(cid:9)Loss on currency exchange and translations
Demonetization Expenses
(cid:9)Other commissions
Subtotal
 RAB 
 RAB 
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
Subtotal Reccurent cost
Subtotal Sub-component 3.2: Project management and coordination
Total Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
C33
Emergency Fund
Total Project Costs
Total Project  Costs in USD
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
III
I
III
VI
V
III
IV
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
I
I
I
I
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Months
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Lumpsum
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
12
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
3
4
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
6
6
6
6
6
                   6 
                   6 
                   2 
                   6 
                   6 
                 -   
                   1 
                   6 
                   6 
                 -   
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   6 
                   2 
                   6 
                 -   
                 -   
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                   8 
                   8 
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                   2 
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
                 -   
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
4
12
12
1
3
12
12
1
12
12
12
4
12
4
12
4
4
4
1
12
4
16
16
16
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1449
1449
1162
623
126
2,000
1,875
5,000
300
984
8,692
8,692
6,972
3,739
759
81,817
293,737
                  12,000 
                  11,250 
                  10,000 
                    1,800 
                    5,904 
2,000
                          -   
250
195
300
                       250 
                    1,170 
                    1,800 
20,000
                          -   
100
                       600 
1,000
                    6,000 
500
                    3,000 
2,294
                  13,761 
17,385
17,385
13,944
7,478
1,517
163,634
587,474
24,000
22,500
20,000
3,600
11,808
2,000
750
2,340
3,600
20,000
1,200
12,000
6,000
9,174
2,880
1,960
                    1,440 
                       980 
240
490
911
                    5,466 
10,932
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q3 
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
Q4
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
 Q1 
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
Q2
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
Q3
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
Q4
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
26,077
26,077
20,916
11,217
2,276
245,451
881,210
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
36,000
33,750
30,000
5,400
17,712
2,000
1,000
3,510
5,400
20,000
1,800
18,000
9,000
22,935
4,320
2,940
16,398
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
0
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
6,881
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
6,881
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
2,000
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
0
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
20,000
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
2,733
2,733
2,733
2,733
2,733
2,733
                  75,421 
                          -   
20,000                   40,000 
                 154,744 
0
80,000
                  230,165                 17,109                 17,359                 12,772 
                12,772 
              12,522 
              32,772 
120,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
10,000                   20,000 
40,000
60,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
20,000                   40,000 
80,000
120,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
30,000                   60,000 
30,000
50                        100 
600
2,048
400
800
250
                160,100 
                          -   
                          -   
                    3,200 
                    6,400 
                          -   
                    9,600 
                          -   
                 230,600 
0
8,192
6,400
12,800
4,000
                   31,392 
0
92                        184 
26                          51 
12                          23 
250                        500 
7,290                   14,581 
                          -   
250                        500 
369
102
46
1,000
29,161
0
1,000
                    9,600 
                   94,462 
90,000
700
390,700
0
8,192
9,600
19,200
4,000
30,000
50
30,000
50
               80,050                 80,050 
0
0
1,600
3,200
0
0
0
1,600
3,200
0
0
150
160,100
0
8,192
1,600
3,200
0
                    40,992                   4,800                   4,800                 12,992 
0
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
0
1,500
47,517
0
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
17,519
0
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
17,519
0
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
33,903
0
150
0
150
                50,150 
0
0
1,600
3,200
1,000
                  5,800 
0
              50,150 
0
0
1,600
3,200
3,000
                7,800 
0
30,000
150
100,300
0
1,600
3,200
0
                4,800 
0
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
19,519
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
23,519
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
17,519
                  19,200 
                577,654 
                 125,854 
              1,224,671 
                    88,509                 22,319                 22,319                 46,895 
             376,635 
               1,745,780 
             271,543               290,596 
                25,319 
              307,109 
              31,319 
            262,859 
              22,319 
            324,259 
                612,654 
              1,380,271 
               1,936,380 
             296,543               300,596 
             388,035 
              319,909 
            297,859 
            420,659 
         3,934,077.99          16,818,039.94 
        20,965,572.88 
     2,346,646.52 
     1,572,416.41 
     3,584,534.03 
      4,555,549.41       4,347,793.25       4,376,355.25 
             4,076,765 
            17,428,021 
             21,725,982 
          2,431,758            1,629,447 
          3,714,543 
           4,720,777 
         4,505,485 
         4,535,083 
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
9
March 2020
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef In-cash)
Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)
Benef (In kind)
 IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks 
Benef (In cash)
Benef (In Kind)
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
Comments
26,077
26,077
20,916
11,217
2,276
245,451
881,210
36,000
33,750
30,000
5,400
17,712
2,000
1,000
3,510
5,400
20,000
1,800
18,000
9,000
22,935
4,320
2,940
16,398
27
27
22
12
2
254
913
37
35
31
6
18
2
1
4
6
21
2
19
9
24
4
3
17
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
10
100%
100%
82%
82%
82%
82%
100%
100%
82%
100%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
26,077
26,077
20,916
11,217
2,276
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
245,451
881,210
0
0
-
-
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
206
864
-
-
-
5,400
972
3,188
360
-
-
972
-
324
3,240
1,620
4,128
778
529
36,000
33,750
24,600
4,428
14,524
1,640
1,000
3,510
4,428
20,000
1,476
14,760
7,380
18,807
3,542
2,411
13,446
2,952
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
27
27
22
12
2
37
35
25
5
15
2
1
4
5
21
2
15
8
19
4
2
14
                 230,165 
              109 
            -   
            -   
                           -                             -   
                             -               205,702               24,463 
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
                         -                            94 
                -   
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
120,000
124
100%
60,000
62
100%
120,000
124
90,000
700
93
0.7
390,700
405
8,192
9,600
19,200
4,000
                   40,992 
-
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
-
1,500
47,517
8
10
20
4
42
0
1
0
0
2
45
0
2
49
100%
100%
100%
82%
82%
82%
82%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
18%
18%
18%
18%
120,000
60,000
120,000
90,000
700
-
-
-
-
-
390,700
0
6,717
7,872
15,744
3,280
1,474.56
1,728
3,456
720
33,613
7,379
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
-
1,500
47,517
0
124
62
124
93
1
7
8
16
3
1
0
0
2
45
-
2
405
35
0
0
49
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
                   88,509                  92 
           1,877 
              1,745,780 
                -   
            -   
            -   
              -   
              -   
            -   
            -   
                           -                             -   
                           -                             -   
                             -                81,130 
               7,379 
                             -            1,697,643               48,137 
                      -                          -                            -   
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
                         -   
                         -                            84 
                         -                       1,768 
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
                -   
              1,936,380 
           2,075 
            -   
              -   
            -   
                           -                             -   
                             -            1,868,230               68,150 
                      -                          -                            -   
                         -   
                         -                       1,945 
                21 
                -   
               -                                 -                              -                                  -   
                -   
                -   
       20,966,072.88 
21,727
            21,726,500 
22,515
40%
60%
1,773
0
0
0
KIIWP  Action Plan and Budget January 2020-June 2021
10
March 2020
KIIWP II  ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months' Period from January 2022 to June 2023 Component by Financier
IFAD Loan
GOR
Private/Ba
nks
GOS
GOR
ICCO
Private/Banks 
Benef (In-cash)Benef (In kind)
Total
Components
Component 1 :Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
Sub–component 1.1 – Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
Sub–component 1.2 – Irrigation Development
Sub–component 1.3 – Infrastructure management institutions 
sub-component A4: enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and 
technologies
Sub–component 1.45– Environmental and Social Management 
Plans 
Component 2: Support to Farm Business Development
Sub-component B1: Developing Farming as business skills (  
FaaB)
Sub-component 2.2 –Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest 
storage and irrigation technologies
Sub-component 2.3 – Supporting backward and forward market 
linkages
Component 3:  Institutional development and project 
coordination 
Sub Component 3.1 –.Support to policy dialogue and enabling 
institutional environment 
Sub Component 3.2 –Project management and coordination
Total Project Costs ( 0000 Frw)
Total Project Costs ( 000 USD)
141,362
2,950,765
0
1,643,079
223,836
285,473
170,587
1,697,643
7,112,745
7,371
%
18
52
1
4
1
0
2,930,389
5,901,530
213,687
687,705
1,934,391
42,532
722,471
130,505
111,410
40,590
61,129.37
142,073.88
3,820,585.52
10,928,760.00
256,219.00
852,976.33
152,000.00
0.00
54,542
574,964
2,272,585.00
11
33,657
148,008
22,169
33,425
405,500.00
341,066.67
0.00
190,600.00
1,745,780.36
2
2
0
1
8
20,013
48,137
0
0
0
0
9,947,637
2,912,435
608,389
33,657
148,008
203,203
20,966,072.88
100
10,308
3,018
630
35
153
211
21,726.50
KIIWP II  ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months' Period from January 2022 to June 2023 Component by Financier
Component I: Strengthening resilience to droughts 
Implement
ing 
Agency 
 IFAD 
Categ 
Unit
Implement
ing 
Agency 
 IFAD 
Categ 
Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-June 
2022 Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-June 
2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
Budget Jan 2021- June 
2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
C1
C10
C11
C110
C11001
C11002
C11003
C11004
COMPONENT I : Strengthening resilience to droughts 
I. Investment Costs
S/Comp 1 :Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
Awareness compain and capacity building 
 Mobilization of local authorities, opinion leaders, farmers and 
local financial institutions 
 Mobilization and training of farmers on land husbandry 
guidelines specific to each agro climatic zone 
 Community training in land husbandry technology 
implementation 
 Refresher course on land husbandry for service provider 
technicians 
 Subtotal awarness comapign and training 
C111
 Establishment of land husbandry techniques 
C11101
 Establishment of  land husbandry techniques including 
agroforestry trees in Ndego and Kabare sectors 
C11102
 Acquisition of inputs (lime,Organic manure ) 
Subtotal land husbandry techniques
C112
C11201
 Upstream protection for main irrigation infrastructures 
(Reforestation) 
 Preparation and production of seedlings ( callistris robusta, 
Pinus patula, Eucalyptus  varieties, etc) 
C11202
 Plantation of forest trees 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 IV 
 Lumpsum 
 IV 
 Farmers 
 IV 
 Farmers 
 IV 
 Number 
 II 
 Ha 
 I 
 tone 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 III 
 seedlings 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
C11203
 Technical support in quality ensurance for tree seedlings/ICRAF   
 Sub-Total upstream protection 
C113
Implentation of watershed management plans
SPIU/ICR
AF 
SPIU/ICR
AF 
C11301
Operationalization of Community competition grants  for Natural 
Resources Management
Sub-total Implentation of watershed management plans
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 I 
 number 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
C114
 Horticulture farming 
C11401
C11402
 Management and maintenance of 900 ha of fruit orchard in 
Murama and Kabaro Sectors 
 Follow up the sustainability  of 900 ha of fruit orchard in 
Murama and Kabaro Sectors 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 III 
 Lumpsum 
 III 
 Lumpsum 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
Subtotal of Hort farming 
Total Sub-comp 1.1 : Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
C12
C120
C12001
C12002
C121
C12101
C12102
C12103
C122
C12201
Sub–component 1.2: Irrigation Development
 Detailed Design for projects with Feasibility Studies (FS) 
completed in KIIWPI 
 Undertake Detailed design for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation 
system (150ha) 
 Detailed design for  pipeline  5000 ha net Command Area in 
Eastern Province of Rwanda 
 SUB-Total detailed design study 
 Infrastructure development 
 Civil works for bulk Irrigation Infrastructure in Kibare, Ihema 
and Nasho 
 In-field irrigation installation in Kibare, Ihema and Nasho 
 Civil Works for Gishyanda Dam and irrigation infrastructure 
(125ha) 
 Sub-Total Infrastructure Development 
 Work supervision 
 Supervision work for Nasho, Kibare and Ihema schemes 
C12202
 Supervision work for Gishanda  
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 IV 
 Lumpsum 
               1                 1                 2 
               1                 1                 1 
                      1 
4
        2,000                          4,000 
8,000
12,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
 IV 
 Farmers 
             -   
           100             100 
           100             100             100                     100 
400
             25                          2,500 
10,000
 IV 
 Farmers 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -               250             250 
                     -   
500
           100 
                             -   
50,000
 IV 
 Number 
             -   
             25               -   
             25               25 
             -   
                     -   
50
             20 
                             -   
1,000
12,500
50,000
1,000
0
0
0
2,500
2,500
0
500
0
500
6,500
69,000
75,500
2,000
5,000
5,000
 II 
 Ha 
             -   
           200             200 
             -               200             200                     200 
600
        1,867                      373,396 
1,120,189
1,493,586
 I 
 tone 
             -   
        2,500 
        2,500 
             -   
        2,500 
        2,500 
                2,500 
7,500
             50                      125,000 
375,000
500,000
        2,700 
-
                    498,396 
1,495,189
1,993,586
 III 
 seedlings 
             -   
 2,000,000 
 2,000,000 
             -   
             -   
             -   
         3,000,000 
3,000,000
          0.05                        90,000 
135,000
225,000
 III 
 III 
 ha 
 Lumpsum 
 III 
 III 
 ha 
             -   
             -   
             -   
-
           800               -   
                     -   
800
495
                             -   
 Lumpsum 
             -   
             -   
             -   
               1               -   
             -   
                     -   
1
      30,000 
                             -   
396,000
30,000
396,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
373,396
125,000
498,396
90,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
                      90,000                      561,000                     651,000 
             -           90,000 
       30,000 
 I 
 number 
             -   
               5                 5 
               2                 5                 5 
                      3 
15
        5,000                        25,000 
75,000
100,000
0
25,000
10,000
             -   
-
                      25,000                        75,000                     100,000 
             -           25,000 
       10,000 
 III 
 Lumpsum 
               1                 1                 2 
               1                 1 
             -   
                     -   
 III 
 Lumpsum 
             -   
             -   
             -   
               1                 1                 1 
                      1 
2
4
    150,000                      300,000 
300,000
600,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
    100,000 
                             -   
400,000
400,000
0
0
100,000
                    300,000                      700,000                  1,000,000 
    150,000 
     150,000 
     250,000 
               919,896.38              2,900,189.14 
           3,820,085.52  ######### ########## ##########
III
III
II
II
II
III
III
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
Study
Study
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
III
III
II
II
II
III
III
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Study
Study
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
               1 
-
               1 
1
-
-
-
-
-
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
0.5
0.5
1
1
-
-
0.5
0.5
1
1
-
-
                     -   
-
      60,000                        60,000 
0
                     -   
1
    500,000                      250,000 
250,000
                    310,000 
250,000
60,000
500,000
560,000
#########                              -   
8,136,480
8,136,480
 2,653,200 
                             -   
1,061,280
1,061,280
    830,000 
                             -   
166,000
166,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
0
250,000
250,000
310,000
250,000
0
0
0
2,034,120
265,320
0
                             -                     9,363,760                  9,363,760 
             -   
               -      2,299,440 
187,500                              -   
750,000
18,750                              -   
75,000
750,000
75,000
0
0
0
0
187,500
18,750
0.5
                    0.5 
0.5
                    0.5 
                    1.0 
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
4
4
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total  costs Jan 2022-
June 2023 Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD 
Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
Private/Ba
nks 
Benef In-cash)Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD 
Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/Ba
nks 
Benef (In-cash)Benef (In kind)
 IFAD 
Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/Ba
nks 
Benef (In cash)Benef (In Kind)
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,500
2,500
2,500
25,000
25,000
500
0
0
0
12,000
12,500
50,000
1,500
12
13
52
2
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
444
463
2,160
9,204
2,250
9,588
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
1,850
9,000
38,350
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
56
270
1,151
30,000
29,500
4,500
76,000
79
2,812
13,680
58,292
373,396
373,396
373,396
1,493,586
1,548
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
55,263
268,845
1,145,580
125,000
125,000
125,000
500,000
518
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
18,500
90,000
383,500
498,396
498,396
498,396
1,993,586
2,066
73,763
358,845
1,529,080
135,000
225,000
233
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
8,325
40,500
172,575
0
396,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
396,000
30,000
410
31
3.7%
3.7%
76.7%
76.7%
18.0%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
1.6%
14,652
1,110
24,087
71,280
303,732
5,400
23,010
117,180
499,317
        396,000 
               -         135,000 
651,000
675
25,000
25,000
15,000
100,000
          25,000 
       25,000 
       15,000 
                        100,000 
104
104
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
3,700
18,000
76,700
3,700
18,000
76,700
150,000
0
0
600,000
622
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
22,200
108,000
460,200
100,000
100,000
100,000
400,000
415
3.7%
76.7%
18.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
14,800
72,000
306,800
        250,000 
     100,000 
     100,000 
                     1,000,000 
1,036
########### ########## ##########                 3,820,585.52 
   3,959.16 
37,000
180,000
767,000
141,362
687,705
2,930,389
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
192
200
800
24
1,216
0.5
0.5
1.9
0.1
2.9
2.2
2.3
9.3
0.3
9.5
9.9
39.7
1.2
14.2
60.4
23,897
57.3
278.6
1,187.1
8,000
19.2
93.3
397.4
31,897
76.4
371.9
1,584.5
3,600
8.6
42.0
178.8
6,336
480
15.2
1.2
73.9
5.6
314.7
23.8
10,416
25.0
121.4
517.4
1,600
3.83
18.65
79.48
0
1,600.0
3.8
18.7
79.5
9,600
23.0
111.9
476.9
6,400
15.3
74.6
317.9
16,000.0
61,129
38.3
146
186.5
713
794.8
3,037
780
16.79
11.01
33.58
6,500
139.90
91.71
279.79
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0.20
0.21
0.83
0.02
1.3
24.8
8.3
33.1
3.7
6.6
0.5
10.8
1.7
1.7
9.9
6.6
16.6
63
0.81
6.74
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
62
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
16,200
10,620
32,400
500,000
518
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
135,000
88,500
270,000
560,000
580
     151,200 
       99,120 
     302,400 
             -   
             -   
             -            7,280             157             103             313 
             -   
             -   
             -                7.5 
             -   
             -   
2,034,120
2,034,120
2,034,120
8,136,480
0
8,432
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
2,196,850
1,440,157
4,393,699
265,320
265,320
265,320
1,061,280
1,100
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
286,546
187,847
573,091
0
0
166,000
166,000
172
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
44,820
29,382
89,640
-
-
-
-
-
-
     2,299,440 
  2,299,440 
  2,465,440 
                     9,363,760 
9,703
  2,528,215 
  1,657,386 
  5,056,430 
             -   
             -   
187,500
187,500
187,500
750,000
777
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
202,500
132,750
405,000
18,750
18,750
18,750
75,000
78
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
20,250
13,275
40,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
105,774
2,276.53
1,492.39
4,553.06
13,797
296.94
194.66
593.88
2,158
46.45
30.45
92.89
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
109.61
14.30
2.24
    121,729 
        2,620 
        1,717 
        5,240 
             -   
             -   
             -            126.1 
             -   
             -   
9,750
975
210
21
138
14
420
42
10
1
Comments
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C12203
 International technical assistance (irrigation expert) 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
III
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
III
Lumpsum
1
1
               2 
1
1
1
1
4
30,000                       60,000 
120,000
180,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
-
                      60,000                      945,000                  1,005,000        30,000 
      30,000 
                    370,000                 10,558,760                10,928,760 
       30,000 
     340,000 
     236,250 
  2,785,690 
             -   
1
               1 
27
             27 
             -   
             -   
               1 
-
-
-
-
1
27
27
2
1
27
27
4
1
               1 
-
-
 Sub-total work supervision 
Sub–total C 1.2: Irrigation Development
C13
Infrastructure management institutions
C130
Formation and strengthening sub-catchment committees
C13001
C13002
C13003
C131
C13101
 Formation  and support operationalization of catchments 
Committee at District level 
Formation and support operationalization of  Sub Catchment 
Committee at Sector level
Training and coaching of catchment management committees
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU 
 IV 
 IV 
 IV 
Lumpsum  SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU-
IFAD 
 SPIU 
sessions
number
 IV 
Lumpsum
 IV 
sessions
 IV 
number
Sub-total sub-catchment committees
Irrigation infrastructures management committees
 Support cooperatives to establish professional committee in 
charge of operationalization,  management and maintenance of 
infrastructures 
SPIU-IFAD
 III 
Number
SPIU-IFAD
 III 
Number
C13102
 Production of training Manual on O&M of  irrigation 
infrastructures   (pumped and dam schemes) 
SPIU-IFAD
 III 
lampsum SPIU-IFAD
 III 
lampsum
C13103
 Layout and printing of O&M and maintenance manuals 
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
lampsum SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
lampsum
C13104
 Training of infrastructures management committee   
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Numbers
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Numbers
C13105
 Organization of workshop at district level ( infrastructure 
management committees and other stakeholders) 
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Lumpsum SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Lumpsum
C13106
Study tour
Sub-total irrigation infrastructure management committees
Sub Total 1.3 Infrastructure Management institutions
C14
sub-component A4: enhancing climate smart agriculture 
practices and technologies
C140
Farmer Field School
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Number
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Number
C14001
Identification and validation of new FFS facilitators (preliminary workshop to estabish EFFS  model)
Sessions 
 IV 
C14002
Update of existing FFS  training modules and  translation
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
lumpsum SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
 IV 
Sessions 
lumpsum
C14003
Layout and printing of FFS booklets and leaflets
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
number
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
number
C14004
FFS facilitators training  on its general approach and 
methodology and CSA and GAP 
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
-
-
-
-
1.0
1.0
-
-
-
C14005
On  field Study for FFS facilitators
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
Sessions 
SPIU-IFAD
C14006
Follow up and technical backstoping of FFS groups 
SPIU/RAB
 IV 
Lumpsum SPIU/RAB
 IV 
 IV 
Sessions 
Lumpsum
1
1
               2 
C14007
Study tour for FFS facilitator
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
number
SPIU-IFAD
 IV 
number
C14008
Bicycles 
C14009
C141
C14101
C14102
C14103
C14104
C14105
C14106
C14107
C14108
Recruitement of service provider to roll out PICSA training
Sub-total FFS
Farmers promoters and demonstration plots
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at  both RAB stations and 10  
cassava FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10  
maize and beans FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10  
banana FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10 
Vegetables  FFS in kayonza
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for establishing 
demosntration plots and  trials at both RAB stations and  10 
Orange sweet potato  FFS in kayonza
FFS training on orchard management 
Refreshment trainings  farmer promoters
Exchanges and local visits  of farmer promoters
Sub-total Farmers promoters and demonstration plots
Support to sustainable mechanization
C142
C14201 Mechanization technical advser
C14202
C14203
C14204
C14205
C14206
support reseach and construction of best adapted tools
trainng to youg artisans
local exchange and visits
international exchange trainings for local TOT manufacturers
Training to young service providers
Sub-total support to sustainable mechanization
Inputs for farmer's initial support
C143
SPIU-IFAD
SPIU
 I 
III
number
SPIU-IFAD
Lumpsum SPIU
 I 
III
number
Lumpsum
             -   
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
number 
sessions
I
I
I
I
I
IV
IV
IV
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU-RAB
SPIU
SPIU
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
sessions
Lumpsum
visit
sessions
SPIU
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
Lumpsum SPIU-RAB
number 
sessions
SPIU
SPIU
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
sessions
Lumpsum
visit
sessions
SPIU
I
I
I
I
I
IV
IV
IV
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
1
1
               2 
1
             -   
            -   
              1 
            -   
            -   
            -   
            -   
            -   
             -   
86
65
1
65
1
1
500
227
1
27
27
4
85
33
1
27
27
3
1
33
1
65
-
-
-
-
1
1
-
-
1
7
1
1
1
1
227
-
-
1
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
-
-
1
153
-
1
-
500
227
-
-
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
153
3
-
-
1
4
1,500 
                        1,500 
6,000
108
1,620 
                      43,740 
174,960
108
100 
                             -   
10,800
7,500
218,700
10,800
45,240
191,760
237,000
13
100
                             -   
1,300
1,300
0
0
0
0
-
1
5,000
                        5,000 
5,000
10,000
5,000
12
                            12 
25
                             -   
2,000
                             -   
1,032
1,625
2,000
1,044
1,625
2,000
12
0
0
50
                             -   
                        5,012                        14,207                       19,219          5,012 
                      50,252                      205,967                     256,219          5,012 
3,250
3,250
0
1,500
1,500
43,740
43,740
0
45,240
2,700
47,940
0
0
0
0
0
0
200
0
0
0
0
0
               -                200 
       45,240 
       48,140 
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
305
17
1
1
2
1
2
-
-
25,000
                             -   
                      35,000                      140,001                     175,001        15,000 
25,000
25,000
0
0
       20,000 
0
       23,000 
500
                             -   
500
500
                             -   
500
500
                             -   
500
500
                             -   
500
500
                             -   
500
500
500
500
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,197
10
40,000
16,667
26,667
3,750
3,750
20,000
                        2,394 
                             -   
                             -   
                        2,394                        10,338                       12,732          1,197 
4,788
3,050
0
7,182
3,050
0
1,197
0
0
1,197
0
0
         1,197 
1,197
1,525
0
         2,722 
                      40,000 
0
                             -   
16,667
                             -   
26,667
                             -   
7,500
                             -   
3,750
                             -   
40,000
                      40,000                        94,583                     134,583 
                             -   
0
40,000
16,667
26,667
7,500
3,750
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
             -           40,000 
0
0
0
16,667
0
0
0
0
       16,667 
0
1
               1 
-
             -   
5,000
                        5,000 
3,000
                             -   
8
                             -   
10
                             -   
5,000
3,000
4,000
2,270
1,362
1,362
2,724
4
                             -   
10,896
4
2
15,000
                      30,000 
60,000
3,000
                             -   
6,000
227
105
                             -   
23,835
10,000
3,000
4,000
2,270
10,896
90,000
6,000
23,835
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
5,000
3,000
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
180,000
187
27.0%
54.0%
17.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.3%
48,600
31,860
97,200
-
-
-
2,340
50
33
101
2
        236,250 
     2,535,690 
     236,250 
  2,535,690 
     236,250 
  2,701,690 
                     1,005,000 
                   10,928,760 
1,041
11,325
             -   
             -   
     271,350 
  2,950,765 
     177,885 
  1,934,391 
     542,700 
  5,901,530 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
      13,065 
             -        142,074 
281
        3,058 
184
        2,005 
562
        6,116 
             -   
             -   
             -   
14
             -   
             -               147 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
               -           42,532 
     213,687 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -                 44             221 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
1,500
1,500
1,500
7,500
8
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
43,740
43,740
43,740
2,700
47,940
2,700
47,940
2,700
47,940
218,700
10,800
237,000
227
11
246
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
0.0%
83.4%
16.6%
0.0%
-
400
400
300
1,300
1
83.4%
16.6%
0
12
813
2,000
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
1,020
813
0
0
            5,400           2,233 
          53,340 
       50,173 
0
0
4,000
2,270
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,448
5,448
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
3,000
3,000
0
23,835
10,000
10
83.4%
16.6%
1,044
1,625
2,000
1
2
2
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
83.4%
16.6%
3,250
3,250
         6,375                            19,219 
                        256,219 
       54,315 
3
20
266
10,000
10
84.7%
15.3%
3,000
4,000
2,270
10,896
90,000
6,000
23,835
3
4
2
11
93
6
25
26
181
0
1
1
1
1
1
7
3
0
13
41
17
28
8
4
41
139
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
25,000
          46,270 
0
       23,448 
0
       47,283 
25,000
                        175,001 
500
500
500
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,197
1,525
0
1,197
0
0
1,197
0
0
500
500
500
500
500
7,182
3,050
-
            5,222           1,197 
         1,197                            12,732 
0
0
26,667
0
0
0
          26,667 
0
0
0
3,750
0
20,000
       23,750 
0
0
0
3,750
3,750
20,000
       27,500 
40,000
16,667
26,667
7,500
3,750
40,000
                        134,583 
1,245
6,255
36,304
182,396
1,793
39,342
9,007
197,658
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
216
1,084
1,660
8,340
173
270
332
871
1,355
1,668
1
38
2
41
0
2
0
0
0
6
189
9
205
1
9
1
1
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
540
         3,190 
2,711
       16,029 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
3
             -                   3               17 
1
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
1,530
459
612
347
8,470
2,541
3,388
1,923
1,667
9,229
13,770
76,230
918
5,082
3,647
20,188
2
0
1
0
2
14
1
4
9
3
4
2
10
79
5
21
3,825
               -           26,775 
21,175
     148,226 
             -   
             -   
22
             -                 28             154 
4
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
77
77
77
77
77
1,099
467
0
             -   
               -             1,948 
424
424
424
424
424
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6,083
2,583
0
       10,784 
             -   
             -   
1
0
0
             -                   2               11 
6
3
0
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
6,120
2,550
4,080
1,148
574
6,120
20,591
33,880
14,117
22,587
6,353
3,176
33,880
113,992
-
-
-
-
-
6
3
4
1
1
6
21
35
15
23
7
3
35
118
C14301
C14302
C14303
C14304
C14305
C14306
C14307
C14308
C15
C1501
C1502
C1503
C1504
Acquisition and distribution of  orange sweet  potato vines
Acquisition and distribution  of  iron fortified beans seeds
Acquisition and districbution  of kale seed 
Acquisition and  distribution of   pumpkin seed 
Acquisition of improved seed
Acquisition of fertilizers
Acquisition of manual tools for women and most vulnerable
Preparation and production of fruit seedlings for Kabare, Ihema 
and Nasho blocks and Home gardens (Avocado, Mango, Papaya, 
passion fruit)
Sub-total inputs for initial support
Sub Total sub-component A4: enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
SPIU
vines
SPIU
kg
SPIU
HH
SPIU
HH
kg
SPIU
lumpsum SPIU
lumpsum SPIU
SPIU
number 
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Sub-component A5: Environmental and social management plan
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Nasho irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Kibare irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan 
(ESMPs) for Ihema irrigation scheme
Implementation of Environmental management plan linked with 
other project activities 
Sub-total  Environmental and social management plan
SPIU/contr
actor
SPIU/contr
actor
SPIU 
contractor 
SPIU 
III
III
III
III
Lumpsum SPIU/contr
actor
Lumpsum SPIU/contr
actor
SPIU 
contractor 
SPIU 
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
III
III
III
III
vines
kg
HH
HH
kg
lumpsum
lumpsum
number 
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
2,100,000
-
300
300
 2,100,000 
        6,000 
           600 
           600 
6,000
300
300
200
200
-
-
             -   
-
200
200
14,000
1
700
200
200
200
200
300,000
0
-
800
800
14,000
1
700
300,000
0
1
0
1
10
45,000
50
1
                      31,500 
                        7,200 
                           240 
                           600 
                             -   
                             -   
                             -   
                             -   
0
0
320
800
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
31,500
7,200
560
1,400
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
0
7,200
120
300
0
0
0
0
31,500
0
120
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
0
             -   
0
1
1
                      39,540                      221,120                     530,660          7,620 
                    116,934                      466,042                     852,976        23,817 
       31,920 
       93,117 
            280 
       42,669 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
54,000
                             -   
54,000
54,000
                             -   
54,000
32,000
                             -   
32,000
4,000
                             -   
12,000
54,000
54,000
32,000
12,000
                             -   
152,000
152,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Component 1:Strengthening resilience to droughts
                 1,457,082                 14,282,958                16,010,041 
    210,829 
  1,246,753 
  3,171,499 
0
0
80
200
140,000
45,000
35,000
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
0
0
0
80
200
0
0
0
270,000
31,500
7,200
560
1,400
140,000
45,000
35,000
270,000
        220,280              280 
       48,675 
        298,439 
            280                          530,660 
       76,260 
                        852,976             884 
33
7
1
1
145
47
36
280
550
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
84.7%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
15.3%
4,820
1,102
86
214
21,420
6,885
5,355
41,310
26,681
6,098
474
1,186
118,580
38,115
29,645
228,690
5
1
0
0
22
7
6
43
28
6
0
1
123
39
31
237
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
81,191
               -         130,505 
449,469
     722,471 
-
             -   
-
             -   
-
             -   
-
             -   
-
466
             -               135             749 
84
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
54,000
54,000
32,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
54,000
54,000
32,000
12,000
56
56
33
12
52.6%
47.4%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
84.7%
15.3%
25,596
28,404
8,262
45,738
4,896
27,104
1,836
10,164
27
9
5
2
29
47
28
11
4,000
4,000
144,000
152,000
158
40,590
111,410
0
0
0
0
0
42
115
     4,090,865 
  3,291,434 
  3,729,161 
                   16,010,541        16,591 
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -      3,092,127 
  2,835,724 
  9,879,487 
             -   
             -   
             -        203,203 
        3,204 
        2,939 
      10,238 
             -   
             -   
             -               211 
             -   
             -   
KIIWP II ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months' Period from January 2022 to June 2023
Component 2: Support to Farm Business Development
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD 
Categ  Unit
 Quantity FY 2021/22 
Quantity FY 2022/23
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2021/22 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price 
Frw '000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-June 
2023 Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 2023Frw'000
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Q2
Q3
C20
C21
I. Investment cost
Sub-component B1: Developing Farming as business 
skills (  FaaB)
C210
Capacity building of cooperatives
C21001 Recruitment of service provider to build capacity of  
SPIU/SP
III
Lumpsum
1
farmers'cooperatives on Global GAP  certification
C21002 Refreshment  allowance for farmers  during training on 
SPI
V
numbers
GAP standards 
C21003 Monitoring and follow-up the activity of  capacity 
building of farmers on GAP standards
SPIU/NAEB
III
Lumpsum
C21004
Training and coaching of existing cooperatives on 
cooperative organization and management
SPIU/Service 
provider
IV
numbers
91
91
C21005
Exchange visits / study tours for cooperative leaders
SPIU
IV
sessions
1
Sub-total Capacity building of cooperatives
C211
C21101
Business development service 
 Preparation of Business Plans
SPIU/Service 
provider
III
numbers
C21102 Recruitment of TA for preparing of Farming as a 
SPIU/ICCO
Business (Faab) curriculum
C21103 Recruitment of BDSPs services for capacity building on 
SPIU/ICCO
C21104
C22
FaaB, integrated to FFS sessions
 Farmers refreshment during training  of farmers on 
FAAB skills
Sub-total busness development  services
Sub-total Developing Farming as business skills (  
FaaB)
Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest 
storage and irrigation kits
SPIU
III
III
V
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
numbers
C2201
 Small Equipment Investments for individual men (>30)
SPIU
I
C2202
C2203
C2204
SPIU
 Small Equipment Investments for individual women & 
youth (<30)
Cooperative microprojects on post-harvest management 
facilities
BDF grant management fee (about 7.35 % of total 
grants)
Sub-total Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation kits
Supporting backward and forward market linkage
SPIU
SPIU
VI
I
I
C23
C230 Market Access
C23001 Conduct pre-season meetings for cooperatives SPIU
SPIU
Supporting farmers to participate in in fairs/ shows
C23002
Supporting farmers cooperatives in signing contracts
SPIU
C23003
Sub total  market access
Facilitating Public Private Producers Partnerships
IV sessions  1
IV
IV
sessions 
number
1
1
            1 
                1 
                1 
C231
C23101 Conduct  workshop among different actors in value chain/value chain platform ( maize and beans, vegetables, fruits and roots and tubers)
                1 
sessions 
SPIU
IV
1
Sub total  faciliting 4Ps
Access to Finance
C232
C23201 Recruitment of TA for development  of tailored 
agrifinance products  for PFIs ( SACCO, MFIs)
recruitment of service provider to conduct financial 
literacy training among farmers cooperatives and 
facilitate PFIs to access credit line 
C23202
ICCO
ICCO
III
III
lumpsum
lumpsum
1
1
                1 
                1 
C23203 Recruitment of SP to support  access to agricultural 
SPIU
III
lumpsum
insurance among KIIWP beneficiaries as well as 
training of NAIS stakehilders 
Sub-total access to finance
Sub-Total sub-component C3 : Supporting backward and forward market linkage
Total Component 2
0
0
0
                1 
              91 
              91 
0
0
1
1
91
1
0
0
1
1
91
1
2
15,000
                   15,000 
30,000
45,000
15,000
182
25
                     2,275 
4,550
6,825
2,275
4
20,000
              1,820,000 
80,000
1,900,000
1,820,000
10
20
20
50
2,600
                          -   
130,000
130,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
2,275
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
26,000
52,000
5,000
0
5,000
0
0
5,000
                          -   
10,000
10,000
              1,837,275                       254,550                  2,091,825            1,837,275 
                      -                    25,000                  63,275                 77,000 
1
1
1
1
2,760
                          -   
2,760
2,760
1
13,000
                          -   
13,000
1
150,000
                          -   
150,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
7,500
13,000
150,000
15,000
300
300
600
25
                          -   
15,000
5
5
1
1
1
1
5
5
2
1
1
10
10
4
1
1
1
                          -                         180,760 
                      -   
              1,837,275                       435,310                  2,272,585            1,837,275 
                  180,760 
                      -   
                       -                            -                 157,500 
                      -                    25,000                  63,275               234,500 
5,000
5,000
                          -   
                          -   
100,000
100,000
30,000
                          -   
180,000
25,500
                          -   
25,500
100,000
100,000
180,000
25,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
50,000
50,000
0
120,000
25,500
0
                          -                         405,500 
                  405,500 
                      -   
                      -   
                       -                    75,500               220,000 
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
10,400
               2,000 
                     2,000 
                     2,000 
                     6,000                         10,000 
4,000
2,000
4,000
6,000
4,000
6,000
                    16,000 
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
2,000
                 2,000                   4,000 
0
0
0
2,000
0
2,000
                       -                      4,000                   4,000 
2,000
0
2,000
                     2,000 
4,000
                     2,000                           4,000                        6,000 
                          -   
0
                   10,400 
0
10,400
6,000
8,667
                     8,667 
0
8,667
1
300,000
                          -   
300,000
300,000
                  319,067 
                   19,067                       300,000 
                   27,067                       314,000 
                  341,067 
        1,864,342              1,154,810            3,019,152 
0
2,000
0
2,000
                      -                     2,000 
                       -                      2,000 
0
                      -   
0
0
0
10,400
8,667
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300,000
                      -                   19,067 
                 2,000                 25,067 
     1,839,275 
          25,067             25,000           144,775 
                       -                            -                 300,000 
                       -                      6,000               304,000 
        758,500 
2
1
20
20
6
1
2
1
2
2
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Total  costs Jan 
2022-June 2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
Q4
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
Comments
 IFAD Loan 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO
Benef In-cash)Benef (In-kind) IFAD Loan 
Private/
Banks 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/B
anks 
Benef (In-cash)Benef (In kind)  IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/Bank
s 
Benef (In cash)Benef (In Kind)
15,000
2,275
20,000
52,000
45,000
6,825
47
7
72.3%
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
32,535
1,080
4,934
164
1,900,000
1,969
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
1,373,700
45,600
130,000
135
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
93,990
3,120
11,385
1,727
480,700
32,890
2,530
529,232
698
3,289
37,950
3,795
7,230
240
1,512,389
50,204
1,995
9,399
66
312
108,450
3,600
10,845
360
130,689
1,643,079
4,338
54,542
-
-
45,732
574,964
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
2
498
34
3
548
1
3
39
4
47
596
-
-
-
34
5
1,424
97
7
1
0
47
3
0
1,567
52
0
0
4
0
4
57
2
10
112
11
135
1,703
57
57
8.3%
8.3%
36.5%
36.5%
55,200
55,200
8,300
8,300
36,500
36,500
0.0%
8.3%
36.5%
99,360
                -   
14,940
65,700
103
                 -   
8.3%
36.5%
14,076
2,117
9,308
15
0
10,000
10
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
               89,275                2,091,825 
2,168
2,760
13,000
0
7,500
2,760
3
72.3%
2.4%
25.3%
13,000
150,000
15,000
13
155
16
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
2.4%
25.3%
               23,260                   180,760 
             112,535                2,272,585 
187
2,355
0
104
104
187
26
100,000
100,000
180,000
25,500
25,000
25,000
60,000
0
72.3%
72.3%
72.3%
55.2%
55.2%
55.2%
55.2%
0
2,000
0
6,000
4,000
6,000
                 2,000                     16,000 
2,000
6,000
                 2,000                       6,000 
10,400
8,667
6
4
6
17
6
6
11
9
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
83.7%
6.5%
6.5%
6.5%
9.8%
9.8%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
6.5%
9.8%
5,022
3,348
5,022
13,392
5,022
5,022
8,705
7,254
390
260
390
1,040
390
390
676
563
-
-
588
392
588
1,568
588
588
1,019
849
            -                   -   
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
3
5
14
5
5
9
8
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
-
-
300,000
311
83.7%
6.5%
9.8%
251,100
19,500
29,400
260
20
0
0
0
-
-
-
9
9
15
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
                 -                     -   
-
-
38
38
68
10
                 -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
                 -   
-
1
0
1
2
1
1
1
1
30
             110,000                   405,500                 420 
             -                  -   
      -   
             -               223,836 
                -   
                      -   
              -         33,657       148,008 
             -                          232 
                 -                     -                     -                     35                  153 
                  -   
                 -                     -   
                      -                     319,067                 331 
                 4,000                   341,067                 353 
        226,535           3,019,152          3,129 
                 -                 -                  -   
             -              -               -        -            -   
           -              -   
      -               -              -   
       -   
             -               267,059           20,739 
             -               285,473           22,169 
          -        2,152,388       76,711 
                      -           31,269 
                      -           33,425 
                 -      608,389    33,657    148,008 
            -                   -                 -                          277 
            -                   -                 -                          296 
          -                  2,230 
                21 
                23 
            79 
                  -   
                 -                    32 
                 -                    35 
                  -   
             -               630               35              153 
                 -   
                 -   
                  -   
                  -   
              -   
                 -                     -   
                 -                     -   
             -                 -   
KIIWP II ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months Period  January 2022 - June 2023
Comp 3:Institutional development and project coordination
 Quantity FY 
2021/22 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total 
Quantit
y FY 
2021/22 
1
          1 
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
 Implementing 
Agency 
 IFAD 
Categ 
Unit
Quantity FY 2022/23
Budget Jan 2021- June 2022
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
 Q1 
 Q2 
 Q3 
 Q4 
 Total Quantity FY 
2022/23 
 Unit Price Frw 
'000 
Total Jan 2022-
June 2022 
Frw'000
Total Jul 2022-
June 2023 
Frw'000
Total Jan 2022-
June 
2023Frw'000
 Q3 
Q4
 Q1 
Q2
C31
C310
C31001
C31004
C31006
C311
C31101
C31103
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and insitutional development
A.Policy support and implementation
I. Study
Start-up workshop
Policy assesment and regulation studies /a
Nutrition studies for baseline  (MDD-W)
Subtotal
II. Support to multistakeholder dialogue
Forums and workshops  for policy dialogue
Lumpsum
Support dialogue and advocacy for Cooperatives 
unions of Kayonza and National level Federations /d
C31104
Support dialogue and advocacy for WUO and WLUO
Gender learning and sharing events (multi stakeholder 
coordination)
Nutrition multi stakeholder coordination
Subtotal
Subtotal Sub-component 3.1: Policy and institutional development
Sub-component 3.2: Project management and coordination
Office equipment and furniture
 SPIU-IFAD  
C31105
C31106
C32
C3201
C3202
Outcome survey
C3203
Knowledge Management
C3204
Capacity building of SPIU Staff
C3205
Promotion materials
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C3206
Preparation and validation of ToRs for different studies  SPIU-IFAD  
C321
C3210
Sub-total Investment cost
Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowancies
A.New staff
1.Central Level
C321001 Operations Manager
C321002
Irrigation Specialist
C321003 Climate and Environment Specialist
C321004 Civil Engineering Specialist
C321005 Cooperative Development Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321006
Social Safeguard and Compliance Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321007 Access to Finance Specialist
C321008 Accountant
C321009
Procurement Specialist
C321010 M/E  Specialist
C321011 Drivers
Subtotal
2.District Level
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321012 Watershed Management Officer
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321013 Value Chain Development/Agribusiness Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321014
Electromechanical Engineering
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321015
Senior Agronomist and FFS Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321016
Land Husbandry Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
IV
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
I
III
III
IV
I
III
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
1
1
0
1
1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
          1 
1
          1  1
1
        -   
        -   
        -   
          1 
          1 
1
          2 
          1 
        -   
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Lumpsum
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
1
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Pers.month
12
12
        24 
12
12
12
12
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
6
6
6
6
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
12
12
12
12
12
1
1
3
4
2
1
2
1
1
3
4
3
-
-
-
-
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
25,000
80,000
25,000
5,000
5,000
5,000
2,800
1,400
               25,000 
                      -   
                      -   
               25,000 
0
80,000
25,000
25,000
80,000
25,000
             105,000                130,000                  25,000 
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
                      -   
0
0
0
                      -   
0
0
0
                          -   
                 5,000 
15,000
                      -   
20,000
                 5,000 
10,000
                      -   
2,800
20,000
20,000
15,000
2,800
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
5,000
5,000
5,000
0
0
0
1,400
5,000
5,000
0
2,800
0
                      -   
2,800
               10,000                 50,600                  60,600 
               35,000 
2,800
                        -                   10,000                 11,400                     12,800 
             155,600                190,600                  25,000                 10,000                 11,400                     12,800 
10,000                       -   
40,000                       -   
10,000
40,000
10,000                10,000 
30,000
10,000                10,000 
40,000
2,000                  4,000 
6,000
5,196                  5,196 
0
10,000
40,000
40,000
50,000
10,000
5,196
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
4,000
5,196
0
0
0
0
10,000
0
0
10,000
40,000
10,000
10,000
2,000
0
               29,196 
             126,000                155,196                    5,196                 24,000                 10,000                     72,000 
2,216
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,449
1,449
1,449
312
1,449
1,782
1,782
1,782
1,782
13,294
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
8,692
8,692
8,692
7,493
26,588
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
17,385
17,385
17,385
14,986
39,882
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
26,077
22,478
111,008
222,016
333,024
8,692
10,691
10,691
10,691
10,691
17,385
21,381
21,381
21,381
21,381
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
0
0
0
0
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
 Budget July 2022- June 2023 
Q3
Q4
 Total  
costs Jan 
2022-June 
2023 
Frw'000 
Total USD 
'000
 IFAD 
Loan 
0
0
25,000
          25,000 
0
80,000
0
         80,000 
25,000
80,000
25,000
   130,000 
26
83
26
            135 
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
KIIWP II ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months' Period from January 2022 to June 2023
Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination
  % Financing 
 Financiers RWF '000 
 Equivalent Financing in USD '000 
 GOS 
GOR
ICCO  Private/Banks Benef In-cash) Benef (In-kind)
 IFAD 
Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
 Private/Banks  Benef (In-cash)Benef (In kind) IFAD Loan 
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/Ban
ks 
Benef (In cash)Benef (In Kind)
Comments
5,000
5,000
0
0
5,000
20,000
5,000
20,000
21
21
89.5%
89.5%
5,000
15,000
16
89.5%
0
2,800
2,800
3
3
89.5%
89.5%
0
          10,000 
          35,000 
1,400
         16,400 
         96,400 
     60,600                63 
            198 
   190,600 
      -               -              -   
             -   
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
2,625
8,400
2,625
                      -         116,350       13,650 
22,375
71,600
22,375
23.19
74.20
23.19
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -               120.6 
2.72
8.70
2.72
              14.1 
                -   
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
17,900
2,100
17,900
2,100
13,425
1,575
2,506
294
19
19
14
3
2
2
2
0
                    -   
                    -   
                -   
                -   
294
2,506
                      -           54,237 
      6,363 
                      -         170,587       20,013 
3
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -                    56 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -                  177 
0
                   7 
                 21 
                  -   
                  -   
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
0
0
0
0
10,000
40,000
10,000
10,000
40,000
10,000
10,000
50,000
2,000
2,000
10,000
0
0
5,196
10
41
41
52
10
5
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
89.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
10.5%
8,950
35,800
1,050
4,200
35,800
4,200
44,750
5,250
8,950
1,050
4,651
546
9
37
37
46
9
5
          22,000 
         22,000 
   155,196 
            358 
                    -   
                -   
                      -         138,901       16,296 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -                  321 
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
6,647
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
4,346
4,346
4,346
3,746
55,504
0
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
5,345
6,647
5,345
39,882
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
4,346
26,077
4,346
26,077
4,346
26,077
3,746
22,478
55,504
0
4,346
333,024
-
26,077
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
41
33
33
33
33
33
33
27
27
27
23
345
27
33
33
33
33
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
39,882
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
26,077
26,077
26,077
22,478
41
33
33
33
33
33
33
27
27
27
23
333,024
-
-
-
-
-
-
345
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
32,072
27
33
33
33
33
C321017 Accountant for KIIWP transaction at District
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321018
Irrigation Technicians /a
C321019 Water Users’ Association Specialist
C321020 Horticulture Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
C321021
Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist
 SPIU-IFAD  
Subtotal
B.Shared SPIU Staff
SPIU Coordinator
C321022
C321023 Head of Procurement
C321024 Head of MIS
C321025 Chief Accountant
C321026 Administrative and logistic Specialist
C321027
Internal Auditor
C321028
ICT and data officer
C321029 Administrative Assistant
C321030 Messenger
Subtotal
Sub-total Salaries and Allowances
Operational costs
Field visit of KIIWP activities
C3202
C320201
C320202 Communication fees 
C320203 Office supply / consumable 
C320204 Announcements and advertisements
C320205 Hiring a vehicle for field visits
C320206 Codification of KIIWP equipments
C320207
Steering/technical comittee meetings
C320208 Allowances for procurement tender committee
C320209 Advertisement and TV talk show's
C320210
Participation in  Agrishow
C320211 Courier dispatching services
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD 
 SPIU-IFAD  
C320212 Refreshment service (different meetings& workshops) 
 SPIU-IFAD  
C320213
 Computer accessoires
 SPIU-IFAD  
C320214 Vehicle hire for office administration transport services 
 SPIU-IFAD  
in Kigali City
C320215 Car wash cleaning services
C320216
Sport for SPIU Personnel
C320217 Cleaning service fees
C3203
C320301
 Subtotal Operational costs
Institution Support
Institutional Support to MINAGRI  to perform the 
ministerial supervisory role on the project
C320302
C320303
Suppot to MINAGRI to the operationalization of 
MINAGRI Knowledge Manamagent & communication 
Strategy
Institutional Support to RAB
C320304
Support RAB in Agrishow
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
MINAGRI/SPI
U-IFAD  
MINAGRI/SPU-
IFAD 
 RAB/SPIU-
IFAD  
 RAB 
C320305 Coomunication fees for RAB Focal Point following 
 RAB 
MoU between RAB and SPIU
Subtotal Institution Support
Vehicles operation & Maintenance
C3204
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
C320401
Fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups  
C320402
C320403 Maintenance fees for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
C320404
Tyre purchasing
Subtotal Vehicle Operation & Maintenance
Bank charges and commission
C3205
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
III
I
III
VI
V
III
IV
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Months
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
III
Lumpsum 1
III
Lumpsum 1
III
III
III
I
I
I
I
Lumpsum 1
Lumpsum 1
Lumpsum 1
Number
Lumpsum 4
Number
4
Number
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
          6 
          6 
          2 
          6 
          6 
        -   
          1 
          6 
          6 
        -   
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          6 
          2 
          6 
        -   
        -   
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
        -   
        -   
        -   
          8 
          8 
        -   
        -   
        -   
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
3
4
4
12
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
3
4
4
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
4
12
12
1
3
12
12
1
12
12
12
4
12
4
12
-
-
4
4
4
1
12
-
-
4
16
16
16
-
-
1,449
1,449
1,782
1,782
1,782
2614
2216
2216
1782
1449
1449
1162
623
126
2,000
1,875
5,000
300
984
2,000
250
195
300
100
1,000
500
2,294
240
490
911
2,048
400
800
250
8,692
8,692
10,691
10,691
10,691
17,385
17,385
21,381
21,381
21,381
26,077
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
100,912
201,824
302,735
15,684
13,294
13,294
10,691
8,692
8,692
6,972
3,739
759
81,817
293,737
               12,000 
               11,250 
               10,000 
                 1,800 
31,368
26,588
26,588
21,381
17,385
17,385
13,944
7,478
1,517
163,634
587,474
24,000
22,500
20,000
3,600
                 5,904 
11,808
                      -   
                    250 
                 1,170 
                 1,800 
2,000
750
2,340
3,600
                    600 
1,200
                 6,000 
12,000
                 3,000 
               13,761 
                 1,440 
                    980 
6,000
9,174
2,880
1,960
20,000
                      -   
20,000
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
47,052
39,882
39,882
32,072
26,077
26,077
20,916
11,217
2,276
245,451
881,210
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
36,000
33,750
30,000
5,400
17,712
2,000
1,000
3,510
5,400
20,000
1,800
18,000
9,000
22,935
4,320
2,940
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
0
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
6,881
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
6,881
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
2,000
250
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
2,733
                 5,466 
10,932
16,398
2,733
2,733
2,733
               75,421 
                      -   
20,000                40,000 
             154,744                230,165                  17,109                 17,359                 12,772                     12,772 
0
80,000
120,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
10,000                20,000 
40,000
60,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
20,000                40,000 
80,000
120,000
30,000                60,000 
30,000
50                     100 
600
90,000
700
20,000
30,000
50
20,000
20,000
20,000
30,000
50
0
150
0
150
                80,050                 80,050 
             230,600 
0
8,192
6,400
12,800
4,000
             160,100 
                      -   
0
                      -   
0
                 3,200 
1,600
                 6,400 
3,200
                      -   
0
                 9,600                 31,392                  40,992                    4,800                   4,800                 12,992                       5,800 
                      -   
0
                   50,150 
0
0
1,600
3,200
1,000
160,100
0
8,192
1,600
3,200
0
390,700
0
8,192
9,600
19,200
4,000
0
0
1,600
3,200
0
0
0
0
0
0
4,346
4,346
5,345
5,345
5,345
50,456
0
7,842
6,647
6,647
5,345
4,346
4,346
3,486
1,869
379
4,346
26,077
4,346
26,077
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
5,345
32,072
50,456
0
7,842
302,735
-
47,052
6,647
39,882
6,647
39,882
5,345
32,072
4,346
26,077
4,346
26,077
3,486
20,916
1,869
11,217
379
2,276
49
41
41
33
27
27
22
12
2
40,909
146,868
40,909
146,868
245,451
881,210
254
913
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
0
585
900
0
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
6,000
5,625
5,000
900
2,952
0
250
585
900
20,000
300
3,000
1,500
2,294
720
490
36,000
33,750
30,000
5,400
17,712
2,000
1,000
3,510
5,400
20,000
1,800
18,000
9,000
22,935
4,320
2,940
37
35
31
6
18
2
1
4
6
21
2
19
9
24
4
3
2,733
2,733
16,398
17
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
10
100%
100%
82%
82%
82%
82%
100%
100%
82%
100%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
27
27
33
33
33
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
26,077
26,077
32,072
32,072
32,072
27
27
33
33
33
314
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
302,735
0
0
0
0
0
0
314
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
245,451
881,210
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
206
864
0
0
-
-
5,400
972
36,000
33,750
24,600
4,428
47,052
39,882
39,882
32,072
26,077
26,077
20,916
-
-
-
11,217
2,276
14,524
3,188
1,640
1,000
3,510
4,428
20,000
1,476
360
-
-
972
-
324
14,760
3,240
7,380
18,807
3,542
2,411
1,620
4,128
778
529
13,446
2,952
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
41
41
33
27
27
22
12
2
37
35
25
5
15
2
1
4
5
21
2
15
8
19
4
2
14
          12,522 
         32,772 
   230,165 
            109 
           -   
             -   
                    -   
                -   
                      -         205,702       24,463 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -                    94 
                 -   
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
20,000
20,000
120,000
124
100%
10,000
10,000
60,000
62
100%
20,000
20,000
120,000
124
100%
0
150
30,000
90,000
150
700
93
0.7
100%
100%
100,300
390,700
405
          50,150 
0
0
1,600
3,200
3,000
0
1,600
3,200
0
            7,800             4,800 
0
0
8,192
9,600
19,200
4,000
     40,992 
-
8
10
20
4
42
0
82%
82%
82%
82%
18%
18%
18%
18%
120,000
60,000
120,000
90,000
700
-
-
-
-
-
390,700
0
6,717
7,872
15,744
3,280
1,474.56
1,728
3,456
720
33,613
7,379
124
62
124
93
1
7
8
16
3
405
35
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C320501 (cid:9)Bank charges
C320502 (cid:9)Purchase of Cheque and Op books
C320503 (cid:9)Bank statement fees
C320504 (cid:9)Money transfer fees
C320505 (cid:9)Loss on currency exchange and translations
C320506 Demonetization Expenses
C320507 (cid:9)Other commissions
Subtotal
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
 SPIU-IFAD  
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Subtotal Reccurent cost
Subtotal Sub-component 3.2: Project management and coordination
Total Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
          2 
        -   
        -   
        -   
        -   
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
-
-
-
92                     184 
26                       51 
12                       23 
369
102
46
250                     500 
7,290                14,581 
1,000
29,161
                      -   
0
250                     500 
1,000
                 9,600                 94,462 
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
0
1,500
47,517
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
17,519
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
17,519
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
33,903
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
19,519
               19,200 
             577,654 
             125,854                  88,509                  22,319                 22,319                 46,895                     25,319 
             290,596               376,635                   307,109 
          1,224,671             1,745,780                271,543 
             612,654 
          1,380,271             1,936,380                296,543 
             300,596               388,035                   319,909 
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
92
26
12
250
7,290
0
250
23,519
17,519
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
-
1,500
47,517
1
0
0
2
45
0
2
49
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
553
153
69
1,500
43,742
-
1,500
1
0
0
2
45
-
2
47,517
0
0
0
49
0
0
0
          31,319 
        262,859 
         22,319 
     88,509                92 
       324,259  ########          1,877 
      -               -              -   
           -              -   
             -   
             -   
                    -   
                    -   
                -   
                -   
                      -           81,130 
      7,379 
                      -      1,697,643       48,137 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -                    84 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -               1,768 
                 -   
                 -   
                  -   
                  -   
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
        297,859 
       420,659  ########          2,075 
           -              -   
             -   
                    -   
                -   
                      -      1,868,230       68,150 
               -                 -                             -                     -                     -               1,945 
                 21 
                  -   
                  -   
                 -                     -   
             -   
             -   
             -   
KIIWP II  ACTION PLAN AND  BUDGET for 18 Months Period  January 2022 - June 2023 Category by Financier
IFAD 
Loan
GOR
GOS
ICCO
Private/Banks
Beneficiaries 
In-cash)
Beneficiaries (In-Kind)
TOTAL 
FRW'000 %
Category
I. Goods
II. Works
III.Consultancies & non-
consulting services
322,597
211,287
931,975
2,583,478
1,926,231
6,202,010
0
0
2,910,019
736,389
2,301,423
565,291
IV.Training & Workshop
263,808
106,155
444,079
37,576
V.Salaries & allowances
984,326
524
VI.Operating costs
48,517
0
0
0
5,522
2,117
9,308
0
0
0
31,540
138,700
9,600
1,645,699
145,626
10,857,346
7.85
51.79
0
0
0
0
0
0
46,761
1,216
6,559,882
31.29
852,834
1,001,795
48,517
0
0
4.07
4.78
0.23
Total
7,112,745
2,980,585
9,879,487
608,389
33,657
148,008
203,203
20,966,073
100.00
%
34
14
47
3
0
1
1
100
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
Rwanda
Project Name:
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, Phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID:
2000002350
Version
1.0
Version Date
16-Apr-21
Prepared by:
Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:
Rwamulangwa Stephen
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
Non-Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
-
-
-
-
-
1,656,347,000.00 
9,796,066,000.00 
4,729,990,000.00 
1,430,985,000.00 
17,613,388,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 6 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
Prior Review Thresholds
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Firms - Consulting 
Services
Individuals - Consulting 
Services
Prior Review
> US$ 100,000.00
> US$ 200,000.00
> US$ 100,000.00
> US$ 50,000.00
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook), or 
based on the thresholds stipulated in the LTB
The exchange rate at time of submission will be used for reviews.
Procurement Method Thresholds
Shopping
NCB
ICB
Goods
Works 
< US$ 20,000.00
< US$ 40,000.00
Non-Consulting 
Services
< US$ 20,000.00
CQS
Firms
< US$ 100,000.00
> US$ 20,000.00 to < US$ 
250,000.00
> US$ 40,000.00 to < US$ 
1,000,000.00
> US$ 20,000.00 to < US$ 
250,000.00
QBS/LCS/FBS
> US$ 100,000 to < US$ 
200,000.00
> US$ 250,000.00
> US$ 1,000,000.00
> US$ 250,000.00
QCBS
> US$ 200,000.00
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 7 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Procurement Plan - Goods
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, Phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID: 2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Plan
Actual
-
Plan
-
Actual
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
USD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LCU
2,997,332,000.00
0.00
1,340,985,000.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
16-Apr-21
Description
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-Qualification
Submission of PreQual 
Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual 
Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bidding Process
Version
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11102
1.0
№
1
C12102
C3201
C14008
C14101           
C14102           
C14103           
C14104           
C14105
C14301           
C14302           
C12303           
C14304
C13103           
C14002           
C14003           
C320203
C320213
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Acquisition of inputs (lime and organic manure ) 
for Ndego and Kabare sectors
IFAD
N/A
Supply and installation of In-field irrigation  in 
Kibare, Ihema and Nasho  
IFAD
N/A
Acquisition of office equipment and furniture
IFAD
N/A
Acquisition of bicycles
IFAD
N/A
Post-Qual
Prior Review
DC
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
1
1
1
1
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for 
establishing demosntration plots and  trials at  
both RAB stations and 10  cassava, 10 maize and 
beans, 10 banana, vegetables, and orange sweet 
potato FFS in Kayonza
Acquisition and distribution of  orange sweet 
potato vines, iron fortified beans seeds and kale 
seeds
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review
Use of  RAB framework contracts
1
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review
Use of RAB framework contracts
1
Acquisition of promotion materials 
IFAD
N/A
Acquisition of office supply / consumables
IFAD
N/A
Acquisition of  computer accessories 
IFAD
N/A
C320402
10
Acquisition of fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
IFAD
N/A
C320404
11
Acquisition of tyres
IFAD
N/A
C11201           
C11202
12
Preparation ,production and plantation  of forest 
trees ( callistris robusta, Pinus patula, Eucalyptus  
varieties, etc) 
IFAD
N/A
Yes
Yes
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
DC
1
1
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
500,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
24-Apr-22
27-Apr-22
30-Apr-22
Actual
1,061,280,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Feb-22
8-Mar-22
10-Mar-22
Actual
10,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
11-Jan-22
N/A
12-Jan-22
23,835,000
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
11-Apr-23
N/A
13-Apr-23
2,500,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
1,120,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5,012,000
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jan-22
N/A
11-Jan-22
30,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
8-Feb-22
N/A
10-Feb-22
-
Actual
9,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
30-Jan-22
N/A
31-Jan-22
Actual
9,600,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Dec-21
N/A
10-Dec-21
Actual
4,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
30-Jan-22
N/A
31-Jan-22
-
Actual
621,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
18-Feb-22
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 8 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Plan
Actual
-
-
Procurement Plan - Goods
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, Phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID: 2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
Bidding Process
1.0
16-Apr-21
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11102
№
1
Description
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Acquisition of inputs (lime and organic manure ) 
for Ndego and Kabare sectors
14-May-22
N/A
N/A
4-Jun-22
18-Jun-22
Plan
25-Jun-22
Date
Contract
Award
8-Jul-22
Date
Contract
Signature
22-Jul-22
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
-
500,000,000
Date
Contract
Completion
22-Jul-23
Remarks
The acquistion of inputs must be undertaken without disrupting 
ongoing operations.
Actual
C12102
C3201
C14008
C14101           
C14102           
C14103           
C14104           
C14105
C14301           
C14302           
C12303           
C14304
C13103           
C14002           
C14003           
C320203
C320213
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Supply and installation of In-field irrigation  in 
Kibare, Ihema and Nasho  
24-Apr-22
N/A
N/A
15-May-22
29-May-22
Plan
5-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
-
1,061,280,000
24-Dec-23
Acquisition of office equipment and furniture
26-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
26-Jan-22
N/A
Acquisition of bicycles
13-May-23
N/A
N/A
3-Jun-23
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
26-Jan-22
28-Jan-22
30-Jan-22
-
10,000,000
31-May-22
10-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
-
23,835,000
29-Aug-23
Inputs and materials for Ngoma RAB station for 
establishing demosntration plots and  trials at  
both RAB stations and 10  cassava, 10 maize and 
beans, 10 banana, vegetables, and orange sweet 
potato FFS in Kayonza
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Acquisition and distribution of  orange sweet 
potato vines, iron fortified beans seeds and kale 
seeds
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
-
2,500,000
30 days from the 
purchase order date
Seeds multiplication and supply is governed by Law No. 
005/2016 of 05/04/2016 governing seeds and plant varieties in 
Rwanda. RAB has the mandate to certify seeds multipliers and 
monitor them to ensure the quality of seed and compliance with 
the above law.  
-
1,120,000
30 days from the 
purchase order date
Seeds multiplication and supply is governed by Law No. 
005/2016 of 05/04/2016 governing seeds and plant varieties in 
Rwanda. RAB has the mandate to certify seeds multipliers and 
monitor them to ensure the quality of seed and compliance with 
the above law.  
Acquisition of promotion materials 
25-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-22
N/A
Acquisition of office supply / consumables
27-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
10-Apr-22
N/A
Acquisition of  computer accessories 
14-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
14-Feb-22
N/A
C320402
10
Acquisition of fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
24-Dec-21
N/A
N/A
24-Dec-21
N/A
C320404
11
Acquisition of tyres
14-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
14-Feb-22
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
25-Jan-22
27-Jan-22
29-Jan-22
-
5,012,000
30-Mar-23
22-Apr-22
29-Apr-22
1-May-22
-
30,000,000
1-May-23
14-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
18-Feb-22
-
9,000,000
19-Apr-23
24-Dec-21
26-Dec-21
28-Dec-21
-
9,600,000
26-Feb-23
14-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
18-Feb-22
-
4,000,000
19-Apr-23
C11201           
C11202
12
Preparation ,production and plantation  of forest 
trees ( callistris robusta, Pinus patula, Eucalyptus  
varieties, etc) 
25-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
2-Mar-22
9-Mar-22
Plan
22-Mar-22
29-Mar-22
31-Mar-22
-
621,000,000
1-Oct-23
The activity must be undertaken without disrupting ongoing
operations
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 9 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
16-Apr-21
Description
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-Qualification
Submission of PreQual 
Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual 
Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bidding Process
Version
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11401
1.0
№
13
Management and maintenance of 900 ha of fruit 
orchard in Murama and Kabare Sectors 
C320206
14
Codification of KIIWP equipment
C320210
15
Decoration for agrishow
C31001           
C31101                        
C320212
16
Refreshment service (different meetings& 
workshops) 
C320214
17
Vehicle hire for office administration transport 
services in Kigali City
C320215
18
Car wash cleaning services
C320216
19
Sport for SPIU staff
C320217
20
Cleaning service 
C320401
21
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
C320404
22
Maintenance fees for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
DC
IFAD
N/A
IFAD
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
IFAD
N/A
IFAD
N/A
GoR
N/A
IFAD
N/A
IFAD
N/A
IFAD
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
600,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Feb-22
23-Feb-22
25-Feb-22
-
Actual
2,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
N/A
16-Jun-22
Actual
3,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
28-Feb-22
N/A
1-Mar-22
-
Actual
41,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
30-Nov-21
N/A
2-Dec-21
Actual
22,935,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
6-Nov-21
N/A
8-Nov-21
4,320,000
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
3-Nov-21
N/A
4-Nov-21
2,940,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
28-Jan-22
N/A
29-Jan-22
-
Actual
16,398,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-22
N/A
13-Jan-22
8,192,000
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2-Aug-22
N/A
3-Aug-22
19,200,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
31-Jan-22
N/A
1-Feb-22
-
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 10 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
Version
Bidding Process
1.0
16-Apr-21
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11102
C11401
№
1
13
Description
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Acquisition of inputs (lime and organic manure ) 
Management and maintenance of 900 ha of fruit 
for Ndego and Kabare sectors
orchard in Murama and Kabare Sectors 
4-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
9-Mar-22
16-Mar-22
Plan
29-Mar-22
Date
Contract
Award
5-Apr-22
Date
Contract
Signature
8-Apr-22
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
-
600,000,000
Date
Contract
Completion
8-Apr-23
Remarks
The acquistion of inputs must be undertaken without disrupting 
The activity must be undertaken without disrupting ongoing
ongoing operations.
operations
C320206
14
Codification of KIIWP equipment
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
30-Jun-22
N/A
C320210
15
Decoration for agrishow
15-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
15-Mar-22
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
30-Jun-22
2-Jul-22
4-Jul-22
-
2,000,000
2-Sep-23
15-Mar-22
17-Mar-22
19-Mar-22
-
3,000,000
18-May-23
C31001           
C31101                        
C320212
16
Refreshment service (different meetings& 
workshops) 
1-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
22-Jan-22
N/A
Plan
29-Jan-22
12-Feb-22
17-Feb-22
-
41,000,000
17-Feb-23
C320214
17
Vehicle hire for office administration transport 
services in Kigali City
8-Dec-21
N/A
N/A
29-Dec-21
N/A
C320215
18
Car wash cleaning services
18-Nov-21
N/A
N/A
18-Nov-21
N/A
C320216
19
Sport for SPIU staff
12-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
12-Feb-22
N/A
C320217
20
Cleaning service 
27-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
27-Jan-22
N/A
C320401
21
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
17-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
17-Aug-22
N/A
C320404
22
Maintenance fees for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
15-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-22
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
5-Jan-22
19-Jan-22
24-Jan-22
-
22,935,000
24-Jan-23
18-Nov-21
20-Nov-21
22-Nov-21
-
4,320,000
21-Jan-23
12-Feb-22
14-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
-
2,940,000
17-Apr-23
27-Jan-22
29-Jan-22
31-Jan-22
-
16,398,000
1-Apr-23
17-Aug-22
19-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
-
8,192,000
20-Oct-23
15-Feb-22
17-Feb-22
19-Feb-22
-
19,200,000
20-Apr-23
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 11 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Plan
Actual
-
Plan
-
Actual
Procurement Plan -Works
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID:2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Version
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11101
1.0
№
1
16-Apr-21
Description
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Establishment of  land husbandry techniques 
including agroforestry trees in Ndego and Kabare 
sectors
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
USD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LCU
9,796,066,000.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Pre-Qualification
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs.     
Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection 
Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual 
Closing Date
IFAD
N/A
Kabare Sector
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Force Account
1
1,493,586,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
C12101
2
Civil Works for  bulk Irrigation Infrastructure and 
ESMPs in Kibare, Ihema and Nasho  
IFAD
4 lots
Kibare-Ihema -Nasho
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
1
Actual
Lot 1: Bulk Irrigation 
Infrastructure and ESMPs for 
Kibare block
Lot 2:Bulk Irrigation Infrastructure 
and ESMPs for Ihema  block
Lot 3:Bulk Irrigation Infrastructure 
and ESMPs for Nasho  block
Lot 4:Farm roads, offices and 
post harverst infrastructures, 
preliminary land preparation and 
drainage system
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
C12103
3
Civil Works for Gishanda Dam and irrigation 
infrastructure (125ha) 
IFAD
N/A
Gishanda
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Force Account
1
Actual
-
-
-
-
Actual
8,136,480,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
166,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 12 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Procurement Plan -Works
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID:2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Plan
Actual
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
Pre-Qualification
1.0
16-Apr-21
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11101
№
1
Description
Establishment of  land husbandry techniques 
including agroforestry trees in Ndego and Kabare 
sectors
Submission of 
PreQual 
Report
N/A
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation 
Date
Bid Closing-
Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
N/A
24-Apr-22
27-Apr-22
4/31/2022
14-May-22
N/A
N/A
Submission
Combined Eval 
Rpt*
4-Jun-22
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
18-Jun-22
Plan
25-Jun-22
Date
Contract
Award
8-Jul-22
Date
Contract
Signature
22-Jul-22
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Actual
C12101
2
Civil Works for  bulk Irrigation Infrastructure and 
ESMPs in Kibare, Ihema and Nasho  
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-22
3-Aug-22
5-Aug-22
19-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
10-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
Plan
31-Oct-22
14-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
C12103
3
Civil Works for Gishanda Dam and irrigation 
infrastructure (125ha) 
N/A
27-Jul-23
30-Jul-23
13-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
3-Sep-23
Plan
10-Sep-23
24-Sep-23
1-Oct-23
Actual
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 13 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
-
Procurement Plan -Works
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID:2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Contract Award & Signature
Version
AWPB/Component 
Ref
C11101
1.0
№
1
16-Apr-21
Description
Establishment of  land husbandry techniques 
including agroforestry trees in Ndego and Kabare 
sectors
Amount
(LCU)
1,493,586,000
Date
Contract
Completion
22-Jul-23
Remarks
The construction and installation works must 
be undertaken without disrupting ongoing
operations
C12101
2
Civil Works for  bulk Irrigation Infrastructure and 
ESMPs in Kibare, Ihema and Nasho  
8,136,480,000
22-Jan-24
The amount of Rwf 20,493,3R00,000 in PP comes from the total estimated budget 
for this activity, which will extend to the following financial year. On the contrary, 
the amount of Rwf 8,766,480,000 in the AWPB comprises the projection of 
expenditures (40% of the total estimated amount) on 30th June 2023.
C12103
3
Civil Works for Gishanda Dam and irrigation 
infrastructure (125ha) 
166,000,000
1-Oct-24
The construction and installation works must 
be undertaken without disrupting ongoing
operations
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 14 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Plan
Actual
-
Plan
-
Actual
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID: 2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Version
AWPB/Com
ponent Ref
1.0
№
C12001
1
16-Apr-21
Description*
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Recruitment of a national  firm to undertake a Detailed design 
for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation system (150ha) 
C12002
2
Recruitment of an international  firm to undertake a Detailed 
design for  pipeline  5000 ha net Command Area in Eastern 
Province of Rwanda
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
USD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LCU
4,819,990,000.00
Plan
0.00
90,000,000.00
0.00
Actual
Plan
Actual
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
IFAD
Kanyeganyege
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
60,000,000
Plan
20-Aug-22
N/A
22-Aug-22
12-Sep-22
26-Sep-22
N/A
30-Sep-22
N/A
2-Oct-22
23-Oct-22
6-Nov-22
N/A
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Actual
Actual
IFAD
Kanyeganyege
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
500,000,000
Plan
24-Oct-22
7-Nov-22
9-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
21-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
8-Jan-23
22-Jan-23
24-Jan-23
10-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
14-Apr-23
Actual
C12201
3
Recrutement of a company for the Supervision works for 
Nasho, Kibare and Ihema schemes 
IFAD
Kanyegenyege
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Actual
C12202
4
Recrutement of a company for the supervision works for 
Gishanda 
IFAD
Gishanda
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
Actual
C14009
5
Recruitement of service provider to roll out PICSA training
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
Actual
C21001
6
Recruitment of service provider to build capacity of  farmers' 
cooperatives on Global GAP certification 
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
CQS
Actual
C21101
7
Recrutment of the SP for the Preparation of Business Plans 
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Actual
C23203
8
Recruitment of SP to support  access to agricultural 
insurance among KIIWP beneficiaries as well as training of 
NAIS stakeholders 
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Actual
C31004
9
Recruitment of  a consulting firm for the Policy assesment 
and regulation studies 
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
Actual
C31006
10
Recruitment for an individual consultant to assess the 
nutrition studies for baseline  (MDD-W) 
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
750,000,000
Plan
13-Feb-22
27-Feb-22
1-Mar-22
22-Mar-22
12-Apr-22
26-Apr-22
30-Apr-22
14-May-22
16-May-22
30-Jun-22
21-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
Actual
75,000,000
Plan
13-Apr-23
N/A
15-Apr-23
6-May-23
20-May-23
N/A
24-May-23
N/A
26-May-23
16-Jun-23
30-Jun-23
N/A
Actual
25,000,000
Plan
20-Apr-22
N/A
22-Apr-22
13-May-22
27-May-22
N/A
31-May-22
N/A
2-Jun-22
23-Jun-22
7-Jul-22
N/A
Actual
45,000,000
Plan
3-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Feb-22
N/A
12-Feb-22
5-Mar-22
19-Mar-22
N/A
Actual
2,760,000
Plan
17-Apr-23
N/A
19-Apr-23
10-May-23
24-May-23
N/A
28-May-23
N/A
30-May-23
20-Jun-23
4-Jul-23
N/A
Actual
300,000,000
Plan
19-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
4-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
15-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
8-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
8-May-23
29-May-23
12-Jun-23
Actual
80,000,000
Plan
10-Apr-23
N/A
12-Apr-23
3-May-23
17-May-23
N/A
21-May-23
N/A
23-May-23
13-Jun-23
27-Jun-23
N/A
-
Actual
25,000,000
Plan
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
17-Mar-23
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
N/A
-
Actual
C3202
11
KIIWP2 Outcome Survey  
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
CQS
40,000,000
Plan
18-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jul-22
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
N/A
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 15 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
The 3 rows above are not part of the Plan and must not be modified. Copy these rows to create new procurement items or retrieve Plan Dates formulas if needed.
Plan
Actual
-
-
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project, phase 2 (KIIWP2)
Project ID: 2000002350
Prepared by: Ingabire Ramutsa Angelique
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications (shortlist is required for this method) 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Version
AWPB/Com
ponent Ref
1.0
№
C12001
1
16-Apr-21
Evaluation
Description*
Contract Award & Signature
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract and 
MoN
No-objection
Date
Recruitment of a national  firm to undertake a Detailed design 
for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation system (150ha) 
N/A
N/A
Plan
18-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
6-Dec-22
N/A
Actual
Date
Contract
Award
8-Dec-22
Date
Contract
Signature
15-Dec-22
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
-
60,000,000
19-Jul-23
C12002
2
Recruitment of an international  firm to undertake a Detailed 
design for  pipeline  5000 ha net Command Area in Eastern 
Province of Rwanda
28-Apr-23
12-May-23
Plan
26-May-23
9-Jun-23
13-Jun-23
27-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
6-Jul-23
-
500,000,000
6-Mar-24
Actual
C12201
3
Recrutement of a company for the Supervision works for 
Nasho, Kibare and Ihema schemes 
18-Aug-22
1-Sep-22
Plan
15-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
26-Oct-22
-
750,000,000
26-Feb-24
Actual
02/26/202
C12202
4
Recrutement of a company for the supervision works for 
Gishanda 
N/A
N/A
Plan
12-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
30-Jul-23
N/A
1-Aug-23
8-Aug-23
-
75,000,000
1-Nov-24
Actual
C14009
5
Recruitement of service provider to roll out PICSA training
N/A
N/A
Plan
19-Jul-22
2-Aug-22
6-Aug-22
N/A
8-Aug-22
15-Aug-22
-
25,000,000
31-Mar-23
Actual
C21001
6
Recruitment of service provider to build capacity of  farmers' 
cooperatives on Global GAP certification 
N/A
N/A
Plan
31-Mar-22
14-Apr-22
18-Apr-22
N/A
20-Apr-22
27-Apr-22
-
45,000,000
27-Jul-22
Actual
C21101
7
Recrutment of the SP for the Preparation of Business Plans 
N/A
N/A
Plan
16-Jul-23
30-Jul-23
3-Aug-23
N/A
5-Aug-23
12-Aug-23
-
2,760,000
12-Aug-24
Actual
C23203
8
Recruitment of SP to support  access to agricultural 
insurance among KIIWP beneficiaries as well as training of 
NAIS stakeholders 
26-Jun-23
10-Jul-23
Plan
24-Jul-23
7-Aug-23
11-Aug-23
25-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
-
300,000,000
3-Sep-24
Actual
C31004
9
Recruitment of  a consulting firm for the Policy assesment 
and regulation studies 
N/A
N/A
Plan
9-Jul-23
23-Jul-23
27-Jul-23
N/A
29-Jul-23
5-Aug-23
-
80,000,000
21-Mar-24
Actual
C31006
10
Recruitment for an individual consultant to assess the 
nutrition studies for baseline  (MDD-W) 
N/A
N/A
Plan
5-May-23
19-May-23
23-May-23
N/A
25-May-23
1-Jun-23
-
25,000,000
1-Sep-24
Actual
C3202
11
KIIWP2 Outcome Survey  
N/A
N/A
Plan
12-Sep-22
26-Sep-22
30-Sep-22
N/A
2-Oct-22
9-Oct-22
-
40,000,000
25-Feb-23
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 16 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
Version
1.0
16-Apr-21
AWPB/Com
C3202
ponent Ref
№
11
Description*
KIIWP2 Outcome Survey  
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
1
Recruitment of a national  firm to undertake a Detailed design 
for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation system (150ha) 
C12203
12
International technical assistance (mitigation expert)
C13101
13
Support cooperatives to establish professional committee in 
charge of operationalization,  management and maintenance 
of infrastructures
C13102
14
Production of training Manual on O&M of  irrigation 
infrastructures   (pumped and dam schemes)
C14201
15
Mechanization technical adviser
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
C14202
16
support reseach and construction of best adapted tools
IFAD
C1501
C1502
C1503
C1504
17
Implementation of environment and social management plan 
(ESMPs) for Nasho, Kibare and Ihema irrigation schemes 
and of ESMP linked with other project activities
C21003
18
Monitoring and follow-up the activity of  capacity building of 
farmers on GAP standards
C21102
19
Recruitment of TA for preparing of Farming as a Business 
(Faab) curriculum
C21103
20
Recruitment of BDSPs services for capacity building on 
FaaB, integrated to FFS sessions
C23201
21
Recruitment of TA for development  of tailored agrifinance 
products  for PFIs ( SACCO, MFIs)
C23202
22
recruitment of service provider to conduct financial literacy 
training among farmers cooperatives and facilitate PFIs to 
access credit line 
C3203
23
Knowledge management
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
C3206
24
Preparation and validation of ToRs for different studies
IFAD
C320301
25
Institutional Support to MINAGRI  to perform the ministerial 
supervisory role on the project
C320302
26
Support to MINAGRI to the operationalization of MINAGRI 
Knowledge Manamagent & communication Strategy
C320303
27
Institutional support to RAB
C320304
28
Support to RAB in Agrishow
Yes
Yes
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
Funding
IFAD
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Post Review
ICS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
Yes
Post Review
CQS
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
No
Post Review
QCBS
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
180,000,000.00 
Plan
5-Feb-22
12-Feb-22
14-Feb-22
28-Feb-22
14-Mar-22
21-Mar-22
25-Mar-22
1-Apr-22
3-Apr-22
18-May-22
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
-
Actual
1,300,000.00 
Plan
1-Mar-22
N/A
3-Mar-22
24-Mar-22
7-Apr-22
N/A
11-Apr-22
N/A
13-Apr-22
4-May-22
18-May-22
N/A
-
Actual
10,000,000.00 
Plan
15-May-22
N/A
17-May-22
7-Jun-22
21-Jun-22
N/A
25-Jun-22
N/A
27-Jun-22
18-Jul-22
1-Aug-22
N/A
-
Actual
40,000,000.00 
Plan
15-Jan-22
N/A
17-Jan-22
7-Feb-22
21-Feb-22
N/A
25-Feb-22
N/A
27-Feb-22
20-Mar-22
3-Apr-22
N/A
-
Actual
16,667,000.00 
Plan
15-Feb-22
N/A
17-Feb-22
10-Mar-22
24-Mar-22
N/A
28-Mar-22
N/A
30-Mar-22
20-Apr-22
4-May-22
N/A
-
Actual
152,000,000.00 
Plan
15-Jan-23
22-Jan-23
24-Jan-23
7-Feb-23
21-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
4-Mar-23
11-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
27-Apr-23
11-May-23
18-May-23
-
Actual
1,900,000,000.00 
Plan
15-Jan-22
22-Jan-22
24-Jan-22
7-Feb-22
21-Feb-22
28-Feb-22
4-Mar-22
11-Mar-22
13-Mar-22
27-Apr-22
11-May-22
18-May-22
-
Actual
13,000,000.00 
Plan
15-Feb-23
N/A
17-Feb-23
10-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
N/A
28-Mar-23
N/A
30-Mar-23
20-Apr-23
4-May-23
N/A
-
Actual
150,000,000.00 
Plan
15-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
8-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
9-Nov-22
11-Nov-22
26-Dec-22
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
-
Actual
10,400,000.00 
Plan
20-Jan-22
N/A
22-Jan-22
12-Feb-22
26-Feb-22
N/A
2-Mar-22
N/A
4-Mar-22
25-Mar-22
8-Apr-22
N/A
-
Actual
8,667,000.00 
Plan
20-Jan-22
N/A
22-Jan-22
12-Feb-22
26-Feb-22
N/A
2-Mar-22
N/A
4-Mar-22
25-Mar-22
8-Apr-22
N/A
-
Actual
40,000,000.00 
Plan
10-Jan-22
N/A
12-Jan-22
2-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
N/A
20-Feb-22
N/A
22-Feb-22
15-Mar-22
29-Mar-22
N/A
-
Actual
5,196,000.00 
Plan
5-Jan-22
N/A
7-Jan-22
28-Jan-22
11-Feb-22
N/A
15-Feb-22
N/A
17-Feb-22
10-Mar-22
24-Mar-22
N/A
-
Actual
120,000,000.00 
Plan
5-Jan-22
12-Jan-22
14-Jan-22
28-Jan-22
11-Feb-22
18-Feb-22
22-Feb-22
1-Mar-22
3-Mar-22
17-Apr-22
1-May-22
8-May-22
-
Actual
60,000,000.00 
Plan
5-Jan-22
N/A
7-Jan-22
28-Jan-22
11-Feb-22
N/A
15-Feb-22
N/A
17-Feb-22
10-Mar-22
24-Mar-22
N/A
-
Actual
120,000,000.00 
Plan
10-Jan-22
17-Jan-22
19-Jan-22
2-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
23-Feb-22
27-Feb-22
6-Mar-22
8-Mar-22
22-Apr-22
6-May-22
13-May-22
-
Actual
90,000,000.00 
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
-
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 17 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
Version
1.0
16-Apr-21
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Description*
KIIWP2 Outcome Survey  
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract and 
MoN
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
AWPB/Com
C3202
ponent Ref
№
11
C12001
1
Recruitment of a national  firm to undertake a Detailed design 
for Kanyeganyege dam and irrigation system (150ha) 
C12203
12
International technical assistance (mitigation expert)
22-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
C13101
13
Support cooperatives to establish professional committee in 
charge of operationalization,  management and maintenance 
of infrastructures
N/A
N/A
C13102
14
Production of training Manual on O&M of  irrigation 
infrastructures   (pumped and dam schemes)
N/A
N/A
C14201
15
Mechanization technical adviser
N/A
N/A
C14202
16
support reseach and construction of best adapted tools
N/A
N/A
C1501
C1502
C1503
C1504
17
Implementation of environment and social management plan 
(ESMPs) for Nasho, Kibare and Ihema irrigation schemes 
and of ESMP linked with other project activities
1-Jun-23
8-Jun-23
C21003
18
Monitoring and follow-up the activity of  capacity building of 
farmers on GAP standards
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
C21102
19
Recruitment of TA for preparing of Farming as a Business 
(Faab) curriculum
N/A
N/A
C21103
20
Recruitment of BDSPs services for capacity building on 
FaaB, integrated to FFS sessions
30-Jan-23
6-Feb-23
C23201
21
Recruitment of TA for development  of tailored agrifinance 
products  for PFIs ( SACCO, MFIs)
N/A
N/A
C23202
22
recruitment of service provider to conduct financial literacy 
training among farmers cooperatives and facilitate PFIs to 
access credit line 
N/A
N/A
C3203
23
Knowledge management
N/A
N/A
C3206
24
Preparation and validation of ToRs for different studies
N/A
N/A
C320301
25
Institutional Support to MINAGRI  to perform the ministerial 
supervisory role on the project
22-May-22
29-May-22
C320302
26
Support to MINAGRI to the operationalization of MINAGRI 
Knowledge Manamagent & communication Strategy
N/A
N/A
C320303
27
Institutional support to RAB
27-May-22
3-Jun-22
C320304
28
Support to RAB in Agrishow
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
11-Jul-22
1-Aug-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
30-May-22
13-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
N/A
19-Jun-22
26-Jun-22
13-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
N/A
2-Sep-22
9-Sep-22
15-Apr-22
29-Apr-22
3-May-22
N/A
5-May-22
12-May-22
16-May-22
30-May-22
3-Jun-22
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
20-Jun-23
11-Jul-23
15-Jul-23
22-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
31-Jul-23
20-Jun-22
11-Jul-22
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
16-May-23
30-May-23
3-Jun-23
N/A
5-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
18-Feb-23
11-Mar-23
15-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
20-Apr-22
4-May-22
8-May-22
N/A
10-May-22
17-May-22
20-Apr-22
4-May-22
8-May-22
N/A
10-May-22
17-May-22
10-Apr-22
24-Apr-22
28-Apr-22
N/A
30-Apr-22
7-May-22
5-Apr-22
19-Apr-22
23-Apr-22
N/A
25-Apr-22
2-May-22
10-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
5-Apr-22
19-Apr-22
23-Apr-22
N/A
25-Apr-22
2-May-22
15-Jun-22
6-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
N/A
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
180,000,000.00 
1,300,000.00 
10,000,000.00 
40,000,000.00 
16,667,000.00 
152,000,000.00 
1,900,000,000.00 
13,000,000.00 
150,000,000.00 
10,400,000.00 
8,667,000.00 
40,000,000.00 
5,196,000.00 
120,000,000.00 
60,000,000.00 
120,000,000.00 
90,000,000.00 
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 18 of 21
Printed on: 29/04/2021
Day Ranges These tables provide estimated timelines by procurement methods, based on experience and guidance in the Procurement Handbook where specified.
The approximate number of days are used in the default Procurement Plan Formulas. Timelines in the Approx fields/Formulas  are not prescriptive, and may be modified by the project.
Approx figures entered will be highlighted/flagged, if below the Minimun number of days. Zero indicates steps that are not applicable to the method, and are indicated as N/A in the Formulas.
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
5
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
19
Day Ranges
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
Selection Method
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
45
45
45
21
14
14
45
14
21
21
14
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
30
45
45
45
45
21
21
45
21
25
45
21
30
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
7
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
21
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
14
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
7
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
10
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
7
20
Day Ranges
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
1
7
7
7
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
3
14
14
14
5
5
5
14
14
14
14
5
5
5
2
7
7
7
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
24
68
83
83
110
125
123
34
78
93
93
120
135
135
60
130
155
155
206
231
231
96
147
172
172
223
247
247
40
96
103
103
164
171
171
45
99
117
117
178
185
185
Approx 
Months/Days
1m 9d 
3m 5d 
3m 12d 
3m 12d 
5m 12d 
5m 19d 
5m 19d 
1m 14d 
3m 8d 
3m 26d 
3m 26d 
5m 26d 
6m 3d 
6m 3d 
Selection Method
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date Contract Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx Min Max Approx Min Max Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
14
7
7
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
21
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
170
170
170
132
118
118
126
88
95
88
74
49
283
283
283
259
220
220
205
173
175
181
142
136
197
204
204
183
152
152
149
125
129
128
97
101
Approx 
Months/Days
6m 15d 
6m 22d 
6m 22d 
6m 1d 
4m 31d 
4m 31d 
4m 28d 
4m 4d 
4m 8d 
4m 7d 
3m 6d 
3m 10d 
21
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza  Irrigation  and  Integrated  Watershed  Management Project  2 
(KIIWP2) 
ANNEX 8: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM)
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Contents 
Table of Contents .................................................................................................................................... 2 
Table of Figures ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
Table of Tables ........................................................................................................................................ 5 
Acronyms ................................................................................................................................................ 6 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES .......................................................................................... 9 
I.1: Definitions ..................................................................................................................................... 9 
I.2: Targeting strategies ..................................................................................................................... 10 
I.2.2: GENDER, SOCIAL INCLUSION AND YOUTH......................................................................................... 17 
I.2.3: NUTRITION AND FOOD SECURITY ................................................................................................... 24 
I.3: Institutional arrangements and responsibilities ............................................................................ 29 
I.3.1: CONTEXT AND RATIONALE ........................................................................................................... 29 
I.3.2: PROJECT GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES .............................................................................................. 30 
I.3.3: LEAD AGENCY AND PROJECT COORDINATION .................................................................................... 30 
I.3.4: POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTING ENTITIES AND SERVICE PROVIDERS ............................................................... 33 
I.3.5: PARTNERSHIPS .......................................................................................................................... 34 
I.3.6. COOPERATION AND LINKAGES WITH OTHER IFAD PROGRAMMES IN THE AREA .......................................... 36 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES ............................................................................... 38 
II.1: COMPONENT A: STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE TO DROUGHTS ................................................................ 38 
Sub-Component .A.1: Catchment rehabilitation and protection ......................................................... 38 
Land husbandry ............................................................................................................................. 39 
Farm level rainwater harvesting ..................................................................................................... 40 
Water for livestock and domestic purposes ................................................................................... 41 
Community competitions for natural resource management ......................................................... 41 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) identified by the ESIAs ............................... 43 
Grievance redress mechanism ....................................................................................................... 44 
Sub-Component A.2: Irrigation development ..................................................................................... 46 
Feasibility studies .......................................................................................................................... 49 
Carrying out the ESIA studies ......................................................................................................... 49 
Carrying out the detailed designs for the schemes that meet the viability criteria (technical, 
environmental, social and economic) in KIIWP1 ............................................................................. 50 
Construction and supervision of construction works in KIIWP2 ...................................................... 51 
Infrastructure management institutions ........................................................................................ 52 
2 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Strengthening Scheme and District Steering Committee ................................................................ 55 
Strengthening Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs). ................................................................. 56 
Developing Irrigation Water Users Organisations ........................................................................... 57 
Developing Water for Livestock Users Organisations ...................................................................... 58 
Sub-Component A.3: Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies....................... 59 
Climate Smart Agriculture compilation........................................................................................... 60 
Farmer Field Schools (FFS) ............................................................................................................. 60 
Farmers’ promoters, demonstration plots and trials ...................................................................... 62 
Promotion of Climate Smart Technologies ..................................................................................... 65 
Gender Action Learning System (GALS) .......................................................................................... 65 
Climate Information Services ......................................................................................................... 66 
II.2: Component B: Support to farm business development ................................................................... 67 
Sub-Component B.1: Developing farming as a business (FAAB) skills .................................................. 67 
Capacity building of farmers .......................................................................................................... 67 
Capacity building of cooperatives .................................................................................................. 68 
Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies ............................. 69 
Sub-Component B.2: Supporting backward and forward market linkages .......................................... 76 
Market access ................................................................................................................................ 76 
Financial services ........................................................................................................................... 76 
Agricultural insurance .................................................................................................................... 78 
II.3: Component C: Institutional development and project coordination ................................................ 82 
Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development ................................................................ 82 
Sub-component C.2: Project coordination ......................................................................................... 82 
PART III: PROJECT PROCEDURES AND PLANNING ................................................................................... 84 
III.1. PLANNING AND SUPERVISION .................................................................................................... 84 
III.1.1. Annual working plan and budget (AWPB) Process ................................................................... 84 
AWPB outline .................................................................................................................................... 85 
III.1.2. Project supervision.................................................................................................................. 85 
III.1.3.Mid-term review ...................................................................................................................... 85 
III.1.4.Project closure ......................................................................................................................... 86 
III.2: M&E, KM and Communication ....................................................................................................... 86 
III.2.1 Monitor and evaluation system ................................................................................................ 86 
M&E structure and processes ........................................................................................................ 86 
Physical progress monitoring ......................................................................................................... 88 
Outcome and impact monitoring and assessments ........................................................................ 90 
KIIWP Management Information System (MIS) .............................................................................. 92 
3 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Reporting and supervision ............................................................................................................. 94 
In- country M&E capacity development ......................................................................................... 94 
KIIWP Evaluation Plan .................................................................................................................... 95 
III.2.2. Knowledge management and communication ......................................................................... 95 
III.3: Financial management and disbursement arragements ............................................................. 96 
Summary of financial management arrangements ......................................................................... 96 
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary responsibilities ................................. 97 
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds .............................................................................. 98 
Planning and budgeting ................................................................................................................. 99 
Statements of Expeditures (SOE).................................................................................................. 101 
Financial management organization and staffing ......................................................................... 102 
Internal controls .......................................................................................................................... 103 
Internal audit ............................................................................................................................... 103 
III.4: Procurement ............................................................................................................................ 107 
PART IV: ANNEXES ............................................................................................................................... 109 
Annex 1: TORs of SPIU staff ................................................................................................................. 109 
Terms of Reference for the KIIWP2 Procurement Specialist ............................................................. 109 
Terms of Reference: Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist at district level ........................... 112 
Terms of Reference for the KIIWP2 Agronomist and FFS Specialist ................................................... 118 
Annex 2: Draft Terms of Reference for consultancy services to conduct a baseline survey for nutrition 
indicators in KIIWP2 ............................................................................................................................ 120 
Annex 3: IFAD Procumenet Risk Matrix ................................................................................................ 124 
Annex 4: Agricultural insurance ........................................................................................................... 128 
Annex 5: Knowledge management plan ............................................................................................... 131 
Knowledge management: Definition ............................................................................................ 131 
Knowledge management: Goal, objective and activities ............................................................... 131 
Knowledge management structure .............................................................................................. 133 
Annex 6: Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) template ................................................................. 136 
Annex 7: Potential partnership between KIIWP/IFAD and WFP ............................................................ 149 
TABLE OF FIGURES  
Figure 1. RAB Organigram .......................................................................................................................... 31 
Figure 2. Organizational structure of Kayonza district ....................................................................... 32 
Figure 3 KIIWP’s institutions at district level......................................................................................... 53 
Figure 4 KIIWPII Funds flow chart............................................................................................................ 98 
4 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TABLE OF TABLES  
Table 1. Targeted households in the Project area, Ubudehe categorization (2016) ................. 11 
Table 2. Targeting implementation flowchart........................................................................................ 17 
Table 3. Gender and youth activities implementation flowchart ..................................................... 24 
Table 4. Nutrition activities implementation flowchart ....................................................................... 28 
Table 5. Complementarity of Component A and phasing with KIIWP1. ........................................ 38 
Table 6. Land husbandry, activities step. ............................................................................................... 39 
Table 7. Farm level rainwater harvesting, activities step .................................................................. 40 
Table 8. Land-husbandry-measures for the different slopes ............................................................ 41 
Table 9. Carrying out the feasibility studies in KIIWP1 ...................................................................... 49 
Table 10. Flowchart for carrying out ESIA studies under KIIPW1. ................................................. 49 
Table 11. Detailed engineering designs and bills of quantities ........................................................ 50 
Table 12. Detailed construction and supervision of works ................................................................ 51 
Table 13. Relevant paragraphs to the rules on the composition and responsibilities of the 
scheme and district-level Steering committees .................................................................................... 55 
Table 14. Relevant paragraphs to the rules on the composition of the HBCs at district and 
sector levels..................................................................................................................................................... 57 
Table 15. Research, extension and CSA technologies implementation flowchart activities. ... 59 
Table 16. Example of adapted tools and machines ............................................................................. 64 
Table 17. Complementarity of Component A and phasing with KIIWP1. ...................................... 67 
Table 18. Details of the cooperatives that could receive KIIWP support ...................................... 69 
Table 19. Detailed mechanisms of these Cat.1 grants ....................................................................... 70 
Table 20. Detailed mechanisms of these Cat.2 grants ....................................................................... 72 
Table 21. Detailed mechanisms of this Cat.3 grant ............................................................................ 74 
Table 22. Sub-component B2 implementation activities flowchart................................................. 75 
Table 23. Project management implementation flowchart ................................................................ 83 
Table 24. KIIWP Evaluation Plan ............................................................................................................... 95 
Table 25. Key controls ................................................................................................................................ 104 
Table 26. NAIS products: cost of crop insurance premiums .......................................................... 129 
5 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
AFR 
AGRA 
AH 
AIDS 
AIF 
AMIR 
AWPB 
BDF 
BDSP 
BNR 
CAADP 
CBFI 
CESB 
CEO 
CFSVA 
CGIAR 
CIP 
CPM 
CPP 
CSA 
CoEB 
CPO 
DDP 
DFID 
EDPRS 
EFA 
EIRR 
EICV 
ESIA 
ESMP 
ESMF 
FaaB 
FAO 
FE 
FFS 
FIRR 
FMA 
FMD 
FtMA 
FO 
GALS 
GAP 
GC 
GDP 
GHG 
GIS 
GoR 
KWAMP 
HH 
HIV 
HoReCO 
ICP 
ACRONYMS 
Access to Finance Rwanda 
Alliance for a Green Africa 
Animal Husbandry 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
Africa Improved Foods 
Rwanda Microfinance Association 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business Development Fund 
Business Development Service Provider 
National Bank of Rwanda 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
Community-Based Financing Institution 
Rwanda Capacity Development and Employment Services Board 
Chief Executive Officer 
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis 
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
Crop Intensification Programme 
Country Programme Manager 
Constant Purchase Power Parity 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
Center  of  Excellence  in  Biodiversity  and  Natural  Resource 
Management 
Country Programme Officer 
District Development Plan 
Department for International Development 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Farming as a Business 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Foreign Exchange 
Farmer Field School 
Financial Internal Rate of Return 
Financial Management Assessment 
Financial Management Division 
Farm to Market Alliance 
Farmers’ Organization 
Gender Action Learning System 
Good Agricultural Practices 
General Conditions 
Gross Domestic Product 
Greenhouse Gas 
Geographic Information System 
Government of Rwanda 
Kirehe community-based Watershed Management Project 
Households 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Horticulture in Reality Cooperative 
IFAD Client Portal 
6 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
ICRISAT 
ICT 
IFAD 
IFMIS 
IMF 
IMTA 
INDC 
IPM 
IPRM 
ITCZ 
IWUO 
KM 
KWAMP 
LTB 
LTR 
LUCP 
LWH 
M&E 
MES 
MFI 
MIDIMAR 
MINAGRI 
MINECOFIN 
MINALOC 
MINICOM 
MINIRENA 
MIS 
MoU 
MPCI 
MPI 
MT 
MTR 
MUV 
NCCLCDS 
NAEB 
NAIS 
NGO 
NO 
NRM 
OAG 
O&M 
p.a. 
PA 
PASP 
PBG 
PBGF 
PDR 
PEFA 
PFI 
PICSA 
PPP 
PRICE 
PSC 
PSTA 
4P 
RAB 
International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
Information and Communication Technology 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
the Integrated Financial Management Information Systems 
International Monetary Fund 
Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
Integrated Pest Management 
Integrated Project Risk Matrix 
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone 
Irrigation Water User Organization 
Knowledge Management 
Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project 
Letter to The Borrower 
Land Tenure Regularization 
Land Use Consolidation Policy 
Land husbandry, Water harvesting and Hillside irrigation project 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring and Evaluation System 
Micro Finance Institution 
Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
Ministry of Local Government 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
Ministry of Lands, Environment, Forestry, Water and Mines 
Management Information System 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Multi-Peril Crop Insurance 
Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index 
Metric Ton 
Mid Term Review 
Manufactures Unit Value 
National Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development Strategy  
National Agriculture Export development Board 
National Agriculture Insurance Scheme 
Non-Governmental Organization 
No Objection 
Natural Resources Management 
Office of the Auditor General 
Operation and Maintenance 
Per Annum 
Priority Area 
Climate-resilient Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support 
Programme  
Performance-based Grant 
Performance-based Grant Facility 
Project Design Report 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Participating Financial Institution 
Participatory Climate Services for Agriculture 
Purchasing Power Parity 
Project for Rural Income through Exports 
Project Steering Committee 
Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in Rwanda 
Public Private Producers Partnership 
Rwanda Agriculture Board 
7 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
RAP 
RB-COSOP 
RCA 
RDDP 
REMA 
RPHC 
RGB 
RNRA 
RPPA 
RSSP 
RWF 
RWFA 
RYAF 
SACCO 
SCC 
SDC 
SDG 
SOE 
SPIU 
SSIT 
STARS 
SWC 
TA 
TAF 
TBD 
ToT 
UNEP 
USD 
VC 
WA 
WEAI 
WoP 
WP 
WFP 
WRSI 
WLUO 
WUO 
Resettlement Action Plan 
Results-Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Rwanda Cooperative Agency 
Rwanda Dairy Development Project 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority 
Rwanda Population and Housing Census 
Rwanda Governance Board 
Rwanda National Resources Authority 
Rwanda Public Procurement Authority 
Rural Sector Support Programme 
Rwandan Franc 
Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority 
Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness Forum 
Savings and Credit Cooperative 
Sub-Catchment Committee 
Sector Development Committee 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Statement of Expenditure 
Single Project Implementation Unit 
Small-Scale Irrigation Technology 
Strengthening African Rural Smallholders 
Soil and Water Conservation 
Technical Assistance 
Technical Assistance Facility 
To Be Determined 
Training of Trainers 
United Nations Environment Programme 
United States Dollar 
Value Chain  
Withdrawal Application 
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index 
Without Project 
With Project 
World Food Programme 
Water Requirement Satisfaction Index 
Water for Livestock User Organization 
Water User Organization 
8 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.1: DEFINITIONS  
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA): comprises the actions needed to transform and 
1. 
reorient  agricultural  systems  to  effectively  support  development  and  ensure  food  security 
under  a  changing  climate.  It  aims  at  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity  and 
incomes  and  adapting and building resilience to climate change.  The term covers  practices 
such  as:  Conservation  Agriculture,  water  and  soil  management,  integrated  production 
systems  with  efficient use  of  resources  and  less  external inputs,  diversification to increase 
resilience, etc.  
Cooperative1 is an autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their 
2. 
common  economic,  social,  and cultural  needs  and  aspirations through  a  jointly-owned  and 
democratically-controlled  enterprise,  according  to  internationally  recognized  co-operative 
values and principles. A cooperative:  
 
 
 
It fulfils a social or environmental objective, or is formed to fulfil its members 
needs 
Its democratic ownership and control 
It has a different way of working and unique legal structure that differentiates 
it from a conventional business 
3. 
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach is a methodology originally developed by the 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO)  as  a  participatory  approach  for  people-centered 
leading.  Practical  field  exercises  using  direct  observation,  discussion  and  decision  making 
encourage  learning-by-doing  and  participants  can  exchange  knowledge  in  a  risk-free 
environment.  Local  knowledge  and  outside  scientific  insights  are  tested,  validated  and 
integrated directly in farmers’ gardens, under their localized ecosystems and socio-economic 
settings. 
Food  insecurity  is  the  inability  to  obtain  sufficient  food  (in  terms  of  calories)  and 
4. 
other essential goods and services to lead a healthy life. 
5. 
Partners of the Project are strategic agencies, entities or organizations who support 
the achievement of Project objectives, either national, regional or international. While these 
may be paid for undertaking specific activities or supplying specific services, they differ from 
implementing agencies in the modalities in which these activities are planned and executed. 
Financing may not be involved at all.  
6. 
Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM):  An  annex  to  the  Project  Design  Report 
(PDR) provides practical guidance to Project implementers on key implementation aspects. It 
describes  in  detail how  the  programme components  and  activities  outlined  in the  PDR  are 
intended  to  be  implemented.  The  PIM  outlines  the  detailed  mechanisms,  processes  and 
procedures,  formats,  eligibility  criteria  etc.  which  will  ensure  efficient  programme 
implementation  and  achievement  of  the  envisaged  programme  results.  The  PIM  is  a living 
document and may be updated at any time, as needs arise, during implementation.  
Time  and  Labor  Saving  Technologies  (TLST):  are  tools  and  equipment  which 
7. 
reduce the drudgery and/or improve the efficiency of performing various farming, off-farm 
and household activities, such as the use of draught animals for land preparation, planting, 
weeding  and  rural  transport,  cooking  on  fuel  efficient  stoves,  harvesting  roof  water  for 
domestic purposes, agro processing and value addition. 
8. 
Watershed is a hydrological unit that discharges rainfall runoff to an outlet (a control 
point) in the downstream. It has been described and used as a physical-biological unit that 
could be easily monitored using objectively verifiable indicators and also, on many occasions, 
as a socio-economic-political unit for planning and management of natural resources. 
1 Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) definition. 
9 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Water  Users  Associations  (WUA)  are  local  institutions  established  with  the 
9. 
objective  of  supporting  the  construction  of  irrigation  schemes  and  managing  them  after 
completion.  Their  major  role  include,  creating  enabling  environment  (incl.  community 
contribution/mobilization) during construction, proper distribution of water after construction, 
managing water conflicts as well as carrying out the operation and maintenance of irrigation 
canals and associated infrastructures. 
I.2: TARGETING STRATEGIES  
Project’s  goal  and  outreach.  The  Goal  of  KIIWP  is  to  “Contribute  to  poverty 
10. 
reduction  in  the  drought-prone  Eastern  Province  of  Rwanda”.  The  Project  Development 
Objective is to “Improve food security and incomes of at least 40,000 rural households on a 
sustainable basis and build their climate resilience”.  
11. 
Geographic  targeting  and  poverty.  KIIWP’s  intervention  area  comprises  nine 
drought-prone sectors out of the twelve sectors in Kayonza District, namely Gahini, Kabare, 
Kabarondo, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego, Rwinkwavu and Ruramira. This last sector was 
not targeted under KIIWP1, and it has been included during the design of the second phase 
of  the  Project;  only  100  ha  in  the  catchment  area  of  Ruramira  sector  (under  the 
Kanyeganyenge irrigation scheme) will be targeted.  
12. 
The area has been identified on the basis of its high vulnerability to drought and the 
poverty and food insecurity level of its population. At the same time, the area offers important 
and  untapped  potential  of  water  resources  that  if  fully  and  sustainably  reached  would 
contribute to significantly increase agricultural production, food security and improve people’s 
livelihoods.  Out  of  the  nine  sectors,  Gahini,  Murundi  and  Mwiri  are  predominantly  agro-
pastoral  areas  and  will  be  mainly  targeted  with  water  infrastructures  aimed  at  increasing 
access  to  water  for  livestock  and  domestic  purposes  (rehabilitation  of  valley  tanks  and 
installation of boreholes, water harvesting infrastructure) and improved rain fed agricultural 
development; the other sectors will be targeted with the development of irrigation schemes, 
along with catchment rehabilitation and protection practices.  
13. 
The nine targeted sectors account for 63,177 households or 283,370 individuals (72 
per  cent  of  the  overall district’s  population),  of  which  51.5  per  cent  are  women2.  In these 
sectors, 31 per cent of the households is headed by women. About 63 per cent3 of the resident 
population is under 25 years old while youth (between 16 and 30 years old) represent more 
than 30 per cent of the population in the Project intervention area. About 48 per cent of the 
population  is  covered  by  the  Ubudehe4  governmental  social  protection  programme:  the 
Ubudehe  Categories  1  and  2  account  for  respectively  13  per  cent  and  35  per  cent  of  the 
population in the Project area.  
14. 
The selection of specific sites will be based on the level of degradation, topography 
and water availability and viability of the site for development. Sites for the development of 
the irrigation schemes (irrigation command area) have been already identified in Ndego and 
Kabare  sectors  by  the  Feasibility  Study  conducted  by  SMEC  during  the  first  phase  of  the 
Project.  Feasibility  studies  for  Kanyeganyenge  and  Gishanda  irrigation  schemes  will  be 
finalised before KIIWP2 will begin its operations. Along with environmental and hydrological 
considerations,  it  is  recommended  that  the  identification  of  specific  sites  includes  poverty 
2 Data provided by the Government of Kayonza district and based on the latest survey of the district population as 
part of the Ubudehe programme system (2016). Compared with the latest national population and housing census 
(2012) the population of the district has increased of about 14 percent (from 344,157 to 392.676 inhabitants).   
3 Rwandan Population Census, 2012. 
4 The national wealth ranking system (Ubudehe system) classifies Rwandan households into 4 categories. The first 
category (i) includes the very poor who do not have a house or cannot to pay rent; have a poor diet; and can hardly 
afford basic needs; (ii) the second one includes those who have a dwelling of their own or are able to rent one but 
rarely get full time jobs; (iii) the third category includes those who have a job and farmers who go beyond subsistence 
farming  to  produce  a  surplus,  which  can  be  sold;  (iv)  the  fourth  category  includes  people  who  own  large-scale 
business.  The  current  Ubudehe  categories  have  been  in  places  since  2016.  In  2020,  MINALOC  has  revised  the 
categorization unveiling five new categories (A, B, C, D and special category E) re-distributing households into their 
socio-economic welfare status. The new categorization system is expected to become effective in 2021. 
10 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
incidence  amongst  the  main  selection  criteria.  Willingness  by  farmers  to  participate  in 
Project’s activities will be key.  
15. 
The geographic entry point to select villages will follow a cluster approach, targeting 
cells and villages served by the same water infrastructure. It is recommended to provide a 
full  package  of  Project’s  interventions  (access  to  water,  improvement  of  agricultural 
production, capacity building, access to market and finance) to villages with high incidence of 
poverty,  in  order  to  boost  synergies  between  the  different  interventions  and  ensure 
improvements in terms of empowerment and poverty alleviation.  
16. 
The  selection  criteria  will  focus  on  poverty  rates,  food  and  nutrition  insecurity  and 
potential for agricultural production. Priority value chains of the Project include rice, maize, 
horticulture, soybeans and beans. Other minor value chains in rainfed and catchment areas 
might include cassava and sorghum and nutrient rich crops varieties. 
17. 
Selection of cells/ villages will also need to take into account areas already targeted 
by  other  IFAD-funded  projects  in  the  same  District  (RDDP,  PRICE),  to  avoid  overlaps  and 
ensure  alignment  between  the  different  interventions.  Consultations  between  SPIU,  KIIWP 
staff  and  Kayonza  district  authorities  will  be  conducted  at  the  inception  phase  in  order  to 
screen a list of cells and villages where the Project will implement its activities.  
Table 1. Targeted households in the Project area, Ubudehe categorization (2016) 
18. 
Target beneficiaries. KIIWP will reach out to about 40,000 rural households, (about 
180,000  household  members),  of  which  7,100  households  will  participate  directly  in  the 
irrigation  schemes  and 11,800 household  in  rehabilitation  and  protection  of  the  catchment 
areas.  The  Project  will  focus  on  poor  and  food-insecure  rural  households  with  economic 
potential, with the half of the targeted producers being very small and small landowners (less 
than 0.5 land size average) with special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed 
households and youth (aged 16-30) often ranking among the poorest and asset less.  
19. 
Targeted households  will  benefit from  the  range  of  Project’s  activities  and  services, 
including Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies  and practices, labour opportunities 
in  irrigation  schemes,  afforestation/reforestation  with  the  introduction  of  fruit  trees,  water 
points for livestock and human consumption combined with solar energy, cooperative services 
to  ensure access to agricultural inputs, Farmer Field Schools (FFS), Farming-as-a-Business 
(FaaB)  training,  matching  grants  for  equipment  and  investments,  financial  services  and 
agricultural  insurance,  potential  participation  in  public-private-partnerships  for  value  chain 
development. These  investments  will contribute  to  a  broad local  improvement  of  food  and 
nutrition security, as well as job, enterprise and income generating opportunities. To foster 
11 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
social inclusion, specific  services and activities will be tailored to women, youth and to the 
most vulnerable households (see, Section I.2.2.) 
20. 
All targeted households will benefit from Project’s services that cut across the needs 
of all types of target groups. These will be channelled through new and existing organisations 
that will be inclusive of all groups:  (i) water infrastructure operation and maintenance and 
water  resources  protection  and  conservation,  through  Sector  and  District-level  Steering 
Committees and Sub-Catchment Committees, Water User Organisations (WUOs) and Water 
for Livestock User Organisations (WLUOs) (ii) market linkages and extension services through 
commodities-based cooperatives and Farmers Field Schools groups; (iii) linkage with financial 
services, through the strengthening of Community Based Finance Institutions and their active 
support  to  the  targeted  cooperatives.  There  will  be  specific  services  and  activities  directly 
targeted  to  the  most  vulnerable  households  depending  on  their  income  levels,  overall 
production capacity and division of role and responsibilities (gender and youth).  
21. 
Description  of  the  target  groups.  Consistent  with  the  national  wealth  ranking 
system (Ubudehe), and on the basis of access to land and market, KIIWP will directly target 
3 different categories of beneficiaries, applying complementary approaches aimed at enabling 
poor farmers to graduate from poverty: 
22. 
Landless, near landless and extremely vulnerable households, who have very 
limited  productive  assets.  Approximately  13  per  cent  of  the  population in the  Project  area 
would fall under this category (Ubudehe category 1). Those engaged in agriculture have no 
land  or  land  of small size  (less than 0.25 ha), grow  fewer  crops,  are  less  likely  to have  a 
vegetable  garden.  Households  with  people  with  disabilities  (PWD)  and  those  headed  by 
women are amongst the most vulnerable ones.  
At least 10 per cent of the targeted households will be amongst the most vulnerable 
23. 
category.  It  is  expected  that  households  ranking  among  the  poorest  in  the  selected 
communities will be interested in improving their livelihoods by participating in the services 
promoted  by the  Project. To  this  aim,  and to  tackle  the multiple  barriers that traditionally 
prevent  very  poor  and vulnerable households  from  moving  out  of  poverty, the  Project  will 
deploy a social inclusion strategy, directly targeting the poorest households with services and 
activities, such as: saving and credit/finance literacy, increased production of nutritious foods, 
alternative  income  generating  activities  on  farm  and  off  farm  for  groups  of  very  poor 
households and especially women and youth. Based on their socio-economic characteristics, 
it is expected that households from this category will mainly join informal associations (such 
as Village Saving and Loans Associations, women’s saving groups, interest groups), that will 
be supported by the Project. At the same time, through Project’s services and activities, it is 
foreseen that vulnerable households will gradually increase their production, capacities and 
income  to  engage  in  other  Project-supported  interventions  (e.g.,  becoming  members  of 
cooperatives). 
24. 
Subsistence  farmers  and  vulnerable  poor  who  have  limited  land  and  access  to 
resources  and  represent  approximately 35  per cent  of the  population  in the  Project’s  area 
(Ubudehe category 2). Poor and food insecure households have an average land size of less 
of 0.5 ha, few active members, are more often headed by a person with low level of education, 
or a single or a person with disabilities. They mainly depend on agriculture daily labour, on 
their  own  agricultural  production,  unskilled  daily  labour,  or  on  external  support  for  their 
livelihoods. In the area targeted by the development of large scheme irrigation infrastructure, 
approximately 28 per cent of the households have less than 0.25 ha and 38 per cent less than 
0.5 ha (ESIA, 2020). Farmers in this category may be considered borderline poor as they are 
subsistence  farmers, usually  already  members  of  cooperatives  but  still  suffering  from food 
insecurity and at risk to slide back into extreme poverty due to stress and external shocks. It 
is  expected  that,  thanks  to  Project’s  services,  this  category  of  households  will  be  able  to 
graduate from poverty and to actively engage into market-oriented production.  
25.  Market-oriented  producers  (category  3  Ubudehe),  account  for  approximately  52 
per  cent  of the  target  population,  are  less  vulnerable  and go  beyond  subsistence  farming. 
These farmers usually have an average of 0.5 ha or more, are already engaged in a more 
12 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
entrepreneurial  logic.  In  the  area  targeted  by  the  development  of  large  scheme  irrigation 
infrastructure, more than half of the population owns more than half a hectare with at least 
a quarter of the households owning more than 1.0 ha each (1.0 to 5.0 ha). This category of 
producers  will  be  supported  through  a  combination  of  technical,  business  and  financial 
capacity  building  combined  with  backward  and  forward  market  facilitation.  Based  on  their 
market  capacity  and  income  level,  it  is  expected  that  households  from  this  category  will 
participate in larger number into highly commercial production system and would be linked 
to formal Financial Institutions and their related products and services. 
Amongst the target groups, special attention will be provided to women and among 
26. 
those,  to  adolescent  girls  and  women  heads  of  households;  youth  will  be  another  priority 
target  group,  as  well  as  vulnerable households  (category 1  Ubudehe,  and households  with 
persons with disabilities).  
27. 
Rural women. Pursuing gender equality, KIIWP will ensure that at least 50 per cent 
of  Project’s  beneficiaries  (90,000  individuals)  are  women.  Adolescent  girls  are  even  more 
vulnerable due to early pregnancy (teenage pregnancy in Kayonza reaches 10 per cent, over 
the  national  average)5.  Women  headed  households  are  disproportionally  faced  with  the 
challenges of poverty and small-sized land (<0.5 ha), compared to male-headed households, 
which limits their access to productive  resources. This category will be directly targeted by 
Project’s interventions; women-headed households are expected to represent 30 per cent of 
households reached. Through its Gender Strategy, KIIWP will promote gender equality and 
women's empowerment, channelling activities and services to women and strengthening their 
decision-making role at community and organization level.  
28. 
Rural  youth  (50  per  cent  women)  will  represent  30  per  cent  of  the  KIIWP’s 
beneficiaries  (equal  to  54,000  individuals).  Youth  are  found  in  the  above-described  target 
groups, while the higher percentage of them is from the very poor and poor categories. Young 
people  have  low  rate  of  education  (only  primary)  and  limited  skills  on  financial  services. 
Overall, this target group includes (i) young men and women who are engaged in agricultural 
activities at subsistence farm level, with an interest to further expand their activities to make 
it as a business, and (ii) young men and women employed under casual or seasonal work at 
minimum wage, who can be engaged in service provision (e.g., infrastructure development); 
(iii)  young  graduated,  interested  to  apply  their  skills  in  the  agriculture  sectors  as  service 
providers. Youth will be targeted as both beneficiaries and service providers of the Project’s 
supported interventions.  
Targeting  mechanisms.  To  reach  the  expected  beneficiary  population,  KIIWP  will 
29. 
apply a combination of self and direct targeting mechanisms: 
Self-targeting:  KIIWP  applies  a self-targeting  approach  as  the  activities  promoted 
30. 
are expected to be of interest for all target groups, ranging from interventions for the most 
vulnerable households, aimed at strengthening their resilience and improve food and nutrition 
security,  to  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  with  higher  capital  investment  to  boost  the 
performance  of  the  agricultural  sector,  that  would  be  more  attractive  for  market-oriented 
producers.  The  Project  will  provide  services  according  to  the  different  socio-economic 
characteristics  and  needs  of  its  targeted  beneficiaries.  In  doing  so,  implementing  partner 
organizations  are  expected  to  adopt  a  pro-poor  focus  to  ensure  the  inclusion  of  the  most 
vulnerable categories in the supported activities.  Beneficiary’s contribution to the operation 
and maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures will be tailored to the different productive, 
economic and financial capacities of the target groups. 
31. 
Direct targeting of youth, women, vulnerable households (including those headed by 
women  and  those  with  persons  with  disabilities)  will  be  implemented  through  established 
quotas ensuring that all of these groups are represented within the Project’s main activities.  
  Women  will  represent  50  per  cent  and  young  people  30  per  cent  of  the  KIIWP’s 
beneficiaries;  the  Project  will  ensure  that  at  least  10  per  cent  of  the  targeted 
households are amongst the most vulnerable category(Ubudehe 1 and including people 
5 Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19- 2023/24. 
13 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
with disabilities) and that 30 per cent are headed by women. In the frame of specific 
activities (such as FFS) the poorest households from Ubudehe category 1 & 2 will be 
the primary beneficiaries.  
  Ubudehe Category 1 households will be directly targeted to benefit from the seasonal 
and  permanent  job  opportunities  created  through  market-orientated  irrigation 
development. 
  Quotas  will  be  also  established  in  the  frame  of  Cooperatives  and  WUOs  to  ensure 
women and youth’s representation and participation in decision making processes. It 
is expected that the water management committees will comprise 40 per cent women 
and 25 per cent youth. In this context, it is expected that at least 40 per cent of the 
farmers will be from the poorest categories (Ubudehe 1 & 2) and that at least 10 per 
cent would be from the most vulnerable one. 
  The implementation of kitchen gardens and the production of nutritious food varieties 
will directly target the most food insecure and the poorest households. 
 
 Grant financing modalities will have a special window for women and youth (with a 
reduced beneficiary’s contribution and a higher grant portion (70% vs 50% for men 
aged above 30 years) and Project’s specific activities will be directed to women and 
youth  (e.g.,  vocational  trainings,  income-generating  activities  attractive  for  these 
target groups, etc.).  
32. 
Vocational  Education  and  Training  (VET)  will  direct  targeting  youth  (50%  women). 
Targeting  mechanisms  will  be  employed  to  identify  and  select  NEET  (not  in  employment, 
education or training) young women and men to receive capacity building and training for the 
development  of  specific  project-related  initiatives  (for  example,  the  development  of small-
scale  mechanisation  technologies/  youth  artisans,  in  the  context  of  CSA)6.  KIIWP  will  also 
directly  targeting  young  graduates  as  service  providers,  in  coordination  with  its  partner 
organizations.  The  Project  will  ensure  participation  of  representatives  from  the  most 
vulnerable households in sub-catchment planning, Farmers’ Organizations, FFS and in water 
infrastructure management committees.  
33. 
Box 1 provides details on the direct targeting mechanisms that KIIWP will put in place 
according to the specific Project’s components and related activities to reach out the priority 
target groups.  
Box 1. Direct targeting mechanisms  
Women 
 
Project’s beneficiaries: 50% of the overall beneficiaries, 30% are women 
head of HH 
  Quotas  for  participation  in  cooperatives,  and  in  decision-making  bodies 
(e.g., Water Users Organizations): 40% 
  Quotas for participation in FFS: 50% 
  Quotas  to  participate  into  capacity  building  and  trainings,  including 
financial literacy training and access to financial services: 50% 
  Quotas to participate into GALS training: 50% 
  Quota  to  access  to  grant:  50%  women/  youth  with  a  special  financial 
window of 70% of the grant portion 
Youth  
 
Project’s beneficiaries: 30% of the overall beneficiaries 
  Quotas  for  participation  in  cooperatives,  and  in  decision-making  bodies 
(e.g., Water Users Organizations): 25% 
  Quotas for participation in FFS: 50% 
6 For more details, refer to sub-component A.3 Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and Technologies. 
14 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Quotas  to  participate  into  capacity  building  and  trainings,  including 
financial literacy training and access to financial services: 30% 
  Quota  to  access  to  grant:  50%  women/  youth  with  a  special  financial 
window of 70% of the grant portion  
  Quotas for participation in VET: 100% 
  Quotas in the development of small-scale mechanisation (Climate Smart 
Agriculture): 100% 
  Direct support to 12 groups of young agricultural service providers (CSA) 
Vulnerable HHs 
(Ubudehe 1 & 2) 
 
Project’s beneficiaries: at least 40% of the overall beneficiaries, of which 
10% will be from Ubudehe 1 category 
  Quotas  for  participation  in  cooperatives,  and  in  decision-making  bodies 
(e.g.,  Water  Users  Organizations):  at  least  40%  of  the  overall 
beneficiaries, of which 10% will be from Ubudehe 1 category 
  Quotas for participation in FFS: 100% 
  Quotas  to  participate  into  capacity  building  and  trainings,  including 
financial literacy training and access to financial services: at least 40% of 
the overall beneficiaries, of which 10% will be from Ubudehe 1 category 
  Quotas to participate into nutrition-sensitive activities (implementation of 
kitchen gardens, nutrition education): 100% 
  Quotas to participate into GALS training: 100% 
Furthermore,  attention  will  be  given  to  costs/beneficiary  contributions,  timing  and 
34. 
administrative procedures required for effective participation of the various target groups. To 
ensure  the  participation  of  women,  attention  to  the  location  and  timing  of  various  project 
activities may increase their opportunity to participate. 
Eligibility criteria for the selection of Project’s beneficiaries. In the selection of 
35. 
beneficiaries  and  their  representative  organizations,  KIIWP  will  adopt  eligibility  criteria, 
already in use by other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, that take into account both social 
and economic profile of the target groups, giving priority to the most vulnerable ones, as well 
as farmer’s motivation, commitment and interest in Project’s activities.To avoid elite capture 
and  to  foster  inclusive  participation,  KIIWP  will  involve  Umudugudu  committees  at  village 
level, ensuring transparency and locally accepted households’ selection. 
36. 
The  box  below  provides  an  overview  of the  eligibility criteria  already  in use  for  the 
identification and selection of FFS’s beneficiaries. Following this model, the KIIWP will provide 
clear eligibility criteria for the identification and selection of beneficiaries  for other project-
supported activities.  
Box 2. Eligibility criteria for the selection of FFS’s beneficiaries 
1. Belong to (old) Ubudehe category 1 or 2 (or new categories, D and C). 
2. At least 50% and 30% of the members of the group must be women and youth respectively. 
3. Living and working in KIIWP intervention zones (project area).  
4. Be a producer of the selected crop related to the specific FFS.  
5. Being committed to participate in all FFS groups learning activities.  
6. Being active and practicing.  
7. Agree to the rules of the group. 
8. Willing to share ideas with other farmers, especially non-members. 
9. Willing to contribute financially or material inputs to school/ work in consensus. 
10. Interested in applying new technologies.  
The participatory approach for the identification and selection of beneficiaries and 
37. 
for the roll out of Project’s intervention will comprise the following key steps: 
15 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Targeting strategy: A strategy document will be prepared by KIIWP at the project 
inception  phase  to  ensure  effectiveness  in  targeting  across  different  project’s 
interventions.  
Households’  profiling:  Profiling  of  households  within  the  area  of  the  interest 
farmers 
(Household  headed,  household  assets,  members’  affiliation 
‘organizations, etc.). Simple questionnaires in local languages will be elaborated 
to this aim. 
to 
Community mobilization: a strong community mobilization will be undertaken at 
the inception  phase  by  KIIWP  staff,  along  with  local  authorities  and  community 
leaders.  While  mobilizing  the  communities,  direct  targeting  measures  will  be 
applied  to  ensure  that  the  most  vulnerable  groups  will  be  reached  out,  that 
representation of female and male participants is equal, and that elite capture is 
avoided.  This  activity  will  be  undertaken  at  the  village  level  and  will  consist  of 
public consultations with the community as a whole and separate interaction with 
special groups, such as women and youth. The Gender, Youth and Social Inclusion 
Specialist  at  KIIWP  Project  level  will  be  directly  responsible  for  organizing  and 
conducting  separate  consultation  with  those  groups  and  their  consequent 
mobilisation within the proposed activities. 
Participatory methods and tools: the use of participatory methods and tools will 
help  balancing  out  unequal  opportunities  to  participate  in  decision-making 
concerning  the  identification  of community’s needs  and the  development  of  the 
proposed  Project’s  activities,  including  the  choice  and/or  location  of  water 
infrastructure.  In  this  framework,  in  the  development  of  sub-catchment 
management plans, KIIWP will employ a Community-based participatory planning 
and community competitions (Inteko y’Imihigo), already successfully tasted under 
KWAMP7, ensuring that the needs  of all communities’ representatives  are taken 
into  account,  including  the  most  vulnerable  households,  and  that  women  have 
equal representation in decision making.  
38. 
Selection of cooperatives. A pre-identification of the cooperatives engaged in the main 
value chains to be supported by the Project (rice, maize & beans, horticulture) was conducted 
during the design of KIIWP1 (see, Table 13 under Component B.1) A new assessment will be 
carried  out  at  inception  phase  (KIIWP2)  to:  (i)  update  data  on  the  cooperatives  already 
identified; (ii) identify new cooperatives that might be supported by the Project in the same 
area. In this context, existing cooperatives in Ruramira sector shall also be identified. As part 
of their mandate, Cooperatives already integrate mechanisms for social inclusion in Rwanda, 
with established quotas for the participation of the most vulnerable farmers and women 
7 Further details on community competitions and eligible beneficiaries are available in Part II, Sub-Component A.1 
16 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 2. Targeting implementation flowchart 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Inception 
Outputs 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Selection of 
cells and 
villages 
Assessment of 
the 
cooperatives 
Community 
mobilization 
KIIWP Project 
coordinator/ 
SPIU Gender 
Specialist and 
district staff 
authorities  
KIIWP 
Cooperative 
Development 
Specialist and 
district staff 
authorities  
KIIWP staff, 
district staff, 
community 
leaders 
Cells and villages are 
selected taking into 
account the above 
criteria. 
List of cooperatives pre-
identified is 
updated/validated and 
new cooperatives are 
identified in the 9 
targeted sectors 
Communities are 
mobilized using 
participatory 
methodologies. 
I.2.2: GENDER, SOCIAL INCLUSION AND YOUTH 
Gender.  Context.  Most  of  the  women  in  the  Project’s  area  are  engaged  into 
39. 
agricultural activities, however the sector is characterized by low productivity, low earnings 
and precarious working conditions that hamper their economic empowerment.  
40. 
Despite achievements at the policy level, gender disparities still persist, especially in 
rural  areas,  where  traditional  patriarchal  attitudes  continue  to  prevail.  Women  have  equal 
access to and ownership of land than men8, however, this doesn’t necessarily translate into 
equal access to assets, decision making on agricultural choices  (what to grow) and control 
over  income resulting  from  the  agricultural  production. Indeed,  women’s  participation into 
value chains is found mostly at the production stage. Gender disparities are also evident in 
the  value  addition  and  marketing  of  agricultural  commodities  where  more  economic 
commodities are controlled by men.  
In general, women are associated with marketing small quantities of production while 
41. 
larger quantities are marketed by men who also control the income from the sales. Men are 
more likely than women to make decisions about cash crop farming and livestock raising, and 
about control over income generated from cash crop farming and non-farm economic activity. 
The gender inequality in decision making powers over these income generating activities and 
the  inequality  in  control  over  income  is  likely  to  lead  to  unequal  power  relations  within 
households.  
A Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index Study9, carried out in Rwanda in 2020, 
42. 
revealed  that  Eastern  Province  has  the  lowest  WEAI  score.  The  biggest  constraints  to 
empowerment for women in Eastern province are the lack of access to credit (24 per cent), 
workload (21 per cent), and purchase, sale and transfer of assets (21 per cent). For the last 
two indicators, women in Eastern province are much more disempowered than women or men 
in other provinces. 
8  In  Rwanda,  the  land  registration  policy  and  the  inheritance  law  favor  equal  access  to  and  ownership  of  land. 
According  to  the  State  of  gender  equality  in  Rwanda  Report,  (2019)  women  had  significant  access  to  land  in  the 
country. According to that source, 58.3 percent of land was owned by spouses, 24 percent by only women and 14 
percent by only men (2 percent by others). 
9  DFID,  2020,  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  Study,  Final  baseline  survey.  The  report  has  been 
prepared  by  IMC  Worldwide  with  the  assistance  of  the  DFID  and  the  Rwandan  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal 
Resources (MINAGRI) at the national scale. 
17 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
43.  With  low  education  level  and  lack  of  literacy,  women  are  less  likely  to  receive 
government extension services10 and financial services which, in turn, limits their opportunity 
to engage in income-generating activities. Lack of assets challenges women to access financial 
services and products, as they are often not able to satisfy collateral requirements needed, 
for example, to receive a loan and start a new business. In this context, unequal control over 
land and economic resources is also found regarding the possibility of using land for getting 
loans from financial institutions. 
44. 
Being  primarily  responsible  for  household  care  work,  women  also  face  the  double 
burden which challenges their participation into capacity building and trainings and therefore 
the opportunity to improve their  skills. In male-headed households, women work for  more 
hours  (15.5  hours)  than  men  (seven  hours),  spending  over  three  hours  more  on  farming 
activities  than  the  seven  hours  worked  by  men,  in  addition  to  five  hours  on  unpaid 
reproductive and household work11 ; firewood is the main source of energy in the Project area 
(93 per cent) and women are the ones responsible for collecting the woods.  
45. 
The WEAI baseline survey found that, currently, men are more likely to serve as active 
members  of  agricultural  producer  groups,  credit  or  microfinance  groups,  and  mutual  help 
groups. Women in female-only households are least likely to belong to these groups, which 
suggests  that  they  do  not  receive  as  much  support,  particularly  in  economic  activities,  as 
others. When it comes to membership in agriculture cooperatives, the number of women is 
lower than men (about 38 per cent in the cooperatives pre-identified in the Project’s area). 
This  is  mainly  attributed to the  distribution  of family responsibilities  (multiple  roles)  which 
leave  women  with  limited  time  to  participate  in  other  development  initiatives.  Within  the 
cooperatives, the participation of women in leadership positions is low; when women are into 
leadership  positions,  they  occupy  traditionally  designated  positions  such  as  secretaries, 
advisors and sporadically as second vice-chairpersons12. Water user associations tend to be 
predominantly composed of male farmers. Generally speaking, women's involvement in the 
implementation of infrastructure projects tends to take the form of voluntary labour inputs. 
The  Agriculture  Gender  Strategy  prepared  by  MINAGRI  in  2010  sets  clear  steps  to 
46. 
ensure  that  programmes  and  activities  targeting  the  agricultural  sector  set  a  strong 
foundation  for  equal  rights  and  equal  opportunities  for  both  women  and  men  in  rural 
development.  The  Kayonza  District  Development  Plan  also  aims  to  enhance  equity  and 
equality (men and women participation) in all value chains of agricultural activities, including 
farming, harvesting and processing, marketing and income utilization.  
47. 
Gender strategy. To  contribute to tackle constraints faced by rural women, KIIWP 
will adopt an inclusive approach to ensure that women and men equally benefit from Project's 
interventions. Overall, women will account for at least 50 per cent of the targeted beneficiaries 
(90,000 female beneficiaries in total overall an estimated 180,000 individuals reached by the 
Project),  and  female-headed  households  and  women  in  male-headed  households  will  be 
empowered to participate in project activities or engage in economic activities. Young people, 
(50  per  cent  women),  will  represent  30  per  cent  of  the  overall  number  of  beneficiaries. 
Households headed by women will represent 30 per cent of the targeted households (12,000). 
48. 
A Gender and Youth Strategy has been drafted during KIIWP1. The Strategy addresses 
gender disparities and youth constraints that limit their participation in economic opportunities 
and  provides  general recommendations  to  ensure that  women  and  youth  will  benefit from 
equal  access  to  assets,  services  and  capacity  building.  The  Strategy  will  be  revised  and 
updated,  integrating  social  inclusion  related  issues,  revising  the  expected  targets  and 
outcomes and defining specific initiatives that will be promoted during KIIWP2. 
10  The  WEAI  baseline  (2020)  found  out  that  only  35%  of  illiterate  female  farmers  received  government  extension 
services and that, in general, only 39% of female farmers benefited from government extension services compared 
to 52% male farmers.  
11  MINAGRI, Agriculture Gender Strategy, 2012 
12 RDDP, Project gender baseline survey 
18 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
In relation to gender equality and women’s  empowerment, the Strategy  will peruse 
49. 
the following main objectives:  
  Expand  women's  economic  empowerment  through  access  to  and  control  over 
assets and resources, enhanced capacities and skills. 
  Strengthen  women's  decision-making  role 
in  the  community  and  their 
representation  in  membership  and  leadership  of  sub-catchment  management 
committees, WUOs and Farmers Organizations.  
  Achieve a reduced workload and an improved equitable workload balance between 
women and men, girls and boys. 
50. 
To achieve these objectives, KIIWP will:  
Ensure  that  women  and  men  have  equal  access  to  Project’s  services,  targeting 
women as 50 per cent of direct beneficiaries of all supported activities.   
Increase  women’s  skills  in  financial  literacy,  managing  and  saving  and  credit, 
encouraging the economic empowerment of women. Under Component B.3, KIIWP 
will  support  financial  literacy  trainings,  focusing  on  women  (50  per  cent  of  the 
trainees)  and  youth  (30  per  cent  of  the  trainees).  Financial  services  should  be 
tailored to the needs  of women: for  example, supporting  loan provision through 
informal groups  (VSLAs). To this  aim, KIIWP would rely upon and strengthening 
existing VSLA (Village Savings and Loan Association)13.  
Increase women’s access to and control over assets and resources. The Project will 
dedicate a special financing window for women and young people (with a reduced 
beneficiary’s contribution) through dedicated grants (component B.2), to enhance 
the adoption of the Climate Smart Agriculture practices and technologies. 
Identify  income-generating  opportunities  for  women  along  the  supported  value 
chains  and  promote  their  participation  also  in  areas  that  are  not  traditionally  in 
their domain. Under  both components, KIIWP will create new income generating 
activities,  on  farm  and  off  farm,  suitable  for  women  (and  specifically  targeting 
young women), in the frame of catchment rehabilitation and protection initiatives 
-such  as  afforestation  and  reforestation  activities,  agroforestry  practices, 
beekeeping-, in post-harvest management and processing of food crops, as input 
dealers, among other areas. 
Promote female leadership within WUOs and Farmers’ Organizations: it is expected 
that the water management committees will comprise 40 per cent women and 25 
per cent youth (component A.3). Gender training to management committees will 
increase  awareness  of  gender  issues  in  infrastructure  management.  Leadership 
trainings  in the context of the cooperatives  will be aimed at promoting women’s 
role in leading positions within their representative organizations. The inclusion of 
gender audits in cooperative capacity assessments will be supported; cooperatives 
will  be  supported  to increase  the number  of  women members  and  in leadership 
positions, and to ensure that they have equal access to cooperative services.  
Improve  the  nutritious  status  and  well-being  of  women  and  of  other  family 
members  by  strengthening  their  access  to  nutritious  foods  and  improve  their 
knowledge on good nutrition and practices (Component A.3). With this objective, 
kitchen  gardens,  managed  by  women,  will  be  promoted  targeting  the  most 
vulnerable households.  Nutrition  education  will be integrated in the Farmer Field 
Schools’  training  curriculum.  The  nutrition  module  will  include  training  in  good 
nutrition/  dietary  knowledge  and  practices,  food  handling  and  storage,  cooking 
classes  and  practical  demonstrations  on  how to  prepare  a  healthy  and  balanced 
meal, along with hygiene practices. It is expected that at least 75 per cent of the 
13 This might be done in partnership with WFP (see, partnership table).  
19 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
women  receiving  direct  support  to  enhance  their  nutrition  will  improve  their 
minimum dietary diversity at the end of the Project.  
  Employ the Gender Action Learning System (GALS), to address power inequalities 
between  women  and  men  and  foster  women’s  decision-making  power  at  the 
household and community level (Component A.3). To implement GALS, the Project 
will leverage on the experience gained in applying the methodology in the frame of 
other on-going IFAD funded projects (details on the implementation of the GALS 
methodology are provided under Component A.3 of this Manual).   
  Support the development of small-scale mechanisation and promote climate smart 
and workload-reducing tools (TLST) adapted to the needs of women, thus reducing 
their  labour  burden  while,  at  the  same  time,  decreasing  impact  on  natural 
resources (Component A.3).  
Train project staff and extension service providers on gender-related issues. It will 
be  ensured that training  modules  include  specific  sections  related to  gender. To 
this  aim,  Gender,  Youth  and  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  will  be  recruited  at  the 
Project level to oversee the training modules  and curricula that will be delivered 
(Component C).  
Ensure that the Project’s Monitoring and Evaluation system is gender sensitive and 
that data are disaggregated (women/youth) and adequately reported (Component 
C).  
51. 
Preventing gender-based violence in the agricultural sector. KIIWP will contribute to 
reducing  any  harmful  act  based  on  gender  through:  (i)  sensitization  on the importance  of 
addressing  GBV,  application  of  IFAD's  no  tolerance  for  Sexual  Harassment  (SH)  /Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) for project staff and project's activities and operations, as part 
of the gender awareness trainings; (ii) map out and partner with GBV prevention and response 
actors in project adjoining communities at the district level; (iii) have GBV risks adequately 
reflected in all safeguards instruments, contracts with suppliers and other third parties to be 
funded with IFAD funds.  
52. 
Gender  awareness  trainings  to  district  authorities  and  implementing  partner 
organizations have been budgeted under KIIWP1 and are expected to be implemented during 
2021, and prior to the start of KIIWP2. However, the Project (through the appointed Gender, 
Youth and Social Inclusion Specialist) will ensure that gender awareness-related topics will be 
embedded into trainings and capacity building activities aimed at district staff and partners 
over the course of the Project’s implementation. To promote women’s leadership in farmer’s 
organizations, KIIWP will organize coaching sessions bringing together women farmers and 
women already in leadership to serve as role models and encourage  other women to apply 
for leadership positions.  
53. 
Social inclusion strategy. Kayonza District has a large number of vulnerable groups, 
including extremely poor  households, marginalised persons,  and genocide  survivors. There 
are  3,426  disabled  people  in  Kayonza  District,  1,198  of  them  are  children.  Amongst  the 
population covered by the Ubudehe governmental social protection programme, 4.2 per cent 
of the targeted households are headed by disabled people. In the Project area, 20 per cent of 
the targeted households report having at least one household member living with a disability 
(mental or physical). The households tend to be more food insecure (27 per cent against 18 
per cent for the heads of households without disability). 
54. 
KIIWP  will  deploy  a  social  inclusion  strategy,  channelling  Project’s  services  to  the 
poorest  and  most  vulnerable  households,  to  ensure  that  they  are  no  left  behind.  This  will 
include  the  provision  of  pro-poor  services  directly  targeting  groups  of  poor  and  extremely 
poor  households, and especially women and youth, such as: alternative income generating 
activities - on farm and off farm- from which near landless farmers will be able to benefit (i.e., 
afforestation and reforestation activities, agroforestry-related practices, construction works, 
among others); capacity building on credit and financial literacy; support to informal financial 
organizations,  such  as  community  saving  groups,  targeting  mostly  women;  the 
20 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
implementation  of  kitchen  gardens  to  improve  access  to  nutritious  food  for  household’s 
consumption.  
55. 
The poorest households, young farm workers and women (from Category 1 Ubudehe), 
will be targeted directly by the Project involving the Umudugudu committee at village level to 
ensure transparent and participative methods of households’ selection. The Project will ensure 
that  at  least  10  per  cent  of  the  targeted  households  are  amongst  the  most  vulnerable 
category. (Ubudehe 1). This percentage will increase in the context of FFS, where Ubudehe 
category  1  &  2  will  be  the  main  target  group.  Ubudehe  Category  1  households  are  also 
expected  to  benefit  from  the  seasonal  and  permanent  job  opportunities  created  through 
market-orientated 
irrigation  development.  The  Project  will  ensure  participation  of 
representatives  from the most  vulnerable households in  sub-catchment  planning,  Farmers’ 
Organizations, FFS and in water infrastructure management committees.  
56. 
Youth. Context. In the Project area, more than 60 per cent of the resident population 
is under  25 years old. Young people are most amongst the most vulnerable sectors of the 
population:  at  the  national  level,  almost  30  per  cent  of  young  people  (16-30)  live  in 
households  that  are  below  poverty  line.  Gender  disparities  also  exist,  with  more  females 
extremely poor (12 per cent) compared to males (10.4 per cent) in 2016/201714. 
57. 
Young rural people in rural areas are mostly literate (83 per cent, with no significant 
difference  between  males  and  females);  however,  the  level  of  education  is  low  and  the 
percentage of young people attending tertiary education and technical or vocational schools 
is extremely limited (only 2.8 per cent of the rural youth population)15 which challenge their 
involvement in the formal labour market. Indeed, precarious forms of employment with low 
level of earning is the main employment problem for the youth. It is estimated that in Kayonza 
District almost 30,000 youth are not in employment, education or training (NEET).  
58.  More  than  60  per  cent  of  young  people  work in  agriculture  and  its  sub-sectors  and 
their main jobs, mostly engaged as independent farmers (45 per cent in total, of which more 
than  53  per  cent  are  women)  than  wage  farmers  (16  per  cent).  As  studies  report16,  root 
causes of unemployment in agriculture for rural youth are mostly related to lack of access to 
productive assets and natural resources, goods and services; lack of knowledge and technical 
and business skills; a negative perception of agriculture among youth and a non-conducive 
environment for  youth employment. These constraints limit rural youth’s ability to develop 
successful businesses.  
59. 
Youth strategy. KIIWP aims to increase youth’s social and economic empowerment 
by  strengthening  young  women  and  men’s  capacities  to  take  part  into  decision  making 
processes at community and organization levels and to engage into business opportunities. 
To this aim, the Project will support youth’s participation into farmers’ organization and WUOs, 
promote  access  to  financial  services  and  credit,  and  create  new  income  generating 
opportunities aimed at youth (e.g., development of small-scale mechanisation).  
The Project will target different sub-target groups within the young population of the 
60. 
Project’s  area, as:  young men and women engaged in agricultural activities  at subsistence 
farm level; youth  employed under  casual or seasonal work at minimum wage, who  can be 
engaged  in  service  provision  and;  young  graduated,  interested  to  apply  their  skills  in  the 
agriculture  sectors  as  service  providers.  Youth  will  be  targeted  as  both  beneficiaries  and 
service providers of the Project’s supported interventions.  
61. 
A Youth Strategy has been outlined during KIIWP1. At the light of the activities planned 
under KIIWP2, the Strategy should be revised and further expanded to address the following 
issues: 
14 EICV5, 2016/2017, Thematic Report, Youth.  
15 In the Eastern Province of Rwanda, 83% of the rural youth population is literate and more than 90% have attained 
schools,  even  from  the  poorest  quintiles;  however,  only  1.7%  attained  tertiary  education  and  2.8%  has  attained 
technical and vocational schools. Source: NISR, EICV5, 2016/2017. Education Thematic Report. 
16 IFAD, 2019, Creating Employment Opportunities for Rural Youth in Africa: Support to integrated agribusiness hubs, 
Grant Design Report.  
21 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
a)  Analyse the main business opportunities for young  women and men along the value 
chains supported by the Project and identify where the main opportunities for youth’s 
employment  are  found.  This  assessment  would  be  carried  out  in  collaboration  with 
Kilimo Trust, in the frame of the IFAD funded grant project (R-YES), aimed at creating 
agribusiness  opportunities  for  young  rural  people  in  Rwanda  (see,  implementation 
modalities). 
b)  Identify  capacities/  knowledge  needs  to  enable  young  women  and  men  to  join  the 
business  opportunities  identified  and  support  their  participation  into  vocational 
trainings and capacity building.  
c)  Identify selection criteria for young women and men to benefit from VET and capacity 
building trainings. It is recommended to prioritize NEET (not in employment, education 
or  training)  youth,  in  order  to  increase  employability  potential  of  the  most 
disadvantaged groups. Partnership with Kilimo Trust should be foreseen to this aim.  
d)  Create  ad-hoc  income  generating  opportunities  aimed  at  young  people,  targeting 
especially the most vulnerable one (e.g., landless) in the frame of the interventions 
supported  and  in  areas  suitable  for  them  (e.g.,  afforestation  and  reforestation 
activities, agro-forestry practices, construction of infrastructures and the development 
of small-scale mechanisation targeting youth as main service providers).  
e)  Promote the hiring of young graduate as service providers, coordinating with service 
providers and partner organizations (such as RYAF, HoReCo and Kilimo Trust). 
f)  Set clear and reachable targets, define specific activities and ensure that human and 
financial resources required to deliver on the Youth’s Strategy are in place. 
Implementation modalities. KIIWP will recruit a Gender, Youth and Social Inclusion 
62. 
Specialist  that  will  act  at  the  Project  (district)  level;  this  Specialist  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with the Gender & Youth Specialist at the SPIU level. S/he will be responsible to 
supervise  and ensure the proper implementation of the Project’s Gender, Youth and Social 
Inclusion Strategy at the Project/district level, to articulate with local government authorities 
and to coordinate with different stakeholders at the district level. In order to harmonize with 
on-going  activities  on  gender  and  women's  empowerment  carried  out  in  Kayonza,  the 
Specialist will articulate with local governmental authorities and, in particular, with the Gender 
and Family Promotion Officers at the district level.  
63. 
At SPIU level, the already appointed Gender & Youth Specialist will be responsible for 
overall supervision of the Gender, Youth and Social Inclusion Strategy and related Action Plan. 
The  Gender  &  Youth  Specialist  will  coordinate  extra-projects  initiatives  related  to  gender 
equality, women and youth empowerment (for example, learning and sharing events amongst 
IFAD funded projects), articulate with implementing partner organizations/ service providers 
(e.g.,  RYAF,  Kilimo  Trust)  and  manage  the  delivery  of  GALS  trainings  to  the  selected 
beneficiaries. The SPIU Gender Specialist will be also responsible to maintain and strengthen 
partnerships with key actors/ stakeholders on gender and youth related issues at the national 
level.  
64. 
To boost capacity building and employment opportunities for young women and men, 
KIIWP  will coordinate  with the  IFAD-funded grant  “Creating Employment  Opportunities  for 
Rural Youth in Africa: Support to integrated agribusiness hubs in Rwanda” (R-YES project). 
Recently approved, the project has started its operation in late 2020. In Rwanda, R-YES will 
target  1,200  youth,  of  which  50  per  cent  women,  identifying  opportunities  for  youth 
employment  along  selected  value  chains,  providing  capacity  building  (through  VTC  and 
colleges) and linking youth graduated with agribusiness enterprises. A network of sub-Hubs 
will  be  established  at  the  provincial  level  to  facilitate  these  linkages.  The  project  is 
implemented  by  a  consortium  of  organizations  and  institutions  and  coordinated  by  Kilimo 
Trust (see, section on implementing partner organizations and service providers).  
65. 
The  SPIU  Gender  &  Youth  Specialist  is  the  focal  point  of  the  R-YES  Project  and  is 
responsible to coordinate activities between the IFAD funded loans and the grant. He is also 
22 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
responsible for  coordinating and supervising the implementation of GALS methodologies  in 
the frame of IFAD-funded investment projects. Together with the KIIWP Gender, Youth and 
Social  Inclusion  Specialist,  he  will  define  tailored  implementation  arrangements  for  the 
delivery  of  selected  interventions  with  the  different  partner  organizations  and  service 
providers.  
66.  Multi-stakeholder coordination will be promoted both at the district and at the national 
level. Participation of the Project’s specialists in thematic working groups (e.g. Gender sub-
sector  working  group)  will  ensure  coordination  and  collaboration  amongst  the  different 
stakeholders to respond to beneficiaries’ needs and align with national and district’s priorities. 
67. 
Project coordination and monitoring. The M&E system will give strong emphasis 
to monitoring of targeting performance. All  implementing partner organizations and service 
providers will be required to provide disaggregated data on women and youth participation, 
in relation to overall Project’s targets. 
68. 
The  M&E  system  will  collect  and  analyse  information  about  Project  outreach, 
effectiveness of the targeting strategy and specific benefits for women and youth. This will 
require strong coordination and collaboration between the M&E unit and the Gender, Youth 
and Social Inclusion specialists at both SPIU and Project level. Impact will be assessed on the 
basis  of  methodologically  gender  sensitive  baseline  and  completion  surveys.  A  gender 
assessment study has been included in KIIWP1 and will be implemented, as part of the overall 
Project’s baseline study, in 2021; a gender study at completion will assess the effectiveness 
and relevance of the strategies/mechanisms put in place. 
69. 
Service  providers  supporting  the  implementation  of  activities  (particularly  those 
directly  dealing  with  producers  and  groups)  should  have  a  demonstrable  commitment  to 
gender inclusive approaches, youth engagement and social inclusion.  
70. 
Key implementing partner organizations/ service providers. During the design, 
a  set  of  key  actors  have  been  identified  as  potential  partners  or  service  providers  for  the 
delivery of gender and youth related activities. 
71. 
Amongst  development  partner  organizations,  it  is  recommended  to  seek  alignment 
and synergies with the on-going SMART WFP/KOICA funded project (2020- 2023) in Kayonza 
district. The Project merges climate resilience with social protection and value chain support, 
targeting 180,000 individuals from the poorest categories (Ubudehe 1 and 2) and channelling 
interventions through formal and informal farmers groups. In this framework, the project is 
promoting the establishment of VSLAs, or strengthening existing ones, and creating linkages 
between  the  women’s  saving  and  loans  groups  with  financial  institutions.  With  the  aim  of 
promoting enabling environments for women’s access to finance, KIIWP should leverage on 
this development project and build on existing VSLAs.  
72. 
Kilimo Trust is an East Africa-based not for profit organization that was established in 
2005  to  contribute  to  broad-based  wealth  creation  through  agriculture  and  agribusiness 
development.  In  Rwanda,  the  organization  is  coordinating  the  R-YES  project,  financed  by 
IFAD,  providing  support  to  the  establishment  of  agribusiness  hubs  to  create  employment 
opportunities  for  rural  youth.  The  grant  is  implemented  by  a  consortium  of  institutions 
including the African Agribusiness Incubators Network (AAIN), Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness 
Forum (RYAF) and Rwanda Polytechnic, through its affiliated Integrated Polytechnic Regional 
Colleges (IPRCs). KIIWP2 would liaise with the grant to identify job opportunities for young 
people for the supported value chains and the provision of capacity building and trainings and 
link to financial services. Graduate youth would be also employed by the Project as service 
providers. 
73. 
Other  service  providers  focusing  on  rural  youth  would  include  the  Rwanda  Youth 
Agribusiness  Forum  (RYAF)  and  HoReCo.  The  first  one  is  a  platform  established  to  bring 
together  different  youth  organizations,  individual  youth  farmers  and  entrepreneurs.  RYAF 
already engaged in IFAD-supported projects PASP and RDDP in the delivery of training and 
extension services, and it could be further involved to engage youth in agriculture, as service 
providers as well as beneficiaries of capacity building, business and financial services.  HoReCo 
23 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
is  a  business  company  of  professionals  in  agriculture  who  were  trained  in  matters  of 
horticulture development and value chain, irrigation and agriculture mechanization as well as 
building capacity of youth in agriculture. They may be employed as service providers for the 
delivery of specific capacity building and trainings in areas where the company has recognized 
professional skills and comparative advantages. 
Table 3. Gender and youth activities implementation flowchart 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Incepti
on 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Outputs 
SPIU Gender & 
Youth Specialist 
SPIU Gender & 
Youth Specialist  
SPIU Gender& 
Youth Specialist 
in coordination 
with the KIIWP 
Gender, Youth 
and SI  
KIIWP Gender, 
Youth and SI 
specialist in 
coordination 
with the SPIU 
Gender 
Specialist 
Revise the Gender 
and Youth Strategy 
(KIIWP1), integrating 
Social Inclusion 
related issues, 
revising targets and 
including KIIWP2 
expected 
interventions. 
Prepare a Gender & 
Youth Action Plan, 
defining key 
interventions and 
implementation 
arrangements for the 
delivery of specific 
services targeting 
women and youth 
with partners/service 
providers 
Define selection 
criteria for young 
women and men to 
benefit from VET and 
capacity building  
Outline training 
contents on gender, 
youth and social 
inclusion related 
issues and ensure 
that they are 
integrated into the 
training curricula for 
project staff, district 
authorities and 
implementing 
partners/ service 
providers 
The Gender, Youth and 
Social Inclusion Strategy 
of KIIWP2 is elaborated. 
A Gender & Youth Action 
Plan is elaborated and 
implementation 
arrangements for the 
delivery of specific 
interventions aimed at 
women and youth are 
defined 
Selection criteria are 
defined. 
Gender, youth and social 
inclusion related issues 
are embedded into 
training curricula.  
I.2.3: NUTRITION AND FOOD SECURITY  
Context. The District of Kayonza faces important food security challenges. Data show 
74. 
that, compared to 2015, food security highly deteriorated (+21.9 per cent of food insecure 
households)  in  the  district.  After  three  consecutive  years  of  drought,  in  2018  Kayonza 
registered the highest prevalence of food insecure households (32.8 per cent) of the Province 
(average 16.2 per cent) and the second highest rate of severely food insecure households 
(4.8 per cent) of the country17. 
75. 
The increased food insecurity is linked to a set of inter-related underlying causes: small 
plot sizes, limited land availability, low productivity in subsistence agriculture and low farmers’ 
purchasing  power,  exacerbated  by  erratic  weather  patterns  and  recurrent  droughts.  The 
17 WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda. 
24 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
stability of food throughout the year and at all times remains an important constraint in the 
Project area. Findings from EICV4 (2014/2014) and EICV5 (2016/2017) show a correlation 
between poverty rates  with the rise in the price of foods  (especially staple vegetables  and 
root crops) and the reduction of purchasing power of households. Household food security is 
strongly  related  to  food  prices  with  poorer  households  far  more  vulnerable  to  fluctuating 
prices. Food prices for staple commodities, such as maize and beans, are generally increasing 
at the end of the year, before the harvesting season. This is also the time of the year when 
household food stocks have run out and market dependency is highest. Food shortages are 
also attributed to lack of adequate post-harvest storage facilities which are extremely limited 
in the District of Kayonza. 
76. 
Household’s dietary diversity. Most of the households base their diet on legumes (60 
per cent) and cereals (56 per cent) as their main food on a daily basis. Tubers (30 per cent), 
mostly  as  cassava,  are  also  a  main  food  with  a  few  households  reporting  consumption  of 
vegetables (17 per cent). There is very low consumption of fruits (0.7 per cent) and animal 
protein in the form of milk or beef. More specific to the dietary compositions, for many meals 
most households consume a mixture of beans and maize “imvungure”, maize flour porridge, 
cassava  and  vegetables  including  cabbages,  eggplants  and  amaranths  “dodo”  mainly 
produced  in  home  gardens.  Findings  from  CFSVA  (2018)18  show  a  significant  correlation 
between  the  mother’s  food  consumption  and  the  child’s  food  consumption:  women’s 
knowledge  and  education  on  food  diversity  has  been  recognized  as  a  significant  factor 
impacting children’s food consumption, especially for achieving the minimum acceptable diet. 
77. 
In  the  Project  area,  the  prevalence  of  stunting  among  children  under  five  age  was 
estimated at 42.4 per cent in 201819, higher than the national rate of 37 per cent. The major 
underlying causes of malnutrition include limited access to nutrient-rich foods, seasonal food 
unavailability  and  low  agricultural  productivity due to  climatic  conditions  and  declining soil 
fertility. In rural areas, households practicing subsistence farming on small plots of land are 
the most affected by malnutrition. Poor access to safe and clean water, health services and 
sanitation  facilities  (WASH),  also  compromise  people’s  health  and  their  capacity  to  retain 
nutrients.  Water-borne  diseases,  such  as  malaria  and  intestine  parasites,  are  the  most 
prevalent forms of illness in Kayonza; more than 40 per cent of the population has no access 
to improved and safe sources of water for domestic use.20 
78.  Nutrition strategy and related activities. Nutrition will be tackled mostly through 
the production pathway, identifying key climate smart and nutrient rich varieties that would 
be promoted for both household’s consumption and sell. KIIWP’s nutrition strategy will aim 
to increase and diversify the production and consumption of nutritious foods to complement 
the production of agricultural commercial commodities, with particular focus on the most food 
insecure households and women. With this objective, the Project will: 
a) 
Promote key climate smart and nutrient rich varieties to be grown in kitchen gardens 
(Component A.3), targeting the most vulnerable and food insecure households and 
women. The Project would rely upon the experience gained in the establishment of 
kitchen  gardens  under  the  IFAD-funded  project  KWAMP  (already  closed  and 
operating in the neighbouring district of Kirehe). Nutrition varieties already identified 
will include: Orange Fleshed Sweet potatoes (OFSP), iron beans, dark green leafy 
vegetables21. Fruit trees (such as moringa, mango, avocado and citrus trees) will be 
grown  in  the  agroforestry  systems  (Component  A.1).  Other  nutrient  rich varieties 
will  be  identified  at  inception  stage  of  the  KIIWP222.  The  selection  criteria  should 
18 WFP, 2018, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA), Rwanda 
19 Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19-2023/24.  
20 NISR, 2012, Kayonza District Profile 
21 A separated budget line has been created in the COSTAB under component A.3 for the promotion of nutritious and 
improved seeds varieties.  
22 For the selection of the nutritious and climate smart food crops to be promoted, KIIWP would be able to rely upon 
the assessment conducted in the frame of the on-going IFAD funded Nutrition Sensitive Water Productivity (NsWP) 
project,  implemented  by  FAO  in  the  same  district,  aimed  at  identifying  those  nutrient  rich  varieties  able  to  tackle 
micronutrient deficiencies of the targeted population and that also offer market opportunities. Furthermore, linkages 
will be established with the Home-Grown School Feeding Programme to promote local market for nutritious crops. 
25 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
b) 
c) 
d) 
consider those crops/vegetables that are included in the food basket for schools, in 
the  frame  of  the  Home-Grown  School  Feeding  Programme,  in  order  explore 
possibilities to link farmers to public purchases. 
Implement  Climate  and  Nutrition  Smart  Technologies  (such  as  storage  facilities, 
dryers, climate resilient drying grounds  and warehouses) in order  to reduce  post-
harvest  losses  and  improve  year-round  availability  of  nutritious  food  crops 
(Component  A.3).  The  introduction  of  these  technologies  would  be  coupled  with 
trainings aimed at strengthening farmers’ capacities on post-harvest practices that 
would help addressing micronutrient deficiencies and provide an additional source of 
protein consumption on the long term (e.g., drying and milling, sun drying).  
Enhance  access  to  clean  and  safe  water  for  human  consumption  (constructing 
boreholes and valley tanks to supply water for domestic use, under Component A.1).  
Provide nutrition education in the frame of Farmers Field Schools (Component A.3) 
to  help  orienting  farmers’ choices  towards  improved  nutrition.  Nutrition  education 
will include training in good nutrition/ dietary knowledge and practices, food handling 
and  storage,  cooking  classes  and  practical  demonstrations  on  how  to  prepare  a 
healthy and balanced meal, along with hygiene practices. It is expected that at least 
75  per  cent  of  the  women  receiving  direct  support  to  enhance  their  nutrition  will 
improve their minimum dietary diversity at the end of the Project.  
e)  Strengthen multi-stakeholder coordination in order to align Project’s interventions to 
the nutrition-related priorities set by the District and reflected into the District Plan 
to Eradicate Malnutrition (DPEM). The SPIU Nutrition Specialist will be responsible to 
engage with other key development partners on nutrition at the national level (such 
as, WFP, FAO, SUN multi-stakeholder platform).  
79. 
Nutrition education. A dedicated module on nutrition education will be embedded into 
the Farmers Field School’s training curriculum. A training module on nutrition education has 
been  already  elaborated  by  the  SPIU  Nutrition  Specialist  under  RDDP  and  it  is  being 
implemented in the  frame  of  the  Livestock  Farmer  Field Schools  (L-FFS) supported  by the 
project in Kayonza District. The curriculum might be adapted to fit KIIWP’s purposes. For the 
development  of materials,  it  is  also recommended to  liaise  with the  on-going IFAD  funded 
Nutrition  Sensitive  Water  Productivity  (NsWP)  project,  implemented  by  FAO  in  the  same 
district,  that  will  also  channel  nutrition  education  through  the  Farmers  Field  School’s 
approach.  
80. 
Nutrition education sessions will be complemented by training on gender (GALS, see 
Component  A.3)  aimed  at  both  husbands  and  wives  that  will  address  intra-household 
dynamics (decision-making, sharing of labour): this will help to tackle those challenges that, 
beyond  food,  may  compromise  improvements  in  diets  at  the  household  level  (e.g.,  intra-
household food distribution, choices on the use of family's income, etc.).  
Finally, the promotion of climate-smart labour-saving technologies would contribute to 
81. 
decrease women’s workload and, it is expected, to increase their caring capacities. Trainings 
at the community level will also include raising awareness on the importance of good hygiene 
and sanitation, including actions to improve the surrounding environment.  
82.  Monitoring of nutrition-sensitive interventions. The SPIU Nutrition Specialist will 
be responsible to oversee the implementation of the nutrition sensitive activities and follow-
up  on  their  progresses,  in  coordination  with  the  Project  M&E  unit.  The  Minimum  Dietary 
Diversity for Women-MDD-W indicator has been introduced at the outcome level to monitor 
improvements in diets in women in reproductive age, as a direct result of Project's activities. 
Studies will be conducted at baseline and completion to assess the effectiveness and relevance 
of the strategies/mechanisms.  
Implementation modalities. To elaborate the contents for the trainings on nutrition 
83. 
education,  KIIWP  will  coordinate  with the  National Early  Childhood  Care  and  Development 
Programme  (NECDP),  which  operates  under  the  Ministry  of Gender  and  Family  Promotion. 
26 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
The  Programme  is  already  partnering  with  RDDP  in  the  delivery  of  nutrition  education  to 
producers’ groups.  
84. 
It  is  expected  that  FFS  facilitators  already  trainined  on  nutrition  education,  and 
currenly providing services under RDDP in Kayonza district, will be available to be recruited 
under KIIWP2. Furthermore, the Project could rely upon FFS facilitators trained on the same 
subject in the frame of the IFAD funded Nutrition Sensitive Water Productivity (NsWP) project, 
implemented by FAO in Kayonza district. Whenever neded, KIIWP may decide to outsource 
technical expertise to deliver nutrition education modules within the FFS. During the project 
design, the mission interviewed international civil society organizations (such as SNV) with 
recognized  capacities  in  the  delivery  of  nutrition  education,  and  social  behaviour  change 
communication, along with complementary trainings  on production of nutritious  food crops 
(implementation of kitchen gardens), WASH, Climate Smart Agriculture, etc.  
85. 
It  is  therefore  reccommended,  at  the  inception  stage,  to:  (i)  map  the  capacities 
available at the district level to deliver nutrition education, leveraging on existing experiences 
and projects; (ii) indentify gaps (in terms of human/technical resources,  materials, etc.) and; 
(iii) define tailored implementation arrangements for the delivery of the nutrition trainings, 
based  on  the  resources  (human/tehnical/fianncial)  available  in  house  (SPIU  level)  and 
external partners that could be mobilized.  
86. 
The  SPIU  Nutrition  Specilist  will  be  responsible  to  ensure  that  nutrition  is 
mainstreamed in Project’s components and activities, to coordinate the implementation of the 
nutrition-sensitive  interventions  planned  and  to  maintain  regular  communication  and 
coordination with IFAD-funded inititives (loans, grants) on nutrition implemented in the same 
district.  The  SPIU  Nutrition  Specilist  will  be  also  responsible  for  strengthening  multi-
stakeholder coordination and partnership with different organziations  (at the governmental 
level, as well as with civil society organizations and development partner institutions).  
Multi-stakeholder coordination and key partnerships 
At  the  district  level,  in  accordance  with  the  National  Decentralization  Policy,  multi-
87. 
sectoral  committees  are  established  to  coordinate  the  implementation  of  the  nutrition 
programmes. Under the leadership of the District Major, these committees are composed of 
district  directors  of  health,  nutritionists,  women  and  youth’  district  representatives, 
agronomists  and  social  protection,  veterinary,  and  hygiene  and  sanitation  officers.  The 
district-level committees oversee the implementation of DPEMs. All districts have developed 
District  Plans  to  Eradicate  Malnutrition  (DPEMs)  that  will  be  key  references  for  the 
development  and  delivery  of  nutrition-related  activities.  The  SPIU  Nutrition  Specialist  will 
maintain close communication and coordination with the district-level committee in Kayonza 
District to harmonize and align the nutrition-  sensitive activities  planned under KIIWP with 
the DPEM’s priorities and to coordinate for the delivery of nutrition education.  
88. 
Potential partnership with FAO, particularly on technical assistance will be pursued due 
to  FAO  expertise  on  nutrition  and  social  inclusion.  FAO  together  with  the  World  Bank  is 
currently  executing  the  GASFP  Sustainable  Agricultural  Intensification  for  Improved 
Livelihoods, Food Security and Nutrition Project (SAIP), covering also Kayonza District and 
implementing  nutrition  sensitive  interventions.  Synergies  should  be  explored,  especially  in 
the  promotion  of  nutritious  crops  and  in  the  implementation  of  nutrition  trainings  to 
communities. 
89. 
The  Nutrition-sensitive  Water  Productivity  (NsWP),  IFAD  funded  grant,  also 
implemented by FAO, will be executed during the next three years in the same District. NsWP 
aims  to  improve  dietary  quality  by  strengthening  the  capacities  of  smallholders  for  the 
adoption of sustainable water management and nutrition sensitive agricultural practices. This 
will be achieved through an NsWP methodology that includes the selection of nutrition-smart 
crops, the delivery of nutrition trainings and the CSA practices through the FFS model.  
A Focal Point for the NsWP has been appointed in Rwanda. Initial arrangements for the 
90. 
development  of  the  partnership  between  NsWP  and  KIIWP  have  been  defined  during  the 
project  design,  including:  (i)  the  adaptation  and  upscaling  of  the  NsWP  methodology  and 
27 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
practices into KIIWP; (ii) the identification of nutritious crops to be promoted in the kitchen 
gardens, that would respond to micronutrient deficiencies of the targeted population; (iii) the 
production of contents for the nutrition education modules and; (iv) a list of FFS faciliators 
trained on nutrition education on whose KIIWP may rely upon. The SPIU Nutrition Specialist 
will be responsible to maintain close communication wihe the NsWP Focal Point in Rwanda to 
follow up on the above mentioned arrangements.  
91. 
The World Food Programme  will be a key partner to link cooperatives  supported by 
KIIWP  with  the  Home-Grown  School  Feeding  Programme  (HGSFP).  In  this  context, 
partnership  would  be  established  to  further  exchanges  on  nutrition-sensitive  and  climate-
smart practices, promotion of nutritious foods and market linkages through the HGSFP. It is 
envisaged that KIIWP maps out, with the support of WFP, the primary schools targeted under 
the  HGSFP  to  strengthen  linkages  between  the  agricultural  cooperatives  supported  by  the 
Project and the Programme for public purchases.  
92. 
Partnership  with  WFP  may  be  also  sought  in  the  provision  of  capacity  building  to 
farmers on nutrition sensitive climate smart practices and technologies to be embedded into 
trainings  at  cooperative  level  (including  aflatoxin  control,  post-harvest  practices,  such  as 
drying and milling).  
Table 4. Nutrition activities implementation flowchart 
Responsib
ility 
SPIU 
Nutrition 
Specialist  
SPIU 
Nutrition 
Specialist 
SPIU 
Nutrition 
Specialist 
SPIU 
Nutrition 
Specialist 
SPIU 
Nutrition 
Specialist 
Activity 
Undertake a nutrition 
assessment to 
identify key nutritious 
crops to be promoted 
in the kitchen 
gardens (a) 
Map the capacities 
available at the 
district level to 
deliver nutrition 
education, leveraging 
on existing 
experiences and 
projects (b) 
Prepare contents for 
nutrition education 
module (c) 
Map out the schools 
supported by the 
HGSFP at the district 
level (d) 
Define 
implementation 
arrangements with 
selected partners and 
service providers for 
the delivery of NS 
activities.  
Inception 
Outputs 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
A nutrition assessment is 
undertaken, and a list of 
nutritious crops defined. 
A list of FFS facilitators 
trained on nutrition 
education is available. 
Contents for the delivery 
of nutrition education 
are prepared. 
A list of schools included 
in the HGSFP is 
available. 
Detailed implementation 
arrangements for 
specific activities are 
defined and reported in 
a Nutrition Action Plan. 
(a)  In partnership with the NsWP project. 
(b)  In partnership with the NsWP project and RDDP project. 
(c)  In partnership with RDDP, NsWP project, NECDP.  
(d)  In partnerhship with WFP. 
28 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
I.3: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.3.1: CONTEXT AND RATIONALE 
93. 
The  institutional arrangements for the Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed 
Management Project (KIIWP) are fully aligned with the current implementation framework of 
IFAD-funded  projects  in  Rwanda.  This  framework  rests  upon  the  below  principles  and 
operational modalities. 
94. 
Single Project Implementation Units (SPIU) were created in every line Ministries 
and Public Agencies, with the overall objective of creating an effective institutional framework 
that will guide the process of designing and implementing projects that are earmarked to fast 
track realization of development targets envisaged in the various sector strategic plans, the 
Seven Year Government Program and the EDPRS, all drawn from the Rwanda’s Vision 2020.  
95. 
The SPIUs are strategically positioned to manage the ongoing and planned as well as 
future projects identified in the course of translating sector strategic plans into development 
results. It further serves as repository of knowledge on lessons of experience accumulated in 
the course of implementing and closing the completed projects. The benefits to be derived 
from the established SPIUs include among others: (i) realization of economies of scale and 
reduction  of  transaction  costs;  (ii)  improved  coordination  and  creation  of  synergy;  (iii) 
efficiency and effectiveness in project implementation oversight through improved M&E; (iv) 
improved  staff  retention leading to  reduction  in  staff  turnover  and  increase  in institutional 
memory,  and  (v)  increased  knowledge  and  expertise  as  well  as  best  practices  in  project 
management. 
The Lead Project Agency23 has been shifted from the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal 
96. 
Resources  (MINAGRI)  to  Rwanda  Agriculture Board  (RAB)  for  the  implementation  of  RDDP 
and  PASP,  and  to  National  Agricultural  and  Export  Development  Board  (NAEB)  for  the 
implementation  of  PRICE.  Effective  from  July  2017  and  following  the  official  letter  from 
MINECOFIN to IFAD dated 27 March 2017, it was decided that the MINAGRI will have the role 
of  making  policies  while  implementation,  management  and  monitoring  of  projects  and 
programs will be transferred to the implementation agencies such as RAB and NAEB. 
97. 
The Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB) is an autonomous body established by LAW 
N°38/2010  of  25/11/2010.  The  law  specifies  that:  RAB  has  the  general  mission  of 
championing the agriculture sector development into a knowledge-based; technology-driven 
and market-oriented industry, using modern methods in crop, animal, fisheries, forestry and 
soil and water management in food, fiber and fuel wood production and processing. 
98. 
The National Agricultural Export Development Board (NAEB) is registered under 
the MINAGRI. Rwanda Tea Development Authority (OCIR THE), Rwanda Coffee Development 
Authority  (OCIR  CAFE)  and  Rwanda  Horticulture  Development  Authority  (RHODA)  were 
merged in 2011 to form NAEB. The formation of the NAEB is aimed to improve the balance of 
payment  of  the  Rwandan  economy  through  increased  agricultural  exports  and  import 
substitution. NAEB was set up by bringing together three government agencies responsible 
for the entire Agriculture Export and cash crop base under one management 
23 Lead Project Agency means the entity designated as such in an Agreement, which has overall responsibility for the 
execution of a Project 
29 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
I.3.2: PROJECT GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES  
99. 
The Project Steering Committee (PSC) KIIWP2 will use the same PSC as KIIWP1.It 
is  headed by the  permanent secretary of the  Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
and will include, the chair person of RAB, the Mayor of Kayonza, the Director General RCA, 
the Deputy Director General of RAB in charge of agricultrue and technology transfer, the Head 
of Departement for activity on Irrigation RAB, other representatives of MINAGRI such as the 
Director General of Agricultural Development, the Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC), 
the  Representative  of  MINICOM,  MINICOFIN,  the  Representative  for  the  MoE,  the 
Representative of Rwanda Development Board, the SPIU coordinator as the secretary of the 
PSC.  The  PSC  with  this  configuration  will  ensure  the  project  oversight  for  a  sound  and 
integrated implementation as well as will approve the AWPB before seding it to IFAD for the 
No-Objection and will meet twice a year. 
100.  The  PSC  will  be  also  active  during  the  year  and  will  invitemembers  of  the  District 
Council, members representing the farmers,  Farmers’ Organizations  (FOs), WUOs, LWUOs, 
NGOs  and local institutions from the public and private sectors’ participating.  This steering 
committee configuration is due to meet at least three times yearly, once to review the draft 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and again to review the implementation progress. It 
will  be  responsible  for  the technical  oversight of  the  implementation  of the  AWPB  and the 
Project’s  integration  into  the  district  structure,  as  well  as  ensuring  also  sectoral  and 
implementation coordination.  
I.3.3: LEAD AGENCY AND PROJECT COORDINATION 
101.  The Lead Project Agency for KIIWP will be the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB) which 
will have the overall responsibility for the coordination and execution of the project. Though 
the  MINAGRI  PS  is  currently  the  Chief  Budget  Officer,  it  is  expected  that  this  role  will  be 
shifted to RAB in the implementation of KIIWP, as well as the implementation of the ongoing 
projects: RDDP and PASP. 
102.  KIIWP will be integrated within the Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) of IFAD 
projects (PASP and RDDP) that are under RAB. The SPIU Coordinator will also oversee and 
coordinate KIIWP2 activities that will be implemented at both the central and district level.  
103.  The  SPIU  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  planning  of  project  activities;  guiding, 
supporting and supervising project implementation; procuring goods and services; financial 
management of the project resources; and monitoring and reporting on implementation and 
financial  progress.  It  will  work  with  MINAGRI  and  other  line  ministries  and  government 
services; and through RAB will collaborate with smallholder dairy farmers, dairy processers 
and other value chain actors, service providers and relevant development initiatives. It will 
play  a  leadership  role  in  terms  of  the  project’s  private  sector  orientation  and  will  be  an 
advocate  for  a  more  private  sector-friendly  investment  climate; it  will ensure the  project’s 
commitment to poverty targeting, and –in particular –to involving women and youth in project 
activities; and it will also support climate-smart approaches for dairy development.  
30 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Figure 1. RAB Organigram 
31 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Figure 2. Organizational structure of Kayonza district 
104.  Staffing  At  Central  SPIU  level,  KIIWP1  already  existing  personnel  and  additional 
personnel (*) will be the same for KIIWP2 plus new extra staff required to support the project:   
a.  A KIIWP Programme Manager;  
b.  A KIIWP Accountant; 
c.  An M&E Officer;  
d.  An Irrigation Engineer Specialist;  
e.  A Procurement Specialist*. 
f.  Climate and Environment Specialist 
g.  Civil Engineering Specialist  
h.  Cooperative Development Specialist 
i.  Social Safeguard and Compliance Specialist  
j.  Access to Finance Specialist 
k.  GIS Specialist* 
l.  Drivers 
Additionally,  a  Procurement  Assistant  and  a  GIS  Specialist  will  be  added  as  cross  cutting 
member  of  SPIU  staff.  The  terms  of reference  for  both  positions    are included in  annex  1 
below. 
32 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
105.  At  the  district  level,  implementation  will  be  monitored  by  the  Director  in  charge  of 
agriculture in collaboration with existing staff. The following existing and additional staff ( *) 
will be recruited by the project in order to support the district:  
a.  Watershed Management Officer 
b.  Value Chain Development/Agribusiness Specialist 
c.  Electromechanical Engineer Specialist 
d.  Senior Agronomist and FFS Specialist* 
e.  Land Husbandry Specialist  
f.  Accountant for KIIWP transaction at District 
g.  Irrigation Technitian 
h.  Irrigation Technitian 
i.  Water Users’ Association Officer 
j.  Horticulture Specialist  
k.  Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist* 
106.  The above personnel will be recruited and paid by the SPIU since these positions are 
not  part  of  the  mandated national structure  for  all  districts. However,  in  order  to promote 
local government involvement and ownership, the contracting and performance management 
of the said staff will be delegated to the district officials.The project distirct unit will work hand 
in hand and integrate district level staff in implementation activities and coordination as well 
as in capacity building needs in order to ensure a sound exit strategty and sustainability of 
interventions  These  arrangements  are  line  with  current  implementation  arrangements  of 
IFAD-supported  projects  (namely  PASP  and  RDDP)  under  the  SPIU  that  pay  directly  the 
salaries of their field staff attached to the districts. 
I.3.4: POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTING ENTITIES AND SERVICE PROVIDERS  
107.  MINAGRI  will  maintain  an  oversight  role  and  lead  the  policy  interventions  and 
dialogue for the sector in general and for KIIWP implementation in particular. The Permanent 
secretary in MINAGRI will maintain the role of Chair within the steering committee of KIIWP; 
108.  The  SPIU  will  establish  partnerships  and  service  provision  agreements  trough 
Memorandums  of  Understanding  (MoU)  (see  Annex  5)  that  will include  budget  allocations, 
activities and responsibilities on the project of each entity.  
109.  The following are the pre-identified implementing entities:  
110.  Rwanda  Cooperative  Agency  (RCA)  promotes,  regulates  and  supervises  the 
grouping of a large number of smallholders into more effective market-oriented cooperative 
organizations.  RCA  was  created  through  Law  n°  16/2008  of  11.06.2008  which  is  strongly 
related  with  Law  n°  50/2007  of  18.09.2007  adopted  by  the  Parliament  to  determine  the 
establishment, organization and functioning of Cooperative Organizations in Rwanda. RCA is 
in charge  of several  activities  connected  with the  creation  and supervision  of cooperatives 
including:  registering,  regulating  and  supervising  cooperatives;  setting  standards  and 
formulating  professional  ethics  for  prudent  management;  assisting  with  capacity  building 
through training and seminars; encouraging the cooperative movement to take advantage of 
investment opportunities at national, regional and international levels; carrying out research 
and studies; advising the Government; and developing good relations and collaborating with 
other agencies carrying out similar missions. 
111.  With  respect  to  KWIMP  implementation,  the  RCA  will  be  responsible  for  several 
activities connected with the creation and supervision of cooperatives including: registering, 
regulating and supervising cooperatives; assisting with capacity building through training and 
seminars. 
33 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
112.  Rwanda  Capacity  Development  and  Employment  Services  Board  (CESB) 
established  under  the  Law  Nº43/2016  of  18/10/2016  is  strategically  positioned  under  the 
Ministry of Public Service and Labour (MIFOTRA). CESB aspires to be a center of reference 
and support engine for Capacity Development (CD) interventions and Employment Promotion 
advisory services in the Country. Its mission include, among others: (i) advise Government 
on  the  implementation  of  institutional  capacity-building  and  human  resource  development 
strategies and how to match them with employment promotion;(ii) monitor and coordinate 
the  implementation  of  the  national  institutional  capacity-building  and  human  resource 
development strategies and those related to employment promotion; (iii) play a role in the 
national  institutional  capacity-building  and  human  resource  development  planning;  (iv) 
manage the National Capacity Development Fund and mobilize resources for initiatives under 
capacity development and employment promotion.  
The Rwanda Center of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management 
(CoEB)24  would be a  partner  for  monitoring the ecosystems  and landscape restoration and 
rehabilitation  measures.  The  CoEB  would  provide  technical  backstopping  to  enhance  the 
knowledge of biodiversity and natural resource management for sustainable development and 
community resilience. As per its mandate, the CoEB would support the Project to implement 
the catchment management plans and all mitigations measures listed under the ESMPs and 
hence contribute to the SDG 15, to ensure conservation, restoration and sustainable use of 
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and their services.  
113.  Other  partner  entities  and  service  providers  will  be  identified  during  the  project 
implementation.  
I.3.5: PARTNERSHIPS  
114.  Access  to  Finance  Rwanda  (AFR)  has  the  core  objective  of  stimulating  the 
development  of  the  financial  sector  in  Rwanda.  AFR’s  intention  is  to  remove  the  systemic 
barriers that hinder access to financial services by putting the low income people particularly 
the rural poor and women at the center of its interventions. AFR supports the development 
and  provision  of  financial  services  including  savings,  credit,  insurance,  payments  and 
remittances. AFR is funded by DFID, Sweden, USAID, the MasterCard Foundation and KfW. 
For  KIIWP  implementation,  collaboration  with  AFR  would  be  explored  in  policy  dialogue  in 
rural finance and for specific instruments that are relevant for KIIWP implementation. 
115.  ICCO:  A  partnership  with  ICCO,  as  potential  co-financier  of  KIIWP2,  would  mainly 
scale-up  Component  B.  The  collaboration  would  allow  leveraging  the  support  to  MFIs  in 
Kayonza (Umutanguha, RIM, Goshen, Duterimbere, etc.), to SMEs, cooperatives and private 
value  chain  actors.  ICCO  has  prepared  a  concept  note  on  partnering  with  KIIWP2  with 
innovative  proposals  on:  (i)  access  to  equipment,  (ii)  mobilizing  youth  for  equipment 
maintenance; (iii) access to agricultural finance with a focus on digital agri-credit assessment 
tool  and  capacity  building  of  financial  institutions;  (iv)  agri-innovation  challenge  fund  to 
stimulate  innovation in  agricultural  sector;  (v) value  chain  development  including  capacity 
building of farmer organizations and business development service; (vi) digital solutions for 
agriculture; (vii) strengthening of VSLAs with focus on women and youth; and (viii) program 
embedded  reflection  and  learning.  ICCO  Cooperation/CORDAID  is  prepared  to  cofinance 
KIIWP2 for an amount of USD 500,000. In addition, ICCO submitted a proposal to the IFAD 
SSTC-China  grant  window  and  if  successful,  the  grant  (USD  500,000)  is  expected  to 
complement  KIIWP2.  Finally,  ICCO’s  partners  such  as  FarmFit  Fund  and  Rabobank  are 
organized to support  SMEs  and  MFIs,  respectively,  through loans  with  a tentative  value  of 
USD 400,000 from each partner. In total, the partnership with ICCO Rwanda could potentially 
add approximately USD 1.8 million to the KIIWP2 funds. 
116.  Business  Development  Fund  (BDF):  Established  in  2011  as  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary  of  the  Development  Bank  of  Rwanda  (BRD),  BDF  has  the  objective  of  assisting 
24 CoEB functions as a consortium of governmental and non-governmental research and higher learning institutions 
in Rwanda called nodes, coordinated by the central hub office at University of Rwanda in the College of Science and 
Technology. 
34 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
SMEs to access finance, particularly those without sufficient collateral to obtain credit from 
traditional financial institutions at reasonable rates. For KIIWP implementation, collaboration 
with BDF could be explored, especially with the Guarantee Fund and matching grant schemes 
currently  managed  by  BDF  and  financed  by  PASP,  PRICE  and  RDDP  The  BDF  would  be  a 
potential  partner  to  manage  the  grant  windows  foreseen  in  KIIWP2,  given  its  thorough 
experience,  outreach  capacity  (through  district  offices)  and  recently  digitalized  application 
process. 
117.  One  Acre  Fund  have  a  strong  presence  in  Kayonza  and  activities  that  could 
complement  KIIWP2.  Entry  points  for  cooperation,  synergies  and  complementarities  could 
include:  irrigation pump  provision  model  piloting  and  scale-up;  value  chain  development: 
agro-dealer credit provision and agronomic training, market creation, for some value chains 
they aggregate produce and bring to off-takers; extension services training with RAB. They 
have  four  key  programmes.  Through  the  core  programme  which  has  large  outreach  in 
Kayonza, One Acre Fund has field officers in every cell, each cell having 300 to 400 farmers 
enrolled into groups. It providers  different inputs  such as  seed and fertilizer on credit, the 
cost  of  which  are  protected  with  agricultural  insurance.  Extension  services  including  in 
agronomy and post-harvest storage are provided by the field officers. In addition, One Acre 
Fund  sometimes  act  as  an  aggregator  of  produce  to  and  deliver  to  buyers.  The  Extension 
Programme  of  One  Acre  Fund  is  a  cooperation  with  RAB’s  extension  service  programme, 
focused  on  training  activities.  Within  the  Rural  Retail  Programme,  One  Acre  Fund  provide 
credit  and  agronomic  training  with  agro-dealer  shops.  Lastly,  One  Acre  Fund  have  been 
working on provision of solar PayGo technology, and in 2021 will start piloting a PayGo model 
for irrigation pumps. 
118.  Africa  Improved  Food/DSM:  is  a  public-private  partnership  involving  DSM, 
Government  of  Rwanda,  IFC,  CDC  Group  and  FMO.  Partnership  will  be  sought  under 
Subcomponent A4 and B3 by proving agriculture inputs and knowhow to prepare ToT for FFS, 
as  well  as  possible  agribusiness  agreements  with  cooperatives  to  purchase  maize  and 
soybean. 
119.  World Food Program (WFP). Potential partnerships include the SMART project and 
Farm-to-Market-Alliance  (FtMA)  plus  complementarity  of  intervention  at  district  level  (for 
more details of the potential partnership see Annex 6). The SMART WFP/KOICA funded project 
(2020- 2023) is scaling up interventions carried out in western and southern provinces since 
2012. The project merges climate resilience with social protection and value chain support, 
targeting  180,000  individuals  from  the  poorest  categories  (Ubudehe  1  and  2)  channelling 
interventions through formal and informal farmers groups and linking farmers to the Home-
Grown School Feeding Programme (HGSFP). It is implemented in Kayonza and specifically in 
Murama sector. FtMA works through a demand-led approach to sustainably improve farmer 
livelihoods and develop commercial viability of value chain stakeholders. FtMA promotes the 
growth  of  viable  smallholder  facing  business  models  through  strategic  partnerships  and 
catalyses  farmer-friendly  investments  into  crop  value  chains.  A  partnership  with  WFP  can 
further  be  explored  in  the  context  of  KIIWP2  in  relation  to  access  to  savings,  credit  and 
insurance,  as  well  as  capacity  building  of  cooperatives,  post-harvest  capacity,  linkage  with 
buyers/financial  sector.  Potential  synergies  could  be  linking  financial  products  of  MFIs  and 
SACCOs with Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) within the targeted cooperatives, 
facilitated  by  WFP,  as  well  as  creating  links  between  SMEs  crowded  into  the  FtMA  and 
matching-grants under KIIWP2. Other possible partnership areas include Nutrition sensitive 
and climate smart practices, promotion of nutritious foods and market linkages through the 
HGSFP, community  mobilization  and  engagement  approach  and linking to finance  support. 
Overall complementarities and scaling-up of interventions are as follows :  
 Sub-component A1. Community-driven development approaches; 
 
  Sub-component A3. Exchanges on nutrition-sensitive and climate-smart practices, 
promotion of nutritious foods and market linkages through the HGSFP, community 
mobilization and engagement approach and linking to finance support.;  
  Sub-component B3. Market analysis and selection of nutrient rich crops with 
potential for local market and public procurement; 
35 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Sub-component Access to quality seeds and improved seeds, coupled with insurance 
(potential facilitation by WFP in coordination with RAB; 
  Sub-component B1, B3. (a) capacity building of cooperatives, post-harvest capacity, 
4Ps; (b) synergies to link financial products of MFIs and SACCOs with VSLAs within the 
targeted cooperatives, (c) linkages between SMEs crowded into the FtMA and Matching 
Grants. 
120.  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO).  Potential  partnership  with  FAO, 
particularly on technical assistance will be pursued due to FAO technical expertise on various 
key  aspects  of  KIIWP2  such  as  CSA,  sustainable  mechanization,  FFS,  nutrition  and  social 
inclusion  aspects.  FAO  together  with  the  World  Bank  is  currently  implementing  a  GASFP 
project Sustainable Agricultural Intensification for  Improved Livelihoods, Food Security and 
Nutrition Project (SAIP), covering also Kayonza district and addressing several common areas 
with KIIWP2, such as irrigation, WUAs capacity building, and CSA. FAO Rwanda has also the 
Technical Assistance to Sustainable Agriculture Intensification  
121.  The World Bank Group is planning a USD 300 million nationwide investment to start 
in September 2021 (pending design validation and approval). Approximately USD 80 million 
is planned to de-risk the agricultural sector in order to support value chain development. The 
World Bank have already carried out an assessment of NAIS and has been discussing options 
for support. Five pillars of support have been proposed to be further defined: 1. Establish an 
appropriate  institutional  framework  for  NAIS:  2.  Collect  and  manage  data  for  agricultural 
insurance; 3. Adopt a smart premium subsidies regime; 4. Expanding investments in financial 
education  and  awareness  creation;  and  5.  Supporting  the  scale-up  of  digital  services  for 
insurance. The planned investments of KIIWP2 in insurance would benefit the development 
of NAIS. The proposed insurance activities therefore contribute to the planned support, whilst 
further  partnership  could  ensure  KIIWP2  beneficiaries  and  cooperating  institutions  would 
benefit from some of the planned support. 
122.  Programme  and  the  implementation  of  the  Nutrition-sensitive  Water  Productivity 
(NsWP) grant, piloting the NsWP methodology from which KIIWP2 could leverage on. 
123.  Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). AGRA works with partners and 
the  Government  of  Rwanda  to  increase  incentives  for  private  sector  participation  and 
investment into the sector while also enhancing access to finance and markets; the adoption 
of  climate  smart  technologies  and  use  of  inputs  (seeds  and  fertilizer).  AGRA  has  also 
supported policy development on seed sector as well as capacity building. Possible areas of 
partnership are on capacity building on government staff, farmers’ linkages with markets and 
the private sector, as well as access to inputs and financial services. 
I.3.6. COOPERATION AND LINKAGES WITH OTHER IFAD PROGRAMMES IN THE AREA 
124. 
 The  IFAD-funded “Climate Resilient Post-Harvest and Agribusiness Support 
Project” (PASP)  is  also  implemented in Kayonza and has co-financed seven post-harvest 
structures  in  the  dairy,  maize  and  bean  value  chains.  KIIWP  will  ensure  beneficiaries  are 
connected to these structures, and build on lessons learned on post-harvest management, 
cooperatives capacity building and forage production. 
125.  The IFAD-funded Rwanda Dairy Development Program (RDDP) is operational in 
12 districts of four Provinces of Rwanda: East (Nyagatare, Rwamagana, and Kayonza), North 
(Gicumbi, Burera, and Musanze), West (Nyabihu, Rubavu and Rutsiro) and South (Nyanza, 
Huye, and Ruhango). It focuses on developing the dairy value chain through improving cattle 
productivity, milk quality and processing capacity of the dairy industry, and strengthening the 
policy and institutional framework for the sector. Synergies will be created in Kayonza district, 
especially in dairy development and water for livestock. 
126.  The  IFAD-funded  Project  for  Rural  Income  through  Exports  (PRICE)  is  a 
country-wide  project  focusing  on  the  establishment  of  pro-poor  cash  crop  value  chains 
involving  smallholder  production  and  early  transformation  in  partnership  with  private 
36 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
operators. Under KIIWP, synergies will be established under the development of horticulture 
value chains for both domestic and export markets. 
127.  IFAD grants with FAO and Kilimo Trust. The Nutrition-sensitive Water Productivity 
(NsWP) IFAD funded grant, implemented by FAO, was launched in Rwanda on November 2020 
and will be executed during the next three years in the frame of KIIWP. The project aims to 
improve  dietary  quality  through  agricultural  production,  by  strengthening the  capacities  of 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of sustainable water management and nutrition sensitive 
agricultural practices. This  will be achieved through the adoption of an NsWP methodology 
and guidelines that will include the selection of smart crops, the delivery of nutrition trainings 
and  the  CSA  practices  through the FFS  model. In this  context,  KIIWP2  will  be  able to rely 
upon and upscale the NsWP methodology and practices in the FFS.  
128.  The R-YES project is coordinated by Kilimo Trust and implemented by a consortium of 
institutions  including  RYAF, the  African Agribusiness  Incubators  Network,  the Rwanda 
Polytechnic  (RP)  with  affiliated  vocational  Training  Centres  (VTCs),  Integrated  Polytechnic 
Regional Colleges (IPRCs) and Business Incubation Centres (BICs) among others. Overall, the 
grant intends to target 1,200 youth, of which 50 per cent women. The project will identify 
opportunities for youth employment along selected value chains and provide capacity building 
(through  VTC  and  colleges)  to  enable  young  women  and  men  to  join  employment 
opportunities  and  will  identify  strategic  partners  to  link  youth  graduated  with  agribusiness 
enterprises  and  BDFs. A  network  of  sub-Hubs  will  be  established  at  the  provincial  level  to 
facilitate  these  linkages.  KIIWP2  will  liaise  with  the  grant  to  identify  job  opportunities  for 
young  people  for  the  supported  value  chains  and  the  provision  of  capacity  building  and 
trainings and link to financial services. Graduate youth would be also employed by the Project 
as service providers. 
37 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
II.1: COMPONENT A: STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE TO DROUGHTS 
129.  The expected Outcome for Component A is to strengthened farmers resilience to 
drought.This  component  will  invest  in  catchment  rehabilitation  and  infrastructure 
development  that  will  improve  water  supply  for  intensive  smallholder  agriculture  and 
livestock, in addition to those financed under KIIWP1. 
130.  KIIWP1 will undertake the feasibility studies  and ESIA of the irrigation schemes, as 
well as the major part of catchment rehabilitation and protection (Sub-component A.1), while 
supporting the establishment and initial training of the infrastructure management institutions 
(Sub-component A.2). KIIWP2 will build further on these achievements and will finance the 
irrigation works (Subcomponent A.2), as well as the promotion of climate-smart agriculture 
practices  and  technologies  (Sub-component  A.3).  KIIWP2  will  continue  strengthening  the 
infrastructure management institutions. 
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements  
131.  The  Component  will  be  coordinated  by  the  SPIU/RAB  irrigations    specialist  in  close 
collaboration with the land husbandary specialist —who will coordinate Sub-component A1—
as  well as the  Senior Agronomist, the FFS Specialist  —who will coordinate Sub-Component 
A.3 — and the Water Users’ Association Officer — who will coordinate Sub-component A.2. 
The irrigation technical assistant (TA) to be recruited for sub-component A2, the Climate and 
Environment Specialist and the Social Inclusion, Gender and Youth Specialist,  will take a key 
role in supporting the implementation of the component activities. At district level, the District 
Watershed management field officers  (DWMO); Land husbandry supervising engineers and 
the Irrigation Engineer (IE), cell tehnitians and Agronomists,  will facilitate the implementation 
of the component.  
Table 5. Complementarity of Component A and phasing with KIIWP1. 
Component A / Sub-components 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP2 
Component A: Strengthening Resilience to Drought 
A1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
A2: Irrigation Development  
A3: Infrastructure Management Institutions 
A4: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture Practices and 
Technologies  
USD 7.05 mio   USD 0.72mio 
USD 6.93 mio 
USD 0.27 mio 
USD 33.6 mio 
USD 1 mio 
USD 2.7 mio 
A5: Environnemental Management Plan  
USD 0.47 mio 
USD 0.823 mio 
SUB-COMPONENT .A.1: CATCHMENT REHABILITATION AND PROTECTION  
132.  This  sub-component  will  support  the 
implementation  of  participatory  and 
comprehensive  land  husbandry  practices  in  a  sub-catchment  setting.  It  will  support 
nvestments  in  infrastructure to  rehabilitate  and  protect the  degraded  farmlands  as  well  as 
considerably  reduce  the runoff  from  the catchments. The  sub-component  will  also  support 
water for livestock and domestic water purposes. The interventions in catchment protection 
and rehabilitation will be selected with a view to reducing the volume and velocity of runoff 
and allow for  rainwater to infiltrate in the soil.  This will be combined with land husbandry 
practices geared towards increasing vegetative cover in the farms which will increase the soil 
fertility and further reduce the erosive force of rainfall. 
 Sub-component A.1 activities and phasing 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP2 
ESIAS and Feasibility Studies 
Community-based participatory sub-catchment management 
planning involving Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs 
Establishment of exact boundaries of the catchments and sub-
catchments in Kayonza District through Geographic 
Information System (GIS) mapping. 
38 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
 Sub-component A.1 activities and phasing 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP2 
20 solar-powered boreholes and 15 valley tanks in Ndego, 
Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi sectors. 
Land husbandry investment, including reforestation and 
afforestation 
Community competition (Inteko y’Imihigo) 
133. 
Implementation of activities in this subcomponent will be driven by the following key 
staff who the SPIU will hire at the start of implementation: Land Husbandry Specialist (LHS); 
District Watershed management field officers (DWMO); Land husbandry supervising engineers 
when required and the Irrigation Engineer (IE) for rainwater harvesting. The SPIU will contract 
the  following  service  providers  (SP)  to  support  implementation  of  activities  under  this 
subcomponent. 
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements 
134.  At SPIU level: a land husbandry expert to be recruited for the overall coordination of 
land  husbandry  activities.  He  /She  will  also  be  in  charge  of  ToRs,  preparation  of  Land 
husbandry  guidelines,  land  husbandry  contracts  management,  preparation  of  annual  work 
plans and budget as well as different documents as required in land husbandry. 
135.  At district level: land husbandry field officers per site to be recruited by SPIU/RAB 
for  supervision  of  land  husbandry  technologies  implementation  activities  to  ensure  better 
quality of the works. 
  A  catchment  level  (hill  sides): Sub  catchment  committees  to  be  established  to 
participate in development of sub-catchment plans, including where land husbandry 
activities will be carried out as well as oversee the implementation of the activities. 
  At  command  area  level:  WUOs  who  actively  participate  in  operation  and 
maintenance of infrastructures for livestock and domestic water supply purposes. 
Land husbandry 
136.  The  project  will  introduce  land  husbandry  investment  in  addition  to  those  under 
KIIWP1, more specifically : 
a.  In Kanyegenyege and Gishanda catchments; 
b.  in 1400 ha command area catchment in Kibare, ihema and Nasho; 
c.  and reforestation as upstream protection for Gishanda and Kanyegenyege dam. 
137.  Farmland protection and rehabilitation techniques will reduce runoff of rainwater and 
stimulate  infiltration.  This  will  be  combined  with  land  husbandry  practices  geared  towards 
increasing vegetative cover and soil fertility. The recommended technologies include drainage, 
land  levelling  (terracing),  contour  buffer  strips,  contour  ditches,  contour  bunds,  contour 
ploughing, silt traps and application of lime, mulching and compost. Where needed, slowing 
down runoff by construction of check dams, gabions, and side drains  will be implemented. 
These will be complimented with agro-forestry, including planting of trees, shrubs and grasses 
as well as pastures. 
Table 6. Land husbandry, activities step. 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Preparation  of land husbandry guidelines that will be applicable for each 
of the agro climatic zones 
LHS 
Mobilization  of  the  local  authorities,  opinion  leaders,  farmers,  through 
contacts and awareness meetings 
SP/LHS/ DWMO 
Refresher  course  for  the  land  husbandry  field  technicians  and  local 
leaders of on land husbandry technologies and their implementation 
SP 
Carry out an assessment and prioritize the areas that will require to be 
rehabilitated  
SP/LHS/Farmers 
39 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
SP 
SP  
Community 
Approach 
community 
No. 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Production  a  detailed  and  farmer-friendly  manual  on  trees/shrub, 
grass/legume and fruit trees management as well as a selection of crops 
suitable for the zone including the crop husbandry.  
DWMO 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Training 
implementation, management and maintenance 
the  communities 
  on 
land  husbandry 
technologies 
SP/DWMO 
Provision of lime and organic manure 
Establishing  tree/shrub,  grass/legume  seed  multiplication  and  fruits 
nurseries with seed and equipment stores as recommended at least one 
per project site 
9 
Establishing nurseries for other agro forestry trees 
10  Operation and maintenance of land husbandry infrastructure  
11 
Continuous monitoring  of  operation, maintenance  and  sustainability  of 
land husbandry infrastructures 
Sub-catchment 
Committees 
Farm level rainwater harvesting 
Table 7. Farm level rainwater harvesting, activities step 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Activity 
Mobilization of the local authorities, opinion leaders, farmers, 
through contacts and awareness meetings 
Develop criteria of farmers to be supported with farm ponds 
Identification  of  the  farmers  that  will  be  supported  to 
implement the farm ponds in target sectors and local artisans 
to be trained in the technology 
Responsibility 
SP/LHS/ DWMO 
LHS/IE/District 
officer,(DAO) 
LHS/IE/DAO/Farmers, 
agriculture 
Design of rainwater harvesting systems 
Training  artisans  on  the  rainwater  harvesting  technology 
including: 
SP 
SP 
  construction of the ponds 
  the rainwater harvesting system (from the farm runoff as 
well  as  from  roofs  in  the  homestead  including  gutter 
installation); 
  connection to farm ponds;  
  the system for pumping water from the pond to the elevated 
storage tank;  
  Gravity-fed system to the drip system on the farm; and, 
  protection of the pond (fencing and shade net roofing) 
Providing the materials for pond construction (dam liner, 
roofing metallic structure, roofing net, shading, drip kit, 
pump and tanks 
SP 
6a 
Preparation of ESMPs 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Construction of farm ponds in the various farms 
SP/Artisans/Farmers 
Supervision of the construction works 
Irrigation Engineer 
Operations and maintenance 
Farmers 
Continuous  monitoring  of  operation,  maintenance  and 
sustainability of ponds and irrigation systems 
Sub-catchment Committees 
40 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 8. Land-husbandry-measures for the different slopes 
No 
1 
Slope Category 
Land-husbandry Measures 
Nearly level to strongly 
undulating (Slope 0-6%) 
Grass strips/trash lines (~1km /ha) 
Agro-forestry interventions 
2 
Gently rolling to strongly 
rolling (slope 6- 16%) 
intercropping with plant cover and green manuring 
Applying manure/compose at the rate of 10tons/ha 
Mulching 
Grass strips/trash lines (~1km /ha) 
Construction of soil bunds (1km/ha) (level or graded as per 
agro climatic zone 
Planting  trees/shrubs  along  the  lower  side  supporting  the 
bunds 
intercropping and green manuring 
Applying manure /compost at 10 tons/ha and mulching 
3 
Hilly to steep (slope 16 –40%)  Constructing Bench (radical) terraces (1.86km/ha) 
Planting  trees/shrubs  along  the  lower  side  supporting  the 
radical terraces 
intercropping and green manuring 
liming with agricultural lime at 3 tons/ha 
Applying manure /compost at 10 tons/ha and mulching 
4 
Very steep (slope 40 –60%) 
Constructing progressive terraces (~5 km/ha) 
Intercropping and green manuring 
5 
Extremely step (slope >60%) 
Constructing micro-basins with tree planting at 1000/ha 
Planting tree seedlings at 1000/ha 
Water for livestock and domestic purposes 
138.  The supply of water for livestock and domestic purposes will be improved through the 
development of valley tanks and drilling and equipping boreholes under KIIWP1. The selection 
of where to invest in livestock watering facilities will be informed by the need to evenly spread 
the grazing areas across the sectors to minimize overgrazing. Selection of where the watering 
facilities  will  be  constructed  it  to  be  done  through  participatory  assessments  in  the  sub-
catchments. The selection of these  sites  will be part of the development of sub-catchment 
plans that will be produced under sub-component A.3.  
a.  Drilling of boreholes and construction of valley tanks are technical activities for 
which the SPIU will hire services providers as follows: 
b.  A drilling contractor with capacity to undertake hydro-geological investigations 
and experience in drilling and equipping of the boreholes; 
c.  A consultancy firm with experience in design and supervision of construction of 
valley tanks; and 
d.  A contractor with experience in valley tanks construction. 
Community competitions for natural resource management 
139.  The  community  competition  (Inteko  y’Imihigo)  is  a  tool  for  mobilizing  the 
community  for  a  better  involvement  in  the  development  and  sustainable  management  of 
41 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
watersheds. The competition aim at encouraging farmers to mobilize and become key actors 
in  the  development  and  implementation  of  projects  in  line  with  the  priority  interventions 
identified  in  the  catchment  management  plans  and  which  will  have  a  significant  impact  in 
coping with the effects  of climate change and protecting and conserving their ecosystems. 
Potential projects include beekeeping, provision of energy saving stoves, rainwater-harvesting 
infrastructures (e.g. ferro-cement boreholes), sustainable production of charcoal as a youth 
business,  eco-tourism,  and  biodiversity  conservation  through  plantation  of  endemic  trees 
species in their farm plot.  
Eligible beneficiaries 
140.  Two  types  of  actors  can  participate  in  these  competitions:  (i)  groups/associations 
engaged  in  agricultural  value  chains  and  (ii)  villages  located  in  the  hydrographic  basin 
targeted by KIIWP project.  
Number of grants 
50 
Financing rule 
- IFAD grant 70% 
- Beneficiary contribution 30% (in cash) 
Max grant ceiling 
US$ 5,000 
Overall project budget 
175,000 USD ( 70% of IFAD investment) 
Steps for implementing the community competition 
141.  Group  discussion  on  ideas  on  natural  resource  managemnt.  A  group/ 
association or a village will gather and discuss about ideas for improving the management of 
their natural resources and ecosystems in their sub-catchment area. The simplified Business 
Plan  proposal  shall  clearly  state  the  priorities  identified  within the  catchment  management 
plan.  When  finalised,  it  shall  be  submitted  to  the  hydrographic  basin  committee  for 
endorsement. The group/ association or village shall provide a proof of their legal existence 
(certificate for groups and stamps from village authorities on the proposal).  
142.  As per the Ministerial Order, the hydrographic basin committee meets once per quarter 
and when never necessary. As such, the community competition will be organised in line with 
the hydro-graphic basin committee meetings. The competition shall be planned on the agenda 
of the committee.  
143.  The  proposal  shall  be  publicly  presented  to  the  District  level  committee.  The 
elaboration  of  the  proposal  shall  be  participatory  and  inclusive.  As  such,  it  shall  include 
handmade  sketching  of  the  area  that  will  be  targeted  (mapping  depicting  the  natural 
resources in their areas, the status of the ecosystems, the rationale of the BPs, etc.).  
144.  The  hydrographic  basin  committee  at  sector  level,  which  include  representative  of 
farmers,  private  sector,  youth,  women,  and  sector  officials,  will  review  proposals  during 
hydrographic basin committee meetings.  
145.  The role of hydrographic basin committee is to assess the economic viability of the BPs 
and endorse it for potential financing via MG scheme within BDF. The sub-catchment committ 
eewill provide an endorsement letter to be attached to the proposal.  
146.  After that, the BDF will review and assess the BPs in coordination with KIIWP district 
staff. The list of successful BPs shall be shared with to the hydro-basin committee for public 
announcement.  
42 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) identified by the ESIAs 
147.  Under  this  Sub-component,  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs) 
Nidentified by the ESIAs25 for Kibare, Nasho, Ihema, Kanyeganyenge and Gishanda command 
areas will be implemented.  
148.  Overall, the ESMP for the full project recommends to: i) conduct rapid site biodiversity 
survey prior to construction of irrigation infrastructure to ensure that the Project will not have 
any negative impact on ecosystems (flora and fauna); and ii) elaborate an Integrated Pest 
Management  Plan  for  the  entire  Project  as  part  of  the  detailed  design  of  each  irrigation 
scheme. Specific ESMPs were developed for each command areas to tackle the following key 
adverse  impacts  associated  with  design  and  management  of  irrigation  system.  Below  are 
common and budgeted activities (further detailed within the cost tables for each command 
area:   
Activity 
Quantities 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Preparation  of  Environmental  management  and 
Rehabilitation  Plans  for  quarries,  borrow  pits  and 
working areas 
4 plans 
Preparation  and  Implementation  of  employment  and 
recruitment Policy including code of conduct 
1 policy  
Provision  for  workers  occupational  health  and  safety 
hazards 
1 plan 
First aid Kits and first aid helper will be provided at each 
working area 
1 
Training  of  drivers  and  preparation  of 
management plan 
traffic 
1 plan 
Sensitization on methods of HIV/AIDS prevention 
3 workshops 
Rapid  identification  survey  of  nesting  habitats  and 
relocation areas 
1 survey 
Preparation  and 
management plan 
implementation  of  borrow  pits 
1 plan 
Specific  area  restricted  to  only  authorize  personnel, 
should be allocated for fuel storage 
1 plan  
Alternative water points for livestock and domestic uses 
  water 
4 
points 
Sensitization  on  the  importance  of  wild  animals 
protection and reporting mechanism 
4 workshops 
Sensitization of community on ownership, sustainability 
and vandalism of infrastructure 
4 workshop 
Control  of  spread  of  water  borne  diseases  (bi-annual 
survey in project sites) 
10 surveys 
Provision of though for cattle in case of damages during 
the construction phase 
1 plan 
Control  of  water  weeds  (mechanical  and  manual 
removal of weeds) 
4 
149.  The  already  developed  Feasibility  Studies  and  ESIAs  for  Ihema,  Kibare  and  Nasho 
command areas have identified that no physical involuntary resettlements are expected, but 
around 200 households will lose part of their land and another more than 1,200 households 
will  lose  income  during  land  husbandry  work,  as  they  may  miss  one  or  more  agriculture 
seasons.  The  Resettlement  Action  Plans  (RAPs)  shall  be  prepared,  implemented  and  all 
compensation  measures  provided  prior  to  the  construction  works  or  land  take.  The  final 
25 ESIAs and feasibility studies were prepared during KIIWP1. 
43 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
budget for resettlement compensation will be confirmed after detailed engineering design and 
detailed resettlement action Plan.  
150.  The  Project  shall  implement  the  Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  Plan 
procedures developed in 2018, as Annex 5 of the PDR, within the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the various and required consultations processes 
(RAPs)  and  ensure  proactive  approach  to  identify  development  pathways  with  local 
communities and build ownership on project initiatives. 
151.  At the time of the design, feasibility studies as well as ESIAs for Kanyeganyenge and 
Gishanda command areas were not finalised. Therefore, specific activities to be implemented 
will be integrated in the cost tables as well as PIM during the start-up of KIIWP phase II.  
152. 
In addition, all ESMPs include no-budgeted activities that shall be mainstreamed in the 
Annual Work Plan and Budget and integrate in the action plan of the project. During the design 
of  the  irrigation  schemes  and  dams,  the  SPIU  shall  make  sure  that  the  contract  of  the 
contractors are aligned with the recommendations of the specific ESMP. 
Grievance redress mechanism 
153.  Establishment  of irrigation  schemes  may  raise  complaints  among local communities 
mainly  due  to  conflict  water  users,  from  resettlement,  conflict  between  workers  and  local 
community. In this situation, Grievance procedures are required to ensure that PAPs are able 
to  lodge  complaints  or  concerns,  without  cost,  and  with  the  assurance  of  a  timely  and 
satisfactory  resolution  of  the  issue.  The  procedures  also  ensure  that  the  entitlements  are 
effectively  transferred  to  the  intended  beneficiaries.  Stakeholders  will  be  informed  of  the 
intention to implement the grievance mechanism, and the procedure will be communicated 
at the time that the RAPs are finalized. Grievances may arise from members of communities 
who  are  dissatisfied  with  eligibility  criteria  use,  community  planning  and  actual 
implementation or compensation. In addition, the project will ensure that any issues related 
to  child  labour,  forced  labour  and  discrimination  are  carefully  considered  and  addressed  
throughout the project lifecyle.  
154.  The overall process of grievance is as follows: 
1.  Local community through water users association, Resettlement committees and 
local authorities will be given copies of grievance procedures as a guide on how to 
handle the grievances. 
2.  The process of grievance redress will start with registration of the grievances to be 
address for reference, and to enable progress updates of the cases. 
3.  The project will use a local mechanism, which includes resettlement committees, 
peers and local leaders of the affected people. These will ensure equity across cases, 
eliminate nuisance claims and satisfy legitimate claimants at low cost. 
4.  The response time will depend on the issue to be addressed but it should be 
addressed with efficiency. 
5.  Compensation will be paid to individual PAPs only after a written consent of the PAPs, 
including both husband and wife. 
Specific procedures:  
155.  The aggrieved person should file his/ her grievance, relating to any issue associated 
with  the  resettlement  process  or  compensation,  in  writing  to  the  block  Grievance  Redress 
Committee (GRC). The grievance note should be signed and dated by the aggrieved person. 
The designated RAB officer and the GRC will consult to determine the validity of claims. If 
valid, the Committee will notify the complainant and s/he will be assisted. GRC will respond 
within 7 days during which time any meetings and discussions to be held with the aggrieved 
person will be conducted. If the grievance relates to valuation of assets, a second or even a 
third  valuation  will  be  undertaken,  until  it  is  accepted  by  both  parties.  These  should  be 
undertaken  by  separate  independent  valuers  than  the  person  who  carried  out  the  initial 
valuation. 
44 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
If the aggrieved person does not receive a response or is not satisfied with the outcome 
156. 
within  the  agreed  time,  she/he  may  lodge  his/her  grievance  to  the  relevant  local 
administration such as the District Land Bureau, also mandated to help resolve such matters. 
If  requested,  or  deemed  necessary  by  the  subproject  Committee,  the  District  Project 
Coordination officer will assist the aggrieved person in this matter. 
157.  The relevant Local Administration will then attempt to resolve the problem (through 
dialogue and negotiation) within 30 days of the complaint being lodged. If no agreement is 
reached at this stage, then the complaint is dealt with through the local courts (Abunzi) where 
possible.  Where  matters  cannot  be  resolved  through  local  routes,  the  grievance  will  be 
referred  to  higher  authorities  at  the  national  level.  The  Resettlement  and  Compensation 
Committee will provide assistance at all stages to the aggrieved person to facilitate resolution 
of their complaint and ensure that the matter is addressed in the optimal way possible. 
If administrative ways of grievance redress is not enough to address the complaint, then the 
unsatisfied person may refer to judicial system. Based on the nature of complaints, the 
process will start from mediators for assets below 3 million Rwandan francs and if the value 
is more than three million, the process will start from intermediate courts, high court and to 
Supreme Court. The proposed grievance redress system is as illustrated follows: 
Figure 40: Proposed GRM flow chart 
158.  Grievance log. At each level, GRC will ensure that each complaint has an individual 
reference number, and is appropriately tracked and recorded actions are completed. The log 
will contain record of the person responsible for an individual complaint, and records dates 
for the following events: 
  Date the complaint was reported; 
  Date the Grievance Log was added onto the project database; 
  Date information on proposed corrective action sent to complainant (if appropriate); 
The date the complaint was closed out; and 
  Date response was sent to complainant. 
159.  The District Project Coordination officer will be responsible for: 
45 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Providing the resettlement and compensation committee with a weekly report detailing 
the number and status of complaints; 
Any outstanding issues to be addressed; and 
  Monthly reports, including analysis of the type of complaints, levels of complaints, 
actions to reduce complaints and initiator of such action. 
160.  Composition of GRC 
  Grievance redress committee should be inclusive and should include representative 
from: 
Representative from sectors 
Representative of cells that are affected 
Representative from any other key sector office involved in the project; 
Two representatives of PAP by cells (equal gender representation). 
Court of law 
  District Land Bureau 
Sector Executive Secretary 
Sector Grievance redress Committee 
Cell Executive secretary 
  Mediators committee (Abunzi) 
Block Grievance Redress Committee 
  District Grievance Redress Committee 
Representative of different water users( cattle keepers, Fishermen, farmers, Water users 
association etc) 
 Representative of women and youth 
Contractor representatives etc 
In  the  case  an  agreement  was  not  reached  through  the  project-level  GRM  and  national 
authorities (RAB and MINAGRI),  the PAPs may contact IFAD via the following email address 
(SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org)  or  send  a  complaint  form  to  IFAD  headquarters  physical 
address. IFAD complaints mechanism are further explained on the IFAD website26.Estimated 
budget for ESMPs implementation and monitoring 
161.  The  most  important  aspects  of  the  implementation  are  the  appointment  of  the 
Environmental  Specialist  to  oversee  the  implementation  of  the  environmental  mitigation 
measures incorporated in the design and contract specifications. Development and delivery 
of an environmental training program for selected staff and Project coordinators responsible 
for overseeing the construction contracts can commence immediately thereafter. This will be 
an  on-going  process  since  contracts  will  be  awarded  over  a  period  stretching  over  many 
months.  Most  of  the  planned  mitigation  measure  will  be  implemented  along  with  project 
activities  and  is  provided  in  specific  Environmental  Management  Plan  and  environmental 
monitoring Plans. 
SUB-COMPONENT A.2: IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT  
162.  This Sub-component will support smallholder farmers with water for irrigation27. The 
proposed  irrigation  infrastructure  is  made  of  two  categories;  i)  large  pumped  irrigation 
systems abstracting water from Kibare and Nasho Lakes in Kayonza District; ii) irrigation in 
marshlands and neighboring hillsides, which will require damming to harvest enough water 
for off-season supplementary irrigation. Expected outputs will also be the required operational 
Infrastructure  Management  Committees,  including  Scheme  Steering  Committees  (SSCs), 
26 https://www.ifad.org/en/accountability-and-complaints-procedures  
27 The feasibility studies will be financed under KIIWP1. 
46 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs)28, Irrigation Water Users Organizations (IWUOs) and 
Water for Livestock Water Users Organizations (WLUOs). After irrigation schemes completion 
and fulfilling all conditions, the IWUOs and WLUOs29 would sign an Infrastructure Management 
Transfer Agreement (IMTA) with RAB and co-signed by Kayonza District Authorities. 
163.  Subject  to  confirmation  of  the  development  costs  and  feasibility  assessment  of 
irrigation  schemes  (financed  under  KIIWP1),  KIIWP2  will  implement  2,285  ha  of  irrigation 
command area30 as follows:  
Scheme 
Sector 
Command 
Area 
Sub-Schemes 
(block) 
Type 
Water Source 
Kibare Irrigation 
Scheme 
Ihema Irrigation 
Scheme 
Nasho Irrigation 
Scheme 
Ndego 
570 ha 
Kibare 1 – 219 ha 
Kibare 2 – 112 ha 
Kibare 3 – 239 ha  
Ndego 
700 ha 
Ihema 1 – 85 ha 
Ihema 2 – 188 ha 
Ihema 3 – 161 ha 
Ihema 4 – 266 ha 
Kabare 
740 ha 
Nasho 1 – 309 ha 
Nasho 2- 218 ha 
Nasho 3 – 114 ha 
Nasho 4 – 99 ha 
Pumped 
irrigation 
Lake Kibare on 
Akagera River 
Pumped 
irrigation 
Lake Kibare on 
Akagera River 
Pumped 
irrigation 
Lake Nasho on 
the Akagera 
River 
Kanyeganyenge Dam 
and Irrigation Scheme 
Kabarondo 
and 
Ruramira 
150 ha 
Dam irrigation  Kanyeganyenge 
River 
Gishanda Dam and 
Irrigation Scheme 
Rwinkwavu 
125 ha 
Dam irrigation  Rwinkwavu 
River 
Note: Feasibility studies will determine the size of the reservoirs, but they are expected to be above one million m3 each. 
164.  Large pumped irrigation schemes: Three irrigation schemes  (Kibare, Ihema, Nasho) 
are envisaged to be constructed in KIIWP2. The three irrigation schemes are divided into 11 
sub-schemes.  The  11  sub-schemes  will  be  implemented  as  individual  (where  possible) 
standalone schemes that can be individually managed. As far as possible, each sub-scheme 
will be supplied by its individual pumping station and if not, one pumping station will supply 
more than 1 sub-schemes but with individual pipeline from the balancing reservoir. The infield 
irrigation technology to be used in Ihema, Kibare and Nasho schemes will be selected by the 
farmer’s cooperatives in a participatory manner that may include a full pressurized irrigation 
system  with  Center  Pivot  Technology  and  Dragline Sprinklers. The  preliminary  rationing  of 
the command area covered with pivots or dragline sprinklers is 60% and 40% respectively as 
an indicative figure. The detailed design will be free to  optimize and recommend a suitable 
rationing  based  on  prevailing  conditions  towards  optimizing  the  project  profitability.    The 
pumping station, water supply mains, distribution submains as well as the farm road, will be 
considered  as  public  investments,  while  infield  distribution  system  (pivots  and  dragline 
sprinklers) will be investments with famers’ contributions.  
165.  Once the detailed design for the 2,285-ha net command area completed, the SPIU will 
start the tendering for the works to contractors with demonstrated experience in carrying out 
such works. The procurement of works will be divided into two categories or two lots. Lot one 
will  be  made  of  all  civil  works  and installations  required to  supply bulk  water till the  farm 
edge.  This  will  include  but  not  limited  to  the  pumping  stations,  main  supply  pipelines, 
28 Former Sub-catchment Committees (SCCs) 
29  Water  for  Livestock  Users  Organizations  (WLUOs)  were  established  under  KIIWP1  to  manage  and  ensure 
sustainability of the 35 boreholes and valley tanks. 
30 Overall 35 per cent of land owners have not finalized the land title process. The Project will need to support a land 
management plan as part of the start-up phase, especially as land titles can be used as collateral for accessing loans. 
47 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
balancing  reservoirs  as  well  as  farm  roads  and  preliminary  land  preparation.  Lot  two  will 
include the infield installations comprising the pivots and sprinklers as well as the distribution 
sub-mains.  The  infield  installations  have  to  be  done  with  specialized  companies. 
Internationally  well-known  pivots  supply  companies  with  experience  in  the  region  will  be 
shortlisted and requested to present their offers and provide guarantee for the total lifespan 
of the equipment as well as after-sale services.  
166. 
In terms of financing, KIIWP2 will finance the construction of the three schemes with 
beneficiary contribution of 10 per cent on infield installation cost to enhance the ownership of 
the  equipment.  The  farmers’  contribution  will  be  made  both in  kind  and  cash. The  in-kind 
contribution will cover the opportunity loss during 2 years (4 cropping seasons) of construction 
activities. The Project will finance 100 per cent all bulk infrastructures to the farm edge and 
90% the in-fields installations. In-cash contribution from farmers will therefore be made of 
10 per cent of the in-field installations as well as the operation and maintenance cost which 
is of course not part of the investment cost 
167. 
Irrigation development cost recovery model. KIIWP2 will pre-finance 100 per cent of 
Sub-component A2 cost and 10 per cent farmers’ contribution to in-field installations will be 
recovered in a period of 4 to 5 years only after the famers have started producing and selling 
their  crops.  This  fund  will  be  collected  by  the  WUOs  and  kept  in  a  RAB  special  account 
designated for “Irrigation Development Recovery Fund” in one of the financing institutions in 
Rwanda. KIIWP2 will encourage the GoR to apply the same model for other irrigation projects 
to allow RAB starts building financial capacity towards irrigation infrastructure financing.   
168.  The management models for irrigation systems will include private sector participation 
as service providers. The project will facilitate management agreements between the farmers, 
government and private sector partners for the management of irrigation infrastructure and 
water service provision to farmers. The farmers will be responsible to pay for a water service 
fee. This arrangement will be implemented at each of the large pumped irrigation schemes to 
be  developed.  In  terms  of  infield  water  distribution  systems,  the  project  will  encourage 
partnership with local representative of the dealer to provide after sale services to WUOs.  
169.  Dam  irrigation  projects.  As  far  as  Gishanda  and  Kanyeganyege  schemes  are 
concerned,  KIIWP231  will  implement the construction  of  the  two  dams,  as  well  as  required 
distribution system including canals, hydraulic structures, pipes, small pumping, access road 
etc.  
170.  With KIIWP2, the SPIU will hire qualifies consultancy company (ies) for supervision of 
construction  works.  The  Supervision  will  also  be  a  participatory  process  involving  the 
consultants providing the day-to-day technical supervision with the SPIU, the District and the 
community institutions put in place in Sub-component A.3.  
171. 
Irrigation schemes that are identified to be environmentally, socially, technically and 
financially viable may be developed under KIIWP. The studies will be done by international 
consulting  companies.  The  SPIU  will  engage  consultancy  firms  with  the  different  required 
expertise  to  carry  out  these  studies  and  assessments  with  active  participation  of  the 
community institutions. 
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements 
172.  At SPIU level: The irrigations  specialists and The irrigation technical assistant (TA) 
to be recruited for sub-component A2 will take the lead in the construction and supervision of 
irrigation  activities.  They  will  be  responsible  for  managing  all  contractors  and  supervisors 
involved  in sub-component  A2  as  well  all the  quality  control in  terms  of  delirables  of  sub-
component  A2.  A  Water  Users  organization  Specialist  will  be  recruited  for  the  overall 
coordination of water users organisations’ activities. He /She will also be in charge of ToRs, 
preparation of water users’organisation guidelines and Training Manual, preparation of annual 
31 KIIWP1 will finance the feasibility and detailed design studies as well as the ESIAs for the two dam projects. The 
Project will recruit a qualified consultancy firm to carry out feasibility and design activities for both dam projects. The 
consultancy firm will design projects to optimise the available water resources and available command area with no 
limit to the proposed command area in the ToRs. 
48 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
work  plans  and  budget  as  well  as  different  documents  as  required  in  field  of  Water  users 
organizations. 
173.  At district level: Irrigation technicians will be recruited by SPIU/RAB and these will 
be  responsible  for  day  to  day  supervision  of  the  construction  activities.  They  will  ensure 
synergy among key stakeholders including district, RAB and IWUO as well as all beneficiaries 
in general. Irrigation technicians will work hand in hand with the contractor and supervisor to 
make sure beneficiaries (IWUOs and Cooperative members) are fully involved in construction 
activies from the very inception of the project. Two Water management field Facilitators will 
be  recruited  by  SPIU/RAB  and  these  will  be  responsible  for  organization  of  water  users 
associations and ensure their proximity coaching towards efficient use of water and scheme 
operationalization. District, Sector and cell level staff, with the support of WUO Specialist from 
the SPIU and RAB, will support the formation and strengthening of these institutions. 
174.  The activities for these studies will be as follows:  
Feasibility studies  
Table 9. Carrying out the feasibility studies in KIIWP1 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  the  feasibility 
studies for Kabare, Kanyeganyege, and Gishanda schemes and for 
the pipeline projects 
Carryout  the  tender  process  up  to  award  for  carrying  out  the 
feasibility studies 
Carry out the feasibility Studies for the 3 schemes and the pipeline 
projects including: 
a.  Land-Husbandry 
b.  Topographic Survey 
c.  Hydrological Analysis  
d.  Water-harvesting  (Dam),  Diversion  Weir,  Intake  for  Pumped 
Systems. 
e.  Marshland and Hillside-irrigation infrastructures 
f.  Socio-economic analysis 
g.  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Review of feasibility studies 
Supervise the consultancy as necessary 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
Technical 
Panel/Consultants/IFAD 
SPIU/District 
Selection of viable schemes for development under Phase 2 
SPIU/RAB 
175.  The schemes that will be found feasible will undergo the full ESIA process. The process 
will be as follows: 
Carrying out the ESIA studies  
Table 10. Flowchart for carrying out ESIA studies under KIIPW1.  
No 
1 
2 
3 
Activity 
Responsible 
Prepare the tender documents for carrying out the ESIA studies for 
Kabare, Kanyeganyege, and Gishanda schemes and for the pipeline 
projects 
undertake the tender process up to award for carrying out the ESIA 
studies 
Carry  out  the  ESIA  Studies  for  the  3  schemes  and  the  pipeline 
projects including: 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
1.  Contribute  to  the  environmental  and  social  design  for  the 
schemes; 
2.  Prepare  a  Project  Brief  for  submission  to  the  Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB) 
3.  Prepare a Scoping Report for submission to the RDB 
49 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
No 
Activity 
Responsible 
4.  Establish  a  baseline  for  biophysical,  climatic  conditions  and 
socio-economic data 
5.  Prepare  a  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  which  can  be  used 
during the ESIA process as well as during the construction and 
operation phases of the schemes 
6.  Establish the need for physical and/or economic displacement 
resulting  from  scheme activities and  proposed  infrastructure, 
and  if  necessary,  develop  Terms  of  Reference  and  cost 
estimates for a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP); 
7.  Develop  a 
comprehensive  Environmental  and  Social 
Management and Monitoring Plan (ESMMP), which will include 
cost estimates for mitigation and monitoring 
8.  Prepare  an  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment 
Report 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Supervise the consultancy as necessary 
SPIU/District 
Public  disclose  of  ESIA  reports,  locally,  nationally  and  on  IFAD 
website (min. 120days) 
IFAD 
Receive comments from the public and revise ESIA 
SPIU 
Selection of irrigation schemes to be developed under Phase 2 
SPIU/RAB 
Carrying  out  the  detailed  designs  for  the  schemes  that  meet  the  viability  criteria 
(technical, environmental, social and economic) in KIIWP1 
176.  The SPIU will engage a consultancy firm to carry out the detailed engineering design 
as follows: 
Table 11. Detailed engineering designs and bills of quantities 
No 
1 
2 
3 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  the  detailed 
engineering  designs  for  2285  ha  irrigation  schemes that  are 
found to be viable. 
Carryout the tender process up to award for carrying out the 
detailed engineering designs  
Carry out the detailed engineering designs for the schemes and 
the pipeline projects including: 
a) 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
For the pumping Kibare, Nasho and Ihema schemes and 
any of the pipeline schemes that will require pumping, 
carry  out  the  designs  and  BOQs  for  the  irrigation 
infrastructure including:  
intake structures; 
 
  pumping station(s); 
  main conveyance system; 
  secondary canals; 
  on farm application structures; 
  all necessary appurtenances; and 
  access road works. 
For  the  Kanyeganyege, and  Gishyanda and  any  of  the 
pipeline schemes that will require damming and gravity 
flow, carry out the designs and BOQs for the irrigation 
infrastructure including:  
i.  Dam works:   
b) 
  Embankment;  
  Spillway;  
 
  Upstream and downstream protection.  
intake chamber; and, 
ii.  Irrigation infrastructure: 
  main conveyance system,  
  secondary canals,  
50 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
No 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Activity 
Responsible 
  on farm application structures,  
  all necessary appurtenances; and, 
  access road works 
Revise the ESIA and ESMPs as necessary 
Prepare bidding documents for the irrigation schemes 
SP 
SP 
Supervise the consultancy work as necessary 
SPIU/District 
External review of detailed engineering designs  
Technical 
Panel/Consultants/IFAD 
Construction and supervision of construction works in KIIWP2 
177.  For  the  schemes  that  are  ready  for  construction  the  SPIU  will  engage  qualified 
supply/construction companies to carry out supply/installation and construction of irrigation 
systems. SPIU also engage qualified firms to supervise construction works as follows: 
Table 12. Detailed construction and supervision of works  
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  construction 
works  for  2285  ha  irrigation  schemes  that  are  approved  for 
implementation 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  supervision 
works for 2285 ha irrigation schemes  
Carryout the tender process up to award for construction and 
supervision 
Implementation of RAP 
Carry out  design review, actual construction and supervision 
of works of the pipeline projects including: 
c) 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Contractor and Supervisor in 
close  collaboration  with  the 
SPIU-TA 
d) 
intake structures civil works; 
For the pumping Kibare, Nasho and Ihema schemes and 
any of the pipeline schemes that will require pumping, 
carry out designs review and construction including:  
 
  pumping station(s); 
  power supply system(s) and connections; 
  main conveyance system; 
  secondary distribution network; 
  on farm application systems; 
  all necessary appurtenances;  
  access road works;  
  preliminary field preparation; and  
  Periodic construction and supervision reports  
For  the  Kanyeganyege,  Gishyanda  and  any  of  the 
pipeline schemes that will require damming and gravity 
system, carry out the designs review, construction and 
supervision of works including:  
iii. Dam construction works:   
  Embankment;  
  Spillway;  
 
  Upstream and downstream protection.  
intake chamber; and, 
iv. Irrigation infrastructure: 
  main conveyance system,  
  secondary conveyance system,  
  on farm application system,  
  all necessary appurtenances; 
  access road works; 
  preliminary land preparation; and 
  periodic construction and supervision reports. 
51 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Infrastructure management institutions  
178.  The Infrastructure Management Institutions will ensure long-term sustainability of the 
irrigation schemes play an active role in the planning, design, construction and operation and 
maintenance of infrastructures developed in the catchments. They will also develop drought 
contingency  plans  for  the  catchment  and  sub-catchment  areas.  They  will  be  central  in 
ensuring  inclusive  and  equitable  access  to  water  for  all  members,  including  farmers  and 
livestock keepers.  
179.  KIIWP1 will establish the required Infrastructure Management Institutions and initiate 
capacity building, which will be continued under  KIIWP2. Capacity building will cover three 
areas:  (i)  governance;  (ii) water  management  and  maintenance;  and  (iii)  monitoring  and 
exchange of experiences. Capacity building will be based on an FFS-type approach.  
180.  Four types of infrastructure Management Institutions would be required: 
i. 
Scheme  and  District  Steering  Committees.  As  per  Ministerial  Instructions  (2017 
draft32),  Scheme  and  District  Steering  Committees  support  and  oversee  the 
functioning of WUOs and ensure optimal use of developed land at irrigation scheme 
and District levels.  
ii.  Hydrographic  Basin  Committees  (HBCs).  In  line  with  the  national  policy, 
Hydrographic  Basin  Committees33 
(former  Sub-catchment  Management 
Committees) will be set up in each watershed. These committees will put in place 
regulations  on  the  use,  conservation,  protection  and  management  of  water 
resources. They are expected to be effective institutional bodies for managing and 
improving sub-catchment areas, and to perform a central role in the planning and 
implementation of the sub-catchment plans, together with the Scheme and District 
Steering  Committees.  They  will  also  be  responsible  for  safeguarding  communal 
areas  with  soil  and  water  conservation  measures,  monitor  implementation  of 
reforestation and safeguard newly reforested areas. 
iii. 
Irrigation  Water  Users  Organisations  (IWUO)  for  the  selected  schemes  will  be 
further strengthened under KIIWP2. The IWUOs will adopt guidelines for O&M and 
ensure payments for water, if required. Women's participation and decision making 
in the management of water supply infrastructure will be mandatory.  
iv.  Water  for  Livestock  Users  Organisations  (WLUOs)34  for  developed  boreholes  and 
valley tanks  will be established and strengthened under  KIIWP1. The WLUOs will 
adopt  guidelines  for  O&M  and  ensure  payments  for  water,  if  required.  Women's 
participation and decision making in the management of water supply infrastructure 
will be mandatory.  
181.  Overall,  KIIWP  will  support  the  formation  and  strengthening  of  the  required 
Infrastructure management institutions in the Project intervention area. These will include: 
a.  13 Irrigation Water Users Organisations 
b.  10 Sub-Catchment Committees (SCCs) 
c.  5 Scheme Steering Committees 
d.  35 Water-for-Livestock User Organisations (20 boreholes and 15 valley tanks 
182.  The different institutions are presented in the figure below. The committees (in blue) 
are at District or Scheme level, involving a mixture of stakeholders. The institutions (in red) 
are Farmer Organisations. 
32  Draft Ministerial Instructions on Land Development, Conservation and Exploitation of Developed Land. 2017 
33 A catchment is an area from which rainwater flows into a watercourse or infiltrates into a groundwater body. 
34 Water for Livestock Users Organizations (WLUOs) were established under KIIWP1 to ensure the management 
and sustainability of the 35 boreholes and valley tanks. 
52 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Figure 3 KIIWP’s institutions at district level 
Hydrographic 
Basin committee
Scheme/District 
Level Steering 
Committee
Sub-catchment 
committees
IWUOs
WLUOs
Cooperatives
Sequence in Formation & strengthening of Infrastructure Management Institutions 
No. 
Activities 
Responsible 
The Monitoring department in SPIU will perform baseline survey of 
Water Users Organizations in Kayonza District 
SPIU  
The SPIU IFAD/RAB will recruit the following staff: 
  1 no. Water Users Organization specialist  
  2 no. Water Management Field Facilitators (WMFF) 
Prepare the terms of reference for a SP to undertake the mapping 
of the sub-catchments 
Recruit and contract the SP for mapping sub-catchments 
Undertake the mapping of sub-catchments 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SP 
Form the sub-catchment committees  
SPIU/District 
Capacity building of the sub-catchment committees 
SPIU/RAB/District 
Preparation of sub-catchment plans 
SPIU/RAB/District/SCCs 
Prepare guidelines and training Manual for O&M specific to 
irrigation schemes (Hillside, marshlands, small scale and Livestock 
waters users) 
SPIU  
The Water Users Organization specialist will jointly with the District 
mobilize the local authorities, opinion leaders, farmers and hold 
awareness meetings on establishment of Waters Association (both 
Irrigation water Users and Livestock water Users Associations) 
SPIU and District 
The above the will hold specific mobilization meeting to create 
awareness on WUOs for beneficiaries of each Irrigation sites and 
Livestock water facilities 
SPIU/District 
The meetings will result in establishment of interim WUOs for each 
of the facilities and elect interim Committee /Representative of 
each of the WUOs  
SPIU /District 
The Water Users Organization specialist will lead the process of 
training the elected committee and opinion leaders in the 
community on their roles and responsibilities: before, during 
schemes development and after scheme completion 
After the initial training the Water Users Organization specialist will 
the lead the process formal elections of WUO committee that will 
be responsible for sustainable O&M of the constructed 
infrastructure  
SPIU  
SPIU  
53 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
No. 
Activities 
Responsible 
The Water Users Organization specialist lead in the training of the 
established WUO committee and members on Operation and 
Maintenance, Management and other aspects related to the 
management of their facilities 
SPIU 
The Water Users Organization specialist will lead in the training of 
the District Steering Committee on their roles and responsibilities. 
SPIU 
The formal training of District Steering Committee and LWUOs will 
be complemented study tours and exchange visits to other 
districts where WUOs have already sustainably managing O&M. 
SPIU/District  
The WMFF in collaboration with District steering Committee be 
carrying out proximity coaching: training focused on the actual 
needs of each of LWUOs in collaboration with District steering 
Committee on a regular basis 
SPIU /District 
The SPIU in collaboration with the District and RAB will support the 
WUOs in the registration process and fulfilling requirements for 
signing IMTA 
SPIU/RAB/District 
Continuously monitor the performance of the WUOs in their 
carriage of the O&M of their infrastructure 
District/RAB/SCCs 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Planning and design phase  
Detailed design shall confirm water availability, water 
requirements and environmental flow and assess any potential 
impact of climate change scenarios and future irrigation 
development 
Detailed design should provide water management and monitoring 
tools such as irrigation calendar, water monitoring system and 
efficient irrigation systems/technologies to ensure that all users 
are served and ecological functions are maintained 
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Detailed design shall identify quarry sites/ borrow pits to prevent 
uncontrolled sourcing of construction material  
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Detailed design shall also identify suitable locations for 
construction work camps, stockpile areas, storage areas and 
disposal areas and other facilities near to the project location  
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Water abstraction permit should be obtained from Rwanda Water 
board and environmental flow instructed by the authority should 
be complied with   
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Detailed design shall confirm water availability, water 
requirements and environmental flow and assess any potential 
impact of climate change scenarios and future irrigation 
development 
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Detailed design should provide water management and monitoring 
tools such as irrigation calendar, water monitoring system and 
efficient irrigation systems/technologies to ensure that all users 
are served and ecological functions are maintained 
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Planning and construction phase:  
Proper compensation measures and livelihood restoration 
programme should be discussed and agreed with affected 
community in compliance with existing regulations  
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
54 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
No. 
Activities 
Responsible 
Conduct consultation with local communities who have grazing 
areas and cattle sheds in command areas and agree on the 
relocation outside command area 
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
A livelihood restoration including cash for work program will be 
prepared and affected should be given an affirmative priority in 
employment  
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
A clear implementation programme indicating areas to be levelled 
and portioned dates when they will occur and monitoring exercise 
involving project staff, sector agronomist and established 
cooperative committees.  
Contractor/SPIU/RAB 
Child labour, forced labour, discrimination and abusive dismissal 
shall be careful be considered 
SPIU/District/RAB 
To avoid air pollution, during construction work, worker shall spray 
water regularly when clearing land to reduce the dust, especially 
under roads work 
Works shall be executed during daytime, i.e from 7 am to 18 pm 
Operation phase  
All grazing areas shall inside the command areas will be identified 
and relocated in consultation with local communities  
SPIU/RAB/District 
Training of scheme users on maintenance of irrigation, land 
husbandry infrastructures, access roads and post-harvest 
infrastructures (PHIs) 
Frequent inspection and repairs of leaking infrastructure is 
necessary to reduce on losses of water through leakages 
Regular inspection of balancing reservoir and canal to detect 
possible leakages early enough and make repairs if required in 
order to reduce avoidable water losses 
SPIU/RAB/District 
SPIU/RAB/District 
SPIU/RAB/District 
Child labour, forced labour, discrimination shall be careful be 
considered 
SPIU/District/RAB 
Strengthening Scheme and District Steering Committee 
183.  The SSCs will be formed and strengthened to be the institutional bodies responsible 
for inforcing the optimal use of developed land and facilities at district and sector levels. The 
SSCs  at  sector  and  district  levels  will  oversee  the  activities  of  IWUOs,  WLUOs  as  well  as 
cooperatives where applicable.  
184.  A total of 5 SSCs are expected to be formed, trained during KIIWP1 and strengthened 
in KIIWP2. The following paragraph explains in details composition and responsibilities of the 
SSCs 
Table 13. Relevant paragraphs to the rules on the composition and responsibilities of the 
scheme and district-level Steering committees 
Article 10: Steering Committee for infrastructures and optimal use of developed land at 
the scheme level   
 The Committee at the scheme level is composed of:   
a)  The Executive Secretary of the Sector in which the scheme is located: Chairperson; 
b)  Officer in charge of agriculture at sector level: Deputy chairperson; 
c)  Officer in charge of Development and social affairs in the cell where the scheme is located 
(Secretary); 
d)  The chairperson of the Cooperative/ Investor operating in the developed scheme; 
55 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
e)  The chairperson of water user association in the irrigated scheme; 
f)  The representative of stakeholders in the developed scheme 
g)  Representatives  of  farmers’  cooperative  operating  in  watersheds  around  the  developed 
scheme.  
When the scheme is located in more than one sector, the Management committee elects an 
Executive Committee made of three people (Chairperson, deputy-chairperson and Secretary).  
Article 11: Responsibilities of the Scheme Steering Committee At the scheme level, the 
Steering Committee is in charge of: 
a)  Approving  the  action  plan  of  water  user  association  and  Cooperative  operating  in  the 
scheme; 
b)  Following  up  the  use  of  resources/property  of  Cooperative  and  water  user  association 
operating on developed land; 
c)  Monitoring the use of infrastructures in the developed schemes;  
d)  Enforcing the laws and regulations governing the management and conservation of natural 
resources;  
e)  Following up all erosion control activities on watersheds around the developed scheme;  
f)  Preventing and solving conflicts that may rise among land and water users. 
Article 12: Scheme Steering Committee at District level  
The management of infrastructure and optimal use of developed land at district level is ensured 
by a Scheme Steering Committee for irrigation and soil conservation activities at District level. 
The committee is composed of:  
a)  Vice Mayor in charge of Economy development and Finance: Chairperson; 
b)  Director of Agriculture and environment in the District: vice chairperson; 
c)  Officer in charge of Cooperatives: Secretary; 
a)  RAB Staff; 
d)  District officer in charge of irrigation program; 
e)  Officer from “One Stop Center”; 
f)  Executive Secretaries of sectors where the infrastructures are located; 
g)  Chairperson of cooperative/ or representative of farmers operating on the developed land, 
h)  Representative of irrigation water user association on the developed land with irrigation 
canals;  
i)  Representatives of stakeholders, development projects and Government entities operating 
in the District in land development, conservation and optimal use programmes. 
Article 13: Responsibilities of Scheme Steering Committee at District level  
a)  Mobilising the users of developed land to adhere to cooperative or irrigation water user 
associations when developed land is equipped with irrigation infrastructures; 
b)  Approving the action plan of cooperative or irrigation water user associations operating on 
developed land in the District; 
c)  Monitoring the use of infrastructures available in developed schemes of the District; 
d)  Advising  on  management  and  use  of  cooperative  and  irrigation  water  user  association 
resources on developed land; 
e)  Monitoring the law enforcement with regard to management and conservation of natural 
resources on developed land; 
f)  Preventing and solving conflicts that may rise between land and water users; 
g)  Following up erosion control activities on watersheds around the scheme; 
h)  Reporting to competent Government authorities. 
Strengthening Hydrographic Basin Committees (HBCs35). 
185.  The  HBCs  will  be formed, trained  in  KIIWP1  and  strengthened  in  KIIWP2  to  be  the 
institutional bodies responsible for planning and managing the hydrological watersheds. They 
will  be  having  a  central  role  in  the  planning  and  implementation  of  activities  under  sub-
component 1.1. The SPIU will engage a service provider for mapping of the sub-catchments. 
After the mapping and validating of the sub-catchments, the HBCS/SCCs will be formed and 
their  capacity  built  to  enable  them  produce  sub-catchment  plans  and  oversee  the 
implementation  of the  plans  including land  husbandry  activities  as  well  other  development 
activities in the sub-catchments.  
35 Ministerial Order determining the organization and functioning of hydrographic basin committee. Official Gazette 
nº Special of 30/05/2013, Ministerial order nº005/16.01 of 24/05/2013 determining the organisation and 
functioning of hydrographic basin committees 
56 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
186.  The expected sub-watersheds to be delineated are estimated at 10 and the expected  
HBCS/SCCs  are therefore 10.  The management of hydrographic basin Committees shall be 
composed  of  five  (5)  members:  The  President,  the  Vice  President,  Secretary  and  two  (2) 
Advisors.  At the Sector  level, the  Executive Secretary of the Sector  shall convene the first 
meeting  of  hydrographic  basin  committee  at  the  Sector  level  in  which  Committee 
management members shall be elected. 
Table 14. Relevant paragraphs to the rules on the composition of the HBCs at district and 
sector levels  
Article 3: Hydrographic basin committee at District level  
 The Committee at the district level is composed of:   
a)  The District Vice Mayor in charge of economic affairs;  
b)  the in charge of water at the District level;  
c)  the  in  charge  of  agriculture,  animal  resources,  land,  urbanization,  urban 
development, forests, infrastructure and environment at the District level;  
d)  a representative of hydrographic basin committees at each Sector of that District;  
e)  a representative of National Women Council at the District level;  
f)  a representative of the National Youth Council at the District level;  
g)  two (2) representatives of farmers at District level;  
h)  a representative of water user organisations in the field of agriculture at District 
level.  
i)  a representative of water users in domestic activities at the District level;  
j)  two (2) representatives of non-government organizations operating in the field 
of water in the District;  
k)  a representative of the Private Sector at the District level;  
l)  one staff  of  the  National Authority  in  charge of  Natural Resources  operating  in 
that hydrographic basin  
Article 4: Hydrographic basin committee at Sector level  
 The Committee at the sector level is composed of:   
a)  the executive secretary of the sector 
b)  the in charge of water at the Sector level;  
c)  the  in  charge  of  agriculture,  animal  resources,  land,  settlement,  urbanization, 
forests, infrastructure and environment at the Sector level;  
d)  a representative of the Executive Committee of each Cell in the Sector elected by 
his/her peers;  
e)  a representative of the National Women’s Council at the Sector level;  
f)  a representative of the National Youth Council at Sector level;  
g)  two (2) representatives of farmers at the Sector level;  
h)  a representative of water domestic users at the Sector level;  
i) 
two (2) representatives of non-governmental organisations working in the field 
of water resources at the Sector level;  
j)  a  representative  of  water  user  organisations  in  the  field  of  agriculture  at  the 
Sector level;  
k)  a representative of the Private Sector at Sector level. 
Developing Irrigation Water Users Organisations 
187.  The IWUOs will be formed for each of the schemes and subchemes and their capacity 
will  be  built  to  manage  the  operations  and  maintenance  of  the  irrigation  schemes.  The 
members  of  the  committees  will  be  elected  from  among  the  users  of  each  of  the  scheme 
keeping  in  mind  the  need  for  gender  inclusion.  The  Steering  Committee,  which  is  already 
established at sector level is responsible for guidance and oversight of all the IWUOs in that 
sector. The District level steering committee will oversee the functioning of all the WUOs in 
the district.  
188. 
It is expected to establish 13 IWUOs grouped on the main 5 schemes as follows:  
57 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Scheme 
Sector 
Command 
Area 
Sub-Schemes 
(block) 
Number of 
IWUOs 
Kibare Irrigation Scheme 
Ndego 
570 ha 
Kibare 1 – 219 ha 
Ihema Irrigation Scheme 
Ndego 
700 ha 
Ihema 1 – 85 ha 
Kibare 2 – 112 ha 
Kibare 3 – 239 ha  
3 
4 
Nasho Irrigation Scheme 
Kabare 
740 ha 
Nasho 1 – 309 ha 
4 
Ihema 2 – 188 ha 
Ihema 3 – 161 ha 
Ihema 4 – 266 ha 
Nasho 2- 218 ha 
Nasho 3 – 114 ha 
Nasho 4 – 99 ha 
Kanyeganyenge Dam and 
Irrigation Scheme 
Kabarondo 
and Ruramira 
150 ha 
Gishanda Dam and 
Irrigation Scheme 
Rwinkwavu 
125 ha 
1 
1 
189.  Each  scheme  or  sub-scheme  will  elect  a  committee  of  7  members  to  manage  the 
scheme.  The  organisations  will  be  set  up  and  guidelines  established  for  proper  O&M  of 
Irrigation Water supply and distribution system. Increasing membership by women and youth 
will be jighly encouraged.   
190.  To  implement  this  activity,  qualified  Service  Providers  (SPs)  will  be  recruited.  To 
complement  their  works,  young  professional  organizations,  such  as  the  Rwanda  Youth  in 
Agribusiness Forum (RYAF)36, and the Horticulture in Reality Cooperative (HoReCo)37  could 
be mobilized by the Project as service providers whenever the need and opportunities arise.  
Developing Water for Livestock Users Organisations 
191.  WLUOs  will be formed for  each  of the 15 valley dams  and 20 boreholes  and will be 
capacity built to manage the operations and maintenance of the water source. The members 
of the committees will be elected from among the users of each of the facilities keeping in 
mind the need for gender inclusion. The District level Steering Committee, which is already 
established,  is  chaired  by  the  Vice-Mayor  in  charge  of  Economic  Development  and  is 
responsible for guidance and oversight of all the WUOs. 
192.  On average, one valley dam benefits 89 male, and 15 female livestock keepers and 
1,523 cows. Some of these dams have Water User Committees, and these organisations would 
also need to be further strengthened. In total 15 WLUOs will be established and strengthened 
to  manage  15  valley  tanks  and  a  total  of  20  WLUOs  will  be  established,  trained  and 
stregthened to manage 20 boreholes within KIIWP1.  
193.  Each valley  dam  will  electe a committee of 5 members to manage the scheme. The 
organisations will be set up and guidelines established for proper O&M of Water for Livestock 
facilities  in  the  Cattle  Corridor,  as  well  as  connected  domestic  water  supply  systems.  The 
WLUOs will involve livestock keepers. Increasing membership by women will be encouraged. 
The role of youth will also be encouraged, who could for example perform the role of Water 
point manager collecting water fees and ensuring hygienic conditions, possibly in combination 
with establishment of tree nurseries in the vicinity of dams or boreholes.  
36 http://www.ryaf.rw/spip.php?article1 
37 http://horecorwanda.com/background/ 
58 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
194.  Synergies  will  be  created  in  dairy  development  and  water  for  livestock  to  build  on 
lessons leant from RDDP.  
SUB-COMPONENT A.3: ENHANCING CLIMATE SMART AGRICULTURE PRACTICES AND TECHNOLOGIES  
195.  This  Sub-component  aims  to  improve  the  production  and  productivity  of  the  target 
groups in a sustainable manner, ensuring their resilience and adaptation to climate change. 
The  proposed  activities  are  based  on  a  participatory  approach  of  skills  transfer,  capacity 
building and participatory research to ensure, on the one hand, the dissemination of adapted 
technologies  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  adoption  of  these  technologies  and  sustainable 
agricultural  practices.  The  agricultural  technical  proposal  aims  to  achieve  integration  and 
efficiency in the use of resources while having a strategy of diversification and adaptation to 
climate change using innovations adapted to the socio-economic context. 
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements 
196.  At SPIU level: SPIU staff will be in communication and coordination with RAB staff 
(sustainable  mechanization  experts,  Master  Trainers  and  FFS  experts)  for  overall 
implementation,  specially  for  Y1  (FFS  facilitators  training,  manuals  preparation,  youth 
arstisans  training,  development  of  sustainable  mechanization).  Moreover,  the  coordination 
will  ensure  the  development  of  research  plots, seed  production  and  distribution  as  well  as 
other inputs distribution.  
197.  At district level: a Senior Agronomist and FFS expert will be recruited at district level 
to ensure overall coordination of the sub-component and sound technical quality of activities 
implementation. Cell level technical staff will be in charge of supervising the implementation 
of activities from their administrative sectors and villages  
Table 15. Research, extension and CSA technologies implementation flowchart activities. 
Activity 
Responsibility 
KIIWP1 
Outputs 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
CSA technologies, 
practices and 
sustainable 
mechanization baseline 
study  
Inputs, including 
technologies for trials in 
research stations and 
cells 
FFS Farmers Facilitators 
training and module 
development. 
FFS village, plot and 
thematic selection 
Farmers promoters 
training and input 
delivery for 
demonstration plots 
RAB and SPIU 
CSA baseline study 
RAB and district 
level staff 
RAB with 
technical service 
provider/partner 
(for e.g. FAO) 
FFS facilitator 
with 
decentralized 
extension service 
and technical 
partner 
RAB and 
decentralized 
extension service 
59 
Knowledge 
products, and trial 
plots active for 
facilitators and 
farmers promoters 
exchanges and visits 
Adapted modules 
developed 
FFS facilitators 
trained on CSA and 
related practices. 
550 FFS will be roll 
out thought the 
project 
implementation 
315 Existing farmer 
promoters will be 
trained on new 
technologies and 
innovative practices 
and supported to 
roll out 
demonstration plots 
in each village 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
RAB and 
international TA 
RAB and 
international TA 
RAB, SPIU staff 
and service 
provider 
RAB, RCA and 
service provider 
Identification of ToT 
manufacturers and 
training course 
preparation 
Support research and 
construction of best 
adapted tools 
Training of youth 
artisans  
Training to youth 
groups service 
providers (production 
and post-harvesting 
services) 
Promotion of Climate 
Smart Technologies 
Training modules 
developed 
Prototypes 
developed for trials 
and for trainings 
SMEs of youth 
artisans in each 
sector 
SMEs / Cooperatives 
of youth artisans in 
each sector 
Climate Smart Agriculture compilation 
198. 
 A  baseline  study  on  CSA  existing  practices  and  technologies  in  Rwanda  and  in the 
region will be undertaken by KIIWP1. A short-term expert in consultation with national experts 
from RAB and the MINAGRI, private sector as well as international specialized entities such 
as FAO, will compile and propose potential best practices and technologies, prioritizing those 
existing in Rwanda. This will set the base trials and mainstreaming adoption and adaptation 
of innovations on CSA with the active participatory role of farmers, that can be revised and 
adjust as a result of farmers experiences and FFS. The study will have to include an analysis 
on sustainable mechanization, including time and labour saving technologies (TLST), available 
and of potential interest. Technologies and improved tools must be adapted to farmers’ needs 
and  production  systems,  affordable,  will  have  to  help  reduce  burden  and  help  increase 
productivity. 
Prioritized crops  
-  In  irrigated  areas  would  include  rice,  maize,  beans, 
soybean, and horticulture crops.  
-  For  rainfed  agriculture,  the  Project  will  prioritize  crop 
diversification and intercropping, including staple (such as 
cassava and sorghum), forage crops (e.g. Elephant grass 
or Brachiaria grass) and nutritious crops (e.g. iron beans, 
orang-flesh  sweet  potato, 
leafy  green  vegetables, 
moringa, and fruit trees).  
Farmer Field Schools (FFS) 
In order to ensure the adoption of sustainable and climate resilient agricultural practices on 
both rainfed and irrigated lands, the project will support the establishment of Farmer Field 
Schools  (FFS)  as  the  main  method  of  agricultural  extension,  giving  priority  to  commercial 
crops as well as staple and nutritious crops. The technical itineraries will include the following: 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM), climate-smart agriculture with a strong emphasis on soil 
conservation  and  fertility,  including  agroforestry  and  Conservation  Agriculture,  the 
introduction of small-scale adapted mechanization and TLST, the SRI system and the efficient 
use of chemical and organic fertilizers. 
199.  Roll out of the FFS. adaptation of existing training materials. The existing teaching 
material will be adapted and translated into local languages by RAB experts, Master Trainers 
in consultation with the SPIU for discussion on project needs and using the CSA baseline and 
conclusions. 
60 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
200.  Training of facilitators. RAB in consultation with the MT will identify and train new 
facilitators in the district. With the help of decentralized extension service staff from the cells, 
they will identified needs of refreshment trainings of existing facilitators in the project area. 
It is expected that at least 30 facilitators out of the 46 existing in the district will receive a 
refresh training, particularly on the new technical intineraries that will be introduced by the 
project. New facilitators will ideally be model producers and already farmers promoters who 
will be identified.The technical itineraries by crops will be chosen according to agroecological 
zone.  Extension  agents  from  the  33  cells  (1  staff  from  each  cell)will  received  a  1  week 
training(in  total, the  will  participate  to the  FFS  facilitators training),  in  order to  be  able to 
follow up on  FFS technical itineraries. In all cases, the project will select at least one-third 
women. 
201.  The  training  and  refreshment  trainings  will  be  done  in  year  1.  The  duration  of  the 
training will last a whole croping season and will be done at district level. The refreshment 
trainings will last only two weeks and can be done together with the facilitators’ training as a 
way to exchange also experience fo existing facilitators.  
202.  Meetings  village  level  for  FFS  implementation.  The  FFS  will  be  implemented 
taking into account the phasing of Component A in the different intervention sites in order to 
ensure  proper  integration  of  activities  and  following  irrigation  infrastructure  and  land 
husbandry. FFS participatory planning meetings will be organized selected villages that are 
part of the intervention sites  before  FFS implementation in order  to present the approach, 
agree on which producers will participate, on which plot of land the school field will be installed 
and which themes and issues will be included. All proposed sites will be visited and evaluated 
according to selection criterias: accessibility (especially to accommodate visitors during the 
rainy season), closeness to village so women with family can participate and land status. 
203.  FFS  implementation.  Trained facilitators  will  facilitate  farmer  field  school  sessions 
for two cycles and, if possible, they will facilitate two FFS (depending on the proximity of the 
FFS plots, the time to be devoted to them, etc.).  
204.  Government extension agents will supervise and provide technical support to the FFS 
facilitators. The project will provide the necessary inputs for the FFS (via the implementing 
partner or SPIU and RAB) with a focus on local supply (agro-dealers and local artisans trained 
by the project), in order to promote sustainability and relations with FFS members. For new 
inputs promoted by the project, such as improved seeds and some fertilizers that may be not 
available in the area, KIIWP2 partners and interested private partners (4Ps under Component 
B) will be put in relation by the SPIU decentralized team in order to facilitate supply as well 
as technical assistance when necessary. 
 KIIWP2 will implement, the 550 FFS, 323 on the irrigated areas and 227 on rainfed 
205. 
areas  and  will  involve  a  total  of  12,100  producers.  The  duration  of  the  FFS  and  technical 
itineraries will vary depending on the crops selected. Meetings will take place once a week for 
annual  crops.  For  FFS  with  perennial  crops  (agroforestry  and  fruit  trees),  meetings  will  be 
held on average once every three to four weeks less for one year when no annual crops are 
planted.  
206.  The  Participatory  Integrated  Climate  Services  for  Agriculture  (PICSA) 
approach  will  be  integrated  within  the  FFS  module.  The  PICSA  approach  aims  to  facilitate 
farmers to make informed decisions based on accurate, location specific, climate and weather 
information;  locally  relevant  crop,  livestock  and  livelihood  options  during  the  process  of 
planning their agricultural season and other livelihood activities. The training will be conducted 
by  the  International  Centre  for  Tropical  Agriculture  (CIAT)  with  proven  experience  in  the 
delivery of PICSA methodology in Rwanda. Divided into twelve steps, PICSA approach and its 
process includes, Training of Trainers (ToTs) who thereafter train their  fellow farmers  with 
the supervision by the CIAT team. The Training of trainers (ToT) will target one member of 
each  FFS  group  (227  farmers  to  be  trained).  The  training  will  consist  of  4  days,  with 
accommodation. 
61 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
207.  The PICSA methodology will be applied to disseminate weather and climate services 
information to farmers, through better understanding, access, use and uptake of the climate 
information package. 
Farmers’ promoters, demonstration plots and trials 
208. 
 KIIWP2  will  support  RAB  decentralized  research  stations  for  trials  of  promoted 
technologies and practices for later dissemination. To reach more farmers an enhanced the 
already  farmers  promoters  established  system,  the  FFS  approach  will  be  combined  with 
demonstration  plots  with  farmer  promoters  to  promote  and  disseminate  innovations  and 
practices.  
209.  Currently there are 315 Farmers’ promoters in the project area (one per village). These 
existing  promoter  will  receive  refreshment  trainings  to  introduce  and  disseminate  KIIWP2 
newly introduced innovation and practices. The refreshment trainings last up to 3 days and 
are given by the FFS facilitators with the participation of extension service staff. A group of 
30 farmer promoters will be gather at each time to do the training. The trainings will be done 
before the start of the season and in accordance to the project phasing by sector. Additional 
trainings,  visit  and  exchanges  are  envisaged  to  continue  reinforcing  farmers’  promoters 
capacities. In particular, additional technical assistance for areas such as GAP will be ensured 
through 4Ps agreements by private sector specialists. 
210. 
In  addition,  the  research  center  test  plots  will  also  serve  as  a  gateway  for  the 
dissemination of innovations to test different climate-resilient agricultural technologies  and 
practices.  These  will  in  turn  be  used  for  visits  and  exchanges  with  producers,  farmer 
promoters and FFS facilitators to promote participatory adaptation and dissemination of these 
technologies. 
Development of adapted farm mechanization 
211.  KIIWP2  will  support  the  development  of  small-scale  mechanization  (power  tillers, 
manual  drafted  tools)  and  workload-reducing  tools  adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  targeted 
producers,  while  promoting  soil  conservation  practices  and  Climate  Smart  Agriculture. 
Assessment and dissemination will be developed under FFS and demonstration plots, access 
to  these  technologies  will  be  provided  together  with  Component  B  through:  (i)  groups  of 
young agricultural service providers (under component B.1); (ii) support to local handicrafts 
to be trained by manufacturers’ trainers38 and exchanges with other countries; (iii) individual 
farmers and cooperatives investing in sustainable mechanization (See Subcomponent B.2). 
212. 
 In order to achieve sustainable adoption of the technologies proposed by KIIWP2, the 
implementation  of  the  activity  will  have  to  be  integrated  with  research  and  extension 
activities. The different stages of its implementation are as follows: 
213. 
Results from baseline study on CSA practices and technologies (under KIIWP1) will 
set  the  base  for  applied  research  and  technology  dissemination.  An  international  expert 
consultant will  for assessment of availability and adapted machines identified by study, TA 
support for implementers and RAB.In addition, the expert consultant39 will provide support to 
the Model Workshops for the manufacture of the first "model" tools that will be tested on year 
1  in  the  research  centre  for  Kayonza  and  in  cells  with  farmer  promoters  participation  and 
trials. A at least 20% of women farmer promoters will participate in order to ensure that tools 
are also adapted for them. The tools and machines, will then scaled up later on during project 
implementation. 
214.  Support  to  young  local  handicrafts.  The  development  of  local  production  of 
adapted agricultural tools and machinery has to two main objectives: their availability in local 
market at lower prices and the creation of jobs for young existing or potential artisans. The 
implementation of this activity will be done in consultation and in parallel with research and 
extension, with a participatory approach through FFS and with demonstrations plots, in order 
38 ToT for manufacturer is planned in Rwanda, with exchanges to Zimbabwe, that then could trained of local youth 
manufacturers. 
39 Could be probably supported through a partnership with FAO.  
62 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
to  produce  tools  adapted  and  requested  by  producers.  Tools  such  as  the  manual  weeders 
(particularly  for  SRI),  direct  seeders  with  animal  or  manual  draught,  the  manual  combine 
harvester  and  other  tools  that  promote  minimum  tillage  (Conservation  Agriculture)  and 
reduce the workload, especially for women.  
Training of young artisans  
215.  Model workshops and trainers. Workshops with quality artisans capable of making the 
different  proposals  of  tools  and  machines  on  demand  as  well  as  training  groups  of  young 
artisans will be identified (at least one workshop). These tool manufacturers will be selected 
by  RAB  and  will  probably  be  the  manufacturers  under  the  ToT  programme  exchange  to 
Zimbabwe,  which  then  will  train  the  local  youth  manufacturers.  With  the  help  of  the 
international expert, they will make the first models that can be tested in research centers 
and in some FFS as well as in the facilitators’ trainings.  
216. 
In a second stage, groups of young artisans will be formed (about 6 young people per 
group,  a  total  of  8  groups)  and  they  will  be  encouraged  to  set  at  least  one  workshop  per 
sector. The trainings will also include spare parts production. The young artisans groups will 
be identified by the implementing partner of sub-component B.1.  Once the young artisans' 
workshops  are in  place, they  will  continue  production  and  adjustments  on  initial models  if 
necessary based on the results of the field tests. These tools will need to be considered for 
possible  use  and  adaptation  by  women  producers,  especially  for  the  tasks  they  primarily 
perform (such as weeding). 
217.  Further  exchanges  between  groups  of  artisans  and  with  experts  workshops  will  be 
promoted, in order to reinforce the learning acquired and the homogeneity in the quality of 
the tools produced.  
218. 
International exchanges for ToT manufacturers will be enhanced during year 1 and 2 
for  further  specialization  on  identified  tools  and  machines  by  the  study  and  international 
expert.  
219.  Support to groups of young agricultural service providers. KIIWP2 will support 
at least 12 groups of 6 young entrepreneurs or cooperative members for in the provision of 
small  mechanization  services  (mainly  power tillers  in  addition to  the  possibility  of  coupling 
different implements, see Table 19): 
– 
Identification  of  interested youth  groups  and  or  cooperatives  (sub-component  B.1). 
The main selection criteria will be based on an expressed interest to start an income-
generating activity in the project area. Existing youth groups will be given priority. 
–  Training BDS (see sub-component  B.1), including  development  of curricula, training 
and  implementation  covering  technical  and  managerial  skills  as  well  as  practical 
training in the use and maintenance of machines/tools.  Investment will be financed 
under Sub-component B.2. 
63 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 16. Example of adapted tools and machines 
Example of manual tools 
Example of small machines (tiller) 
Cutting machine for harvesting 
Manual weeder for paddy rice and horticulture 
Conservation agriculture farming tools: digger and 
Tiller with different attachments
seeder
Min-harvester 
64 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Soil cultivation and sowing in one pass with a 
mechanical seed drill (Photo : E.M. Haque, CIMMYT 
Bangladesh) 
Promotion of Climate Smart Technologies 
220.  KIIWP2 will support the promotion of rainwater harvesting technologies (water storage 
tanks/ponds at household level, drip irrigation and treadle pumps). In addition, the Project 
will  support  Climate  and  Nutrition  Smart  Technologies  such  as  storage  facilities,  dryers, 
climate resilient drying grounds and Warehouses, which will be promoted and financed under 
Component  B  (see  sub-component  B.2  for  detailed  implementation  modalities).  These 
technologies  will  help  extending  shelf  life  of nutritious  foods  and increase  their  year-round 
availability for enhanced food security. The promotion and financing of these technologies will 
also  go  under  the  community  competition  modalities  (see  sub-component  A.1  for  detailed 
implementation modalities).  
Gender Action Learning System (GALS)  
221.  To foster behavioural change and gender equality, KIIWP will introduce and implement 
the GALS methodology in the context of FFS. Rwanda has developed considerable expertise 
in the use of GALS within IFAD-supported projects and grants. In fact, the use of the GALS 
methodology has been successfully promoted in IFAD funded programs (RDDP, KWAMP) as 
well  as  in  UN  joint  programmes40,  as  a  sound  participatory  and  gender  sensitive  practice, 
producing sustainable development outcomes at household and community level. 
222.  The  methodology  will  offer  a  framework  to  implement  gender  transformative 
approaches by addressing power inequalities between women and men and foster women’s 
decision-making power at the household and community level. To implement GALS, the KIIWP 
will  rely  upon  the  capacities  installed  at the  district  level under  the  on-going IFAD funded 
RDDP (GALS Master Trainers and Facilitators already trained and able to provide services), 
where  the  methodology  is  being  implemented  in  the  frame  of  the  Livestock  Farmers  Field 
Schools supported by the project.  
223.  Two  service  providers  (civil  society  organizations),  with  proven  experience  in  the 
delivery  of  GALS  methodologies  in  Rwanda,  have  been  identified  and  are  being  currently 
recruited by RDDP to scale out the methodology and reach the expected target beneficiaries 
in Kayonza District. KIIWP will be able to rely upon the provision of services of the selected 
organizations; this will help accelerating the procurement process – which usually takes up to 
one year- and timely implement the methodology. The presence of the two organizations in 
the district of Kayonza will also help significantly decreasing costs for GALS implementation.  
224.  Proposed  framework  for  GALS  dissemination.  The  GALS  methodology  will 
primarily  target  rural  households  from  the  most  vulnerable  and  poorest  categories.  It  is 
expected  that  at  least  5,000  poor  households  will  be  reached.  Thirty-one  GALS  Master 
Trainers, already trained by RDDP, will be able to train about 250 Facilitators to reach the 
40 FAO, IFAD WFP and UN Women Joint Programme on “Accelerating progress towards rural women economic 
empowerment.  
65 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
same  number  of  groups  and  5,000  households  (20  people  per  group).  Trainings  will  be 
organised per sector. The training location will be the same location as the FFS training.   
225.  A GALS training methodology has  been elaborated, as  part of the above-mentioned 
projects and programmes. The SPIU Gender & Youth Specialist will be responsible to revise 
the  training  methodology  to  fit  KIIWP’s  purposes  and  targets;  he  will  also  responsible  to 
supervise  the  implementation  of  the  GALS  methodology  by  the  service  providers  and  to 
coordinate with KIIWP staff on its delivery.  
Climate Information Services  
226.  Climate Information Services are proven to be effective options to cope with climate 
variability  and  climate  change  effects.  KIIWP  will  thus  encourage  the  communication  and 
dissemination of meteorological bulletins tailored to climate risks and vulnerabilities specific 
to selected cash and food crops suitable to Kayonza District. The SPIU agro-meteorologist will 
continue the work initiated within PASP and collect data on quantity of rainfall; length of rainy 
season  as  well  as  dry  season; sunrise  and  sunset  times  so  as  to  better  organize  planting, 
harvest and drying stages for each value chain. The bulletins will be distributed to all relevant 
project stakeholders at sector, district, cooperative and community levels. 
227.  The climate information services will be coupled to the PICSA training modules to be 
conducted  as  part  of  the  FFS  modules  (  see  above).  In  addiiton,  The  project  will  create 
synergies with ongoing climate information services initiatives such as Rwanda Meteorological 
Agency toll free number and what’s app group that provides hourly message; ii) USAID daily 
SMS and audio services; and iii) CICA calling centre, which provides RMA weather information 
coupled with agricultural advisory services. 
66 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
II.2: COMPONENT B: SUPPORT TO FARM BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 
229.  The  expected  Outcome for  Component B  will  be:  “Farm  business  development  with 
increased sales and linkages of farmers and cooperatives to services and markets”. 
Expected outputs of Sub-component B1 are: (i) 8,000 FFS members received FaaB training, 
(ii) 500 FFS members and 50 cooperatives received business development coaching and have 
bankable business plans. The cooperatives and FFS will be entry points to provide business 
development services (BDS); (iii) 480 individual smallholders (at least 50 percent women and 
30 percent youth) access farm equipment and tools; (iv) 25 cooperatives access appropriate 
post-harvest  management  facilities;  (vi)  three  (3)  joint  ventures  are  created  between 
cooperatives  and  private  sector  companies  to  invest  in  larger  storage/processing  facilities 
under contractual arrangements. 
Table 17. Complementarity of Component A and phasing with KIIWP1. 
Components / Sub-components 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP2 
Component B: Support to Farm Business Development 
B.1: Developing Farming as a Business Skills. 
B.2: Promotion of Farm Mechanization and Post-harvest Facilities  
B.3: Supporting Backward and Forward Market Linkages  
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements  
230.  Component B will be coordinated under the overall responsibility of the MINAGRI SPIU 
and the direct coordination and supervision of the Program Manager. At SPIU level, KIIWP2 
will lean on the Farmer Organization Specialist recently hired by RDDP, as well as the Market 
Support Specialist already assisting other ongoing IFAD-funded projects. 
231.  Component  B  will  benefit  from  the  experience  of  partner  ICCO  in  Kayonza  District. 
ICCO will leverage on its STARS Project to spur the development of an entrepreneurial farming 
mind-set among KIIWP beneficiaries.  
SUB-COMPONENT B.1: DEVELOPING FARMING AS A BUSINESS (FAAB) SKILLS  
Overall coordination and implementation arrangements 
232.  A  FaaB  training  module  will  be  developed  by  ICCO  and  incorporated  in  the  FFS 
curriculum The FaaB training will then be imparted along FFS by specialized service providers41 
recruited by the Project on a competitive basis. RCA is in charge of several activities connected 
with  the  creation  and  supervision  of  cooperatives  including:  registering,  regulating  and 
supervising cooperatives; setting standards and formulating professional ethics for prudent 
management; assisting with capacity building through training and seminars. 
233.  Based on experience from PASP and PRICE, KIIWP2 will ensure that all grants are duly 
implemented  within  the  first  years,  so  that  proper  monitoring  and  follow  up  of  grant 
beneficiaries  can  be  done,  and  the  real  impact  of  such  important  investments  can  be 
measured. No grants should de facto be disbursed in the last year of the Project. 
234.  An MoU could be signed between RAB/SPIU and Business Development Fund (BDF) at 
the onset of KIIWP2 to manage the grant windows, given its thorough experience, outreach 
capacity through  district  offices  and recently  digitalized  application  process.  BDF has  been 
managing all grants financed by the recent IFAD-funded projects PASP, PRICE and RDDP. 
Capacity building of farmers 
235.  A  FaaB  training  module  will  be  developed  by  ICCO  and  incorporated  in  the  FFS 
curriculum, so that FFS members can acquire Farming-as-a-Business Skills.  
41  Examples  of  such  service  providers  are  HoReCo and  RYAF,  whose  mandate  is  to  encourage  the  involvement  of 
young professionals in implementing programs/projects that support agricultural transformation. 
67 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
236.  The  FaaB  skills  training  will  follow  business  planning  templates  agreed  upon  with 
SACCOs and MFIs for loan applications. The aim is to improve smallholder skills on (i) input 
and output markets and marketing, (ii) production planning, (iii) gross margin calculations, 
(iv) loan investment and repayment, and (iv) business plan.  
237.  To raise awareness on the principles of FaaB, ICCO and the KIIWP2 District team, will 
organize introduction workshops targeting Project beneficiaries. The RAB and District frontline 
staff, as well as FFS Facilitators, will be systematically involved in the FaaB training to ensure 
a spill-over effect and sustainability beyond the Project’s life.  
238.  To implement BDS, Business Development Service Providers (BDSPs) will be recruited. 
To complement their works, young professional organisations, such as the Rwanda Youth in 
Agribusiness Forum (RYAF)42, and the Horticulture in Reality Cooperative (HoReCo)43  could 
be mobilized by the Project as service providers whenever the need and opportunities arise.  
239.  BDSPs will be recruited to organize the capacity building sessions on FaaB. 
240.  BDSPs will also support farmers to prepare their business plans. 
Capacity building of cooperatives 
241.  Based  on  existing  materials, KIIWP2 in  partnership  with  ICCO  will  develop manuals 
and  templates  for  Cooperative  Business  Planning,  in  consultation  with  local  micro-finance 
institutions (MFIs).  
242.  Farmers  supported  through  new  irrigation  or  water  for  livestock  schemes  will  be 
encouraged to join existing cooperatives or form new cooperatives that will be registered with 
the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA).  
243.  The BDSPs will strengthen the organizational and technical capacity of both new and 
existing cooperatives will be strengthened. The capacity of the cooperatives will be built for 
efficient  governance,  management, 
internal  organizational,  membership  policies, 
management procedures, and internet control processes. The leadership will be supported in 
maintenance of records, asset registers, cash books and other cooperative documents. 
244.  Other specialized institutions identified as implementing partners include the Rwanda 
Cooperative Agency (RCA) and NAEB (especially for horticulture export crops. 
Activity 
Quantities  Y1  Y2 
Y3 
Y4  Y5  Y6 
Capacity building of farmers 
Inception Workshop 
Preparing Farming as a Business Curriculum 
BDSP  services  for  capacity  building  on  Faab 
integrated in FFS sessions 
Support to prepare Business Plans 
Capacity building of cooperatives 
  Organizational 
cooperatives 
Support  TA 
cooperatives  
development 
of 
existing 
for  external 
relationships  of 
Exchange visits and study tours 
Support to prepare Business Plans 
1 
1 
1800 
480 
50 
150 
300 
50 
245.  During the BDS sessions, the smallholder farmers and the cooperatives will complete 
their  business plans. From among the business plans, those with implementation potential 
will be selected for Matching Grant financing (see component B2 below). After the Matching 
Grant disbursements, the SACP district team and the recruited BDS consultants will provide 
42 http://www.ryaf.rw/spip.php?article1 
43 http://horecorwanda.com/background/ 
68 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
additional services to the APG groups and the Microenterprises, including (i) technical support 
for the investment implementation, (ii) monitoring of the disbursements and utilization of the 
Matching Grants, and (iii) facilitation of access to markets and financial services. 
246.  The  table  below  summarizes  the  existing  cooperatives  of  the  Project  which  could 
benefit from support. 
Table 18. Details of the cooperatives that could receive KIIWP support  
Sector 
Rice value chain 
Murundi 
Gahini 
Mwiri 
Rwinkwavu 
Karabondo 
Murama 
Kabare 
Ndego 
Total Nr. of 
coops 
Total Nr. of 
HH 
Total Nr. of 
members 
Males 
Females 
% 
Females 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 567 
0 
1 324 
1 838 
456 
0 
515 
1 567 
0 
1 324 
1 838 
456 
0 
515 
964 
0 
764 
1 096 
218 
0 
250 
603 
0 
560 
742 
238 
0 
265 
38% 
42% 
40% 
52% 
51% 
sub-total 
Maize & beans value chain 
5 
5 700 
5 700 
3 292 
2 408 
42% 
Murundi 
Gahini 
Mwiri 
Rwinkwavu 
Karabondo 
Murama 
Kabare 
Ndego 
12 
4 
2 
7 
3 
1 
3 
2 
sub-total 
34 
Horticulture Value Chain 
0 
Murundi 
Gahini 
Mwiri 
Rwinkwavu 
Karabondo  
Murama 
Kabare 
Ndego 
sub-total 
Grand total 
4 
3 
4 
2 
1 
1 
0 
15 
54 
4 864 
587 
146 
3 012 
108 
2 013 
2 845 
234 
4 864 
587 
146 
3 012 
108 
2 013 
2 845 
234 
2 965 
321 
109 
2 145 
79 
1 367 
1 752 
187 
1 899 
266 
37 
867 
29 
646 
1 093 
47 
39% 
45% 
25% 
29% 
27% 
32% 
38% 
20% 
13 809 
13 809 
8 925 
4 884 
35% 
0 
42 
104 
2 131 
93 
26 
20 
0 
2 416 
21 925 
0 
42 
104 
2 131 
93 
26 
20 
0 
2 416 
0 
22 
53 
1 155 
28 
18 
13 
0 
1 289 
21 925 
13 506 
0 
20 
51 
976 
65 
8 
7 
0 
1 127 
8 419 
48% 
49% 
46% 
70% 
31% 
35% 
47% 
38,4% 
Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies  
247.  All  activities related  to  Promotion  of  Farm  Mechanization  and  Post-Harvest  Facilities 
will be placed under the direct supervision of the Access to Finance Specialist at SPIU who will 
also be in charge of the financial services under SC B.2. He/she will work in close coordination 
with (i) the Agronomist supervising the activities meant to enhance climate smart agriculture 
practices and technologies under SC A.3 and (ii) the Agribusiness and Cooperative Specialists 
supervising the delivery of farming-as-a-business skills to individual smallholder farmers and 
cooperative members under SC B.1. Business planning to support the grant applications will 
be provided by the Business Development Service Providers mobilized through ICCO.  
69 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Category.1 grants for small equipment and tools 
248.  This grant category is meant to facilitate the access to on-farm equipment and tools 
for  smallholder  farmers, further to the adoption of the  Climate Smart Agriculture practices 
and technologies they have been exposed to along their FFS training delivered under SC A.3. 
The  peculiarity  of  this  grant  category  is  that  it  will  be  tied  to  a  loan  representing  the  full 
investment sought, and the grant will only be disbursed upon the satisfactory repayment of 
the loan portion. Such performance-based grant (PBG) will thus involve ‘Participating Financial 
Institutions (PFIs)’ who will be selected along the same principle as the ones used in PRICE 
project.  
249.  Women and youth will be given an advantage by being allocated a higher grant portion 
(70% vs 50% for men aged above 30 years). The beneficiaries of this grant category will also 
have the possibility to use a portion of their grant to acquire an agricultural insurance that 
will curb their risk of crop failure and thus also reduce their risk of loan default. Priority will 
be given to such applicants who use agricultural insurance. 
250.  A total of 480 grants will be availed under this category, half of them being specifically 
for women and youth. The maximum ceiling for grants will be USD 2,500 for men >30 and 
USD 3,500 for women and youth. No individual will be able to access a KIIWP2 grant more 
than once, and priority will be given to applicants who have never benefitted from other grant 
facilities under other IFAD-funded projects (e.g. PASP, RDDP or PRICE).  
Table 19. Detailed mechanisms of these Cat.1 grants 
Eligible investments 
Eligible beneficiaries 
Financing modality 
Financing rule 
Max grant ceiling 
Number of grants 
IFAD Budget 
Beneficiary contribution 
Total Budget 
Objectives  
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Nutrition and food 
security 
Category 1a: Small Equipment 
Grants for individual men (> 
30) 
Category 1b: Small Equipment 
for individual women and youth 
(< 30) 
SSIT kits using solar pumps, power tillers, sprayers, agricultural 
insurance premium (for the 1st season only)44, etc. (possibility to 
combine several types of equipment) 
Individuals farmers, males, aged 
above 30, and who have been 
attending KIIWP FFS 
Individuals farmers, women or 
youth (i.e. aged below 30), and 
who have been attending KIIWP 
FFS 
Performance-based grant facility (based on PRICE model): 
- A simplified BP will support grant application, outlining in particular 
market outlet, expected productivity increase and loan repayment 
schedule 
- Loan to be taken by beneficiary on full investment sought, through 
PFI  
- BDF disburses the grant amount to PFI once the loan has been 
disbursed and grant application has been approved 
- Grant is disbursed to beneficiary by PFI once the full loan portion has 
been paid back by the beneficiary 
- Note: interest is charged by PFI on full investment loan 
- IFAD 50% 
- Beneficiary 50% 
USD 2,500  
240 
USD 600,000 (total 50% of 
investment) 
USD 600,000 (total 50% of 
investment) 
USD 1,200,000 
Smallholder CC resilience, improved productivity and product quality, 
enhanced nutrition and food security 
Small Equipment investments adopt CSA technology solutions 
- IFAD 70% 
- Beneficiary 30% 
USD 3,500 
240 
USD 840,000 (total 70% of 
investment) 
USD 360,000 (total 30% of 
investment) 
USD 1,200,000 
Commodities with proven positive nutritional impact are preferred 
44 With grant portion in lieu of non-government subsidized premium portion 
70 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Risk management 
Category 1a: Small Equipment 
Grants for individual men (> 
30) 
Category 1b: Small Equipment 
for individual women and youth 
(< 30) 
Priority will be given to grant applications that consider solutions for 
risk management, including but not limited to agricultural insurance 
251.  The Cat.1 grant application process is schematized as follows: 
Category.2 grants for cooperative micro-projects on post-harvest management 
252.  This  grant  category  is  meant  to  facilitate  the  access  to  small/medium  sized  post-
harvest management facilities for cooperatives involved in KIIWP target value chains, further 
to  the  increase  in  production  triggered  by  the  irrigation  development  and  catchment 
rehabilitation  undertaken under  component  A. Unlike  Cat.1  grants,  this  grant  category  will 
not be necessarily tied to a loan; the beneficiary cooperatives may also raise their contribution 
through their own resources. The grant model under this category will draw from modalities 
used in PASP and RDDP (cooperative-led model).  
253. 
 The cooperatives benefitting from this grant category will also have the possibility to 
get an additional grant to acquire an agricultural insurance (optional) that will curb the risk 
of crop failure among member farmers who are to use the facilities the cooperatives will invest 
in. Priority will be given to such cooperatives who use agricultural insurance. 
254.  A total of 25 grants will be availed under this category. The maximum ceiling for grants 
related  to  post-harvest  management  facilities  for  cooperative  micro-projects  will  be  USD 
15,000. An additional grant of up to USD 5,000 will be availed for agricultural insurance. No 
cooperative will be able to access a KIIWP2 grant more than once, and priority will be given 
to cooperatives who have never benefitted from other grant facilities under other IFAD-funded 
projects (e.g. PASP, RDDP or PRICE).  
71 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 20. Detailed mechanisms of these Cat.2 grants 
Category 2: Grants for cooperative micro-projects on post-harvest management 
Eligible investments 
Additional investments 
(optional) 
Eligible beneficiaries 
Financing modality 
Financing rule 
Max grant ceiling 
Number of grants 
IFAD Budget 
Beneficiary contribution 
Total Budget 
Drying ground, dry storage facility, cold room, maize cribs, etc. 
Agricultural insurance premium45 for cooperative members related to 
the planned other investments 
Registered cooperatives operating in KIIWP target value chains (i.e. 
rice, maize, beans, soybeans, horticulture) 
Cooperative-led grant facility (simplified from PASP model): 
- Full BP to be developed, including marketing arrangements, working 
capital needs (not eligible to grant), and realistic income and cashflow 
statements 
- BDF disburses the grant amount to beneficiary along 3 tranches: 50% 
upon the realization of 100% of the beneficiary’s contribution as 
planned in the BP; 30% upon the approval of the utilization of the first 
instalment; 20% after ascertaining that the working capital funds are 
available as specified in the business plan 
- IFAD 50% 
- Beneficiary 50% (can be from loan or from own resources) 
USD 15,000  
50 
USD 375,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 375,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 750,000 
Additional agricultural insurance premium (optional) 
Max grant ceiling 
insurance 
Number of grants 
insurance 
IFAD Budget insurance 
Beneficiary contribution 
insurance 
Total Additional Budget 
insurance 
USD 5,000  
25 
USD 125,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 125,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 250,000 
IFAD Budget  
Beneficiary contribution  
Grand Total 
Objectives  
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Nutrition and food 
security 
Risk management 
Total Budget including optional insurance premium 
USD 500,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 500,000 (total 50% of investment) 
USD 1,000,000 
Smallholder CC resilience and commercialization. Achieved through 
improved farmers’ productivity and product quality, nutrition and food 
security, pre-processing and marketing capacities. 
Priority will be given to post-harvest management investments that 
include climate-resilient technologies/processes (e.g. rainwater 
harvesting system included in infrastructure, solar powered cold room, 
etc.)  
Commodities with proven positive nutritional impact are preferred 
Priority will be given to grant applications that consider solutions for 
risk management, including but not limited to agricultural insurance 
45 With grant portion in lieu of non-government subsidized premium portion 
72 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
255.  The Cat.2 grant application process is schematized as follows: 
Category.3 grants for joint ventures between cooperatives and private sector 
companies 
256.  This grant category is meant to support the development of contractual arrangements 
between  cooperatives  and  key  off-takers  to  store/process  crop  surpluses  generated  by 
irrigation development in Kayonza district, particularly in Ndego  and Kabare sectors. Unlike 
Cat.1  grants,  this  grant  category  will  not  be  necessarily  tied  to  a  loan;  the  beneficiary 
cooperatives and private sector companies may also raise their contribution through their own 
resources. The grant model under this category will draw from modalities used in PASP and 
RDDP (joint-venture model).  
 The cooperatives benefitting from this grant category will also have the possibility to 
257. 
get an additional grant to acquire an agricultural insurance (optional) that will curb the risk 
of crop failure among member farmers who are to use the facilities the cooperatives will co-
invest in. Priority will be given to such cooperatives who use agricultural insurance. 
258.  A total of 3 grants will be availed under this category. The maximum ceiling for grants 
related  to  medium/large  storage/processing  infrastructure  for  joint  ventures  between 
cooperatives and private sector companies will be US$ 120,000. An additional grant of up to 
US$ 4,000 will be availed for agricultural insurance. No cooperative will be able to access a 
KIIWP2  grant  more  than  once,  and  priority  will  be  given  to  cooperatives  who  have  never 
benefitted from other grant facilities under other IFAD-funded projects (e.g. PASP, RDDP or 
PRICE).  
73 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 21. Detailed mechanisms of this Cat.3 grant 
Category 3: Grants for joint ventures between cooperatives and private sector companies  
Eligible investments 
Additional investments 
(optional) 
Eligible beneficiaries 
Financing modality 
Financing rule 
Max grant ceiling 
Number of grants 
IFAD Budget 
Beneficiary contribution 
Total Budget 
Large warehouses, rice processing facilities, etc. 
Agricultural insurance premium46 for cooperative members related to 
the planned other investments 
Registered cooperatives and private companies operating in KIIWP 
target value chains (i.e. rice, maize, beans, soybeans, horticulture) 
Joint venture grant facility (simplified from PASP model): 
- Full BP to be developed, including marketing arrangements, working 
capital needs (not eligible to grant), and realistic income and cashflow 
statements 
- BDF disburses the grant amount to beneficiary along 3 tranches: 50% 
upon the realization of 100% of the beneficiary’s contribution as 
planned in the BP; 30% upon the approval of the utilization of the first 
instalment; 20% after ascertaining that the working capital funds are 
available as specified in the business plan 
- IFAD 40% 
- Cooperative 20% (can be from loan or from own resources) 
- Private sector 40% (can be from loan or from own resources) 
USD 200 per coop member engaged as shareholder and in contractual 
relationship with the private company, with a maximum of 120,000 
USD 
3 
US$ 360,000 (total 40% of investment) 
- cooperative US$ 180,000 (total 20% of investment) 
- private sector US$ 360,000 (total 40% of investment) 
US$ 900,000 
Additional agricultural insurance premium (optional) 
Max grant ceiling 
insurance 
Number of grants 
insurance 
IFAD Budget insurance 
Beneficiary contribution 
insurance 
Total Additional Budget 
insurance 
US$ 4,000  
3 
US$ 12,000 (total 40% of investment) 
- cooperative US$ 6,000 (total 20% of investment) 
- private sector US$ 12,000 (total 40% of investment) 
US$ 30,000 
IFAD Budget  
Beneficiary contribution  
Grand Total 
Objectives  
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Nutrition and food 
security 
Risk management 
Total Budget including optional insurance premium 
US$ 372,000 (total 40% of investment) 
- cooperative US$ 186,000 (total 20% of investment) 
- private sector US$ 372,000 (total 40% of investment) 
US$ 930,000 
Smallholder CC resilience and commercialization. Achieved through 
improved farmers’ productivity and product quality, nutrition and food 
security, (pre-processing and marketing capacities. 
Priority will be given to post-harvest management investments that 
include climate-resilient technologies/processes (e.g. rainwater 
harvesting system included in infrastructure, use of renewable energy)  
Commodities with proven positive nutritional impact are preferred 
Priority will be given to grant applications that consider solutions for 
risk management, including but not limited to agricultural insurance 
46 With grant portion in lieu of non-government subsidized premium portion 
74 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
259.  The Cat.3 grant application and disbursement process is schematized as follows: 
260.  Note: full details on the grant implementation arrangements will be provided in the 
KIIWP Grant Implementation Manual that will be prepared by the SPIU at the onset of KIIWP2 
and shared with IFAD for No Objection. 
Grant management 
261.  The  management  of  all  grant  facilities  will  be  carried  out  in  collaboration  with  the 
Business Development Fund, building on the structures and mechanisms already established 
for similar funds under other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. A specific MoU will be signed 
between  RAB/SPIU  and  BDF  at  the  onset  of  KIIWP2.  The  project  will  strive  to  establish  a 
thorough grant monitoring system so as to closely follow up and guide the business promoters 
and then draw the impact of these specific interventions in terms of improved productivity, 
food security and income. 
262.  The management of all three grant facilities foreseen in KIIWP2 will require extensive 
upstream  engagement  with  both  applicants  (to  check  their  compliance/eligibility)  and 
participating  financing  institutions  (PFIs)  in  the  case  of  a  grant  tightened  to  a  loan  (Cat.1 
grants). It also requires thorough follow-up, monitoring and evaluation once the grants have 
been disbursed, to ensure that the projects financed are not deviated and the grant tranches 
are  disbursed according to the set procedures. A grant management fee of USD 170,00047 
will thus be availed by the project to BDF, in order to cover such expenditures. 
Table 22. Sub-component B2 implementation activities flowchart 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Draft comprehensive KIIWP2 
Grant Implementation Manual 
SPIU, BDF 
Sign MoU with BDF 
SPIU, BDF 
Launch call for expression of 
interest to apply for KIIWP2 
grants – support it through 
SPIU, district 
team 
Grant implementation 
modalities in KIIWP2 are clearly 
set 
Grant Management MoU is 
signed with BDF 
KIIWP target group is well 
aware of various opportunities 
made available to support their 
47  BDF  grant  management  fee  equivalent  to  about  7%  of  total  grants  managed  by  the  BDF  (including  the  grants 
allocated through the community competition under SC A.1) 
75 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
information/mobilization 
campaign 
Implement Cat.1a grants 
SPIU (led by 
AFS), BDF, PFIs 
20  40  80  100   
Implement Cat.1b grants 
SPIU (led by 
AFS), BDF, PFIs 
20  40  80  100   
Implement Cat. 2 grants 
SPIU (led by 
AFS), BDF 
5 
10  10 
Implement Cat. 3 grants 
SPIU (led by 
AFS), BDF 
1 
1 
1 
Grant management fee to 
BDF 
SPIU 
¼  ¼  ¼ 
¼ 
Follow up and Monitoring of 
KIIWP2 grants 
SPIU, BDF, PFIs 
investments, as well as 
eligibility criteria and 
application process 
240 small individual farmers 
(males >30) access on-farm 
equipment to enhance their use 
of CSA practices and 
technologies promoted by 
KIIWP 
240 small individual farmers 
(women and youth <30) access 
on-farm equipment to enhance 
their use of CSA practices and 
technologies promoted by 
KIIWP 
25 cooperatives in KIIWP target 
VCs enhance their post-harvest 
management facilities to cope 
with surplus production 
generated by the project 
Crop surpluses are 
stored/processed in adequate 
infrastructure through 3 
contractual arrangements 
between cooperatives and key 
off-takers  
BDF has appropriate financial 
capacity to manage KIIWP2 
grants 
All KIIWP grants are closely 
monitored and their impact can 
be measured 
SUB-COMPONENT B.2: SUPPORTING BACKWARD AND FORWARD MARKET LINKAGES  
263.  Expected outputs of the Sub-component will include: ((i) 8,000 cooperative members 
and smallholders have improved access to markets, (ii) 10,000 smallholders have improved 
access to financial services, and (iii) 2,500 smallholders use agricultural insurance products.  
Market access 
264.  Pre-season meetings for cooperatives will be organized to exchange with prospective 
buyers, help farmers assess market opportunities, and plan their production accordingly. The 
BDSPs will facilitate marketing arrangements with traders, processors and/or major off-takers 
through  improved  communication,  market-based  production  programming  and  joint 
marketing. Market exposure of cooperatives will be enhanced by participation in trade fairs 
or agricultural shows. 
265.  Horticulture  exporters  operating  in  the  intervention  area  will  be  linked  to  the 
Horticulture Export Guarantee Facility (currently set at USD 500,000) that has been piloted 
under  PRICE  in  collaboration  with  Rwanda  Development  Bank  (BRD).  Opportunities  to 
complement the guarantee fund with additional financing from other development partners 
will be looked at during the course of the Project, if demand exceeds current capacities. 
266. 
In  the  case  of  pumped  irrigation  that  is  intended  to  develop  highly-commercial 
smallholder  production  systems,  4P-like  arrangements  with  the  private  sector  will  be 
developed  whenever  feasible,  in  particular  for  vegetables,  maize  and  soybeans.  4P 
partnerships  between  cooperatives  and  private  sector  companies  will  be  fostered  through 
joint-venture grants planned under SC B2. 
Financial services 
267.  To facilitate the targeted communities’ access to inclusive financial services, KIIWP2 
will: (i) support the quality and outreach of local financial services, and (ii) build the capacity 
of the target groups in use of financial services. These interventions will be aligned with the 
76 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
above described BDS and MG, so to ensure bankability of the business plans and to facilitate 
the in-cash beneficiary contributions of MG investments. 
268.  Step 1: Selection of Partner Financial Institutions. The offer of partnership with 
local Financial Institutions will be announced publicly by KIIWP2, and expressions of interest 
are  collected  from  FIs  (Financial  Institutions).  Subsequently,  Participating  Financial 
Institutions will be selected using pre-agreed criteria, which include but are not limited to: (i) 
FI  strategy  to  increase  agrifinance,  (ii)  FI  presence  in  Kayonza,  (iii)  FI  overall  financial 
standing and institutional capacity to service KIIWP2 clients in Kayonza, (iv) FI appetite to 
adopt  innovative  financial  products  and tools  suitable  for  the  smallholder  and  agribusiness 
SME sectors active in Kayonza district.  
269. 
It  should  be  noted,  the  KIIWP2  design  mission  has  identified  and  discussed  with 
potential  partner  financial  institutions,  who  have  confirmed  their  interest  to  join  KIIWP2 
activities:  (i)  four  Kayonza  based  SACCOs,  (ii)  most  potential  Microfinance  Institutions: 
Duterimbere, RIM and Umutanguha,  all of which operate in Kayonza through their district-
branches  in  or  next  to  Kayonza,  and  have  the  appetite  to  strengthen  their  outreach  and 
products in line with KIIWP2 targets, and (iii) additional possible partner MFIs: Goshen and 
Copedu. 
270.  Step  2:  Financial  literacy  trainings.  To  strengthen  the  KIIWP2  target  groups’ 
financial literacy skills, KIIWP together with ICCO, AMIR (Rwanda Microfinance Association) 
and the locally present Financial Institutions will provide targeted trainings to the smallholder 
households. This activity will include support in the opening of bank accounts and training on 
basic banking skills and concepts such as “Saving for a Purpose”, borrowing, interest rates, 
collateral, bank transactions, payments, and use of mobile and digital banking. Focus will be 
given to women (minimum 50 per cent), youth (minimum 30 per cent). To enable increases 
in savings among target groups, KIIWP2 would benefit from WFP VSLA (Village Savings and 
Loan Association) development programme. 
271.  Step  3:  Development  of  tailored  agrifinance  products  with  PFIs.  KIIWP2  in 
partnership  with  ICCO  and  AFR  will  work  with  the  PFIs  to  develop  and  strengthen  their 
innovative and client-oriented agri-finance products for MSMEs and smallholders, suitable for 
possible new clients in Kayonza, including equipment leasing and value chain finance. 
272.  Step 4: Development of institutional capacity of Kayonza district PFIs. locally 
present Kayonza district branches of PFIs including especially the SACCOs and MFIs receive 
institutional  capacity  building to strengthen their  local  agri-finance  capacities,  use  of  client 
assessment and monitoring systems, and proactive identification and risk assessment of new 
potential client pipeline. Furthermore, the project will support the PFIs in scoping for demand 
and potential establishment of agent network in immediate vicinity of the KIIWP2  
273.  Step  5:  ICT4D  solutions  for  the  PFIs.  KIIWP2  in  partnership  with  key  players, 
including ICCO, AGRA, and AFR will also promote the digitalization of financial services for 
smallholders  and cooperatives in order to reduce  transaction costs, increase efficiency and 
sustainable access to finance. Through competitive selection, a financial support package is 
made  available for  the  PFIs  for  their  proposed and  preferred  ICT4D  solution  procurement, 
R&D, installation and training costs. 
274.  Step 6: Access to credit lines. KIIWP2 in partnership with ICCO, AFR and IFAD will 
facilitate the MFIs and SACCOs to access credit lines by IFAD’s partner institutions, including 
potential  candidates  IFC,  WBG,  ABC  Fund  and  Rabobank,  to  meet  their  growing  financial 
needs.  This  entails  organization  of  workshops,  identification  of  financier  interest  and 
requirements,  identification  and  preparation  of  summary  notes  on  potential  pipeline 
investments, negotiations and preparation of full proposals by the PFIs supported by ICCO. 
During the design mission, discussions were held with IFC, WBG and ABC fund and each of 
them are in principle interested to invest into the MFI sector in Rwanda through their existing 
investment instruments. 
275. 
In  addition,  the  above  described  Matching  Grants  (Sub-Component  B2)  will  be 
implemented so that they leverage and stimulate commercial rural finance in the target areas, 
77 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
co-finance  strategic  investments  with  the  local  FIs,  and  establish  a  sustainable  long-term 
access  to financial  services.  As  successfully implemented  in  IFAD’s  PRICE  programme,  the 
individual household-targeting grants under Categories 1a and 1b are made to the households 
through Partner Financial Institutions, against good performance of smallholders in repayment 
of loans. The implementation steps of this scheme are explained in the above sections. 
Agricultural insurance  
276.  KIIWP2  will  support  understanding  of  and  access  to  agricultural insurance  products 
offered  under  Rwanda’s  National  Agricultural  Insurance  Scheme  (NAIS).  It  will  support 
activities  at  demand,  supply,  and enabling environment  levels.  NAIS  works  on  agricultural 
microinsurance.48  The  purpose  of  working  with  this  level  of  agricultural  insurance  in  the 
project, is to improve resilience of KIIWP2 beneficiaries by both protecting their livelihoods, 
and  by  taking  away  one  of  the  barriers  they  have  in  accessing  finance  to  invest  in  their 
production. As expressed in the IPRM, it will also help to protect the sustainability of some 
KIIWP2 investments.  
277.  Lessons from NAIS and RDDP were built on in KIIWP2 design, as they are relevant for 
both  livestock  and  crop  insurance.  RDDP  producers  now  recognize  the  value  of  highly-
productive livestock and the role of insurance within this. RDDP helped crowd in insurance 
stakeholders,  connect  them  with  farmers’  groups  and  distribution  channels  offering  other 
services, and provide public goods like insurance education. There was no livestock insurance 
available for project beneficiaries before KWAMP and then RDDP. As a result of these projects, 
beneficiaries increased their understanding of insurance, insurers became interested in the 
market, and GoR has set-up the NAIS for livestock and crops. NAIS has also recognized the 
need to link a variety of programmes and entities working with farmers, and the importance 
of  further  developing  insurance  awareness  and  understanding  at  all  levels  of  the  market. 
Other  lessons  from  RDDP  on  agricultural  insurance  relate  to  targeting,  and  activities  to 
overcome  affordability  constraints  for  some  target  groups.  Linked  to  social  protection,  for 
Girinka49  beneficiaries,  RDDP  has  been  phasing out  project-funded  premium subsidies  and 
been  educating  producers  on  saving  for  insurance,  as  well  as  working  with  an  insurance 
partner  to  offer  different  coverage  levels  and  therefore  premium  cost  options.  Also,  Milk 
Collection  Centres  (MCCs)  can  pre-finance  insurance  and  then  deduct  premium  payments 
from  payments  of  collected  milk.  Similar  models  will  be  explored  in  KIIWP2  for  other 
aggregators. 
278.  The  primary  beneficiaries  of  KIIWP2  agricultural  insurance  activities  will  be  farmers 
already targeted by the project and who are involved in the value chains covered by NAIS 
insurance products.50 They will be reached directly through education and awareness raising 
on agricultural insurance, contribution to insurance premium within the context of business 
plans linked to matching grants (Sub-component B.2), as well as indirectly through building 
capacity of NAIS stakeholders (NAIS project management unit, insurers, existing distribution 
channels)  and  other  entities  mobilizing  or  working  with  farmers  within  KIIWP2.  Additional 
agricultural insurance activities are planned under Component C.1 which aim to support policy 
dialogue to improve access to NAIS products for all KIIWP2 target groups in the long-term.  
48 While IFAD is exploring ways to partner with the African Risk Capacity (ARC), this is not yet operational in Rwanda 
and its future progress is dependent on several factors. ARC is a macro-level agricultural insurance mechanism which 
protects  against  sovereign  risk  mainly  in  the  event  of  very  infrequent,  high  impact  droughts  at  country  level.  All 
levels of agricultural insurance can co-exist in a country as part of a risk-layering approach, as they have different 
features, purposes, and targets.  Rwanda is a member of ARC and the Government of Rwanda, and, under MINAGRI 
leadership, has signed a memorandum of understanding with ARC and has formed a technical working group that is 
customizing  indices. However,  onboarding  of  a  country  is  a  lengthy  process  that  requires  substantial  training  and 
index customization. Notably, there may be some challenges in the hazard modelling/index customization compared 
to  other  countries  considering  Rwanda’s  substantial  geographic  rainfall  variability  due  to  its  diverse  topography. 
Index insurance (at micro level) based on only rainfall information has a history of failure in Rwanda, which indicates 
some of the potential difficulties. 
49 Girinka: One Cow per Poor Family 
50 Currently crop insurance products offered under NAIS are: maize, rice, chilli, French beans, Irish potato. NAIS is 
planning to add: banana, cassava, beans and soya beans. All crop products are subsidized by NAIS at 40 per cent. 
Other commodities may be added depending on demand and government priorities. Livestock insurance is available 
for dairy cows, pigs, and poultry. 
78 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
279.  The planning and implementation for all activities related to agricultural insurance in 
B.3  and  C.1  will  be  decided  in  collaboration  with  NAIS  project  management  and  technical 
staff.  To ensure linkages  with  other  KIIWP2  activities, the  guidance  and  oversight  of  SPIU 
experts in climate, access to finance, and market access would be especially important. Joint 
planning with NAIS will ensure the financing, approach and information are in-line with current 
Government strategy and plans. In addition, this will allow NAIS to coordinate with leverage 
any other industry or development actor partnerships it has or may develop, such as planned 
technical support by the World Bank Group, potential future WFP activities in insurance, NAIS 
partner insurers and the Rwanda Insurers Association (ASSAR). It is the preference of GoR to 
internalize and develop capacity on agricultural insurance within the NAIS structure and the 
Rwandan  insurance  sector.  As  such,  some  of  the  World  Bank  Group  planned  funding  in 
agricultural insurance will be complementary and focus on further developing NAIS technical 
and  operational  structures,  as  well  as  other  sector  development  support  (Annex  4  on 
insurance).51 Recognizing both the existing capacity within NAIS, but at the same time the 
requirements under KIIWP2, some financing has been made available in activities to allow for 
hiring of additional technical or implementation support as appropriate. KIIWP2 management 
and NAIS can also take advantage of implementation support from the INSURED programme 
on request. An INSURED expert supported the design. It is a technical assistance programme 
for  the  IFAD-financed  portfolio  which  is  financed  by  Sida  and  housed  in  the  Platform  for 
Agricultural Risk Management (PARM), at IFAD.  
280.  On  the  demand-side,  KIIWP2  will  support  education  and  awareness  raising  for 
smallholders  to  improve  the  understanding  of  targeted  producers  about  agricultural 
insurance. Lack of awareness and understanding is a reported constraint by all stakeholders 
spoken to as part of the design mission, and something which there are plans to partially test 
with  some  producer  groups  within  KIIWP1.  The  primary  ToT  targets  for  farmer  education 
under  KIIWP2  support  will  be  threefold,  although  it  can  depend  on  needs  at  the  time  of 
implementation: cooperative leaders; extension officers; and distribution channels (financial 
and non-financial). Relevant district officers, such as those with a role to support producer 
cooperatives,  or  extension  services,  should  also  be  included  within  the  same  or  separate 
trainings.  As  a  result,  it  is  expected  at  least  5,000  farmers  will  be  trained  on  agricultural 
insurance. 
281.  So far, education in NAIS has been mainly targeted at some producer cooperatives, 
for which the NAIS project management unit already have a module developed and experience 
in  delivering.  KIIWP2  will  expand  on  this  to  train  more  producer  cooperative  leaders  and 
members within the value chains targeted by NAIS products in the KIIWP2 project areas. It 
will also support ToTs and farmer education with other individuals, groups, and aggregators 
linked to the project, such as but not limited to : extension officers and farmers receiving FFS 
training in Component A ; MFIs and SACCOs and their clients/members in B.3 ; farmers linked 
to business development plans and to SMEs financed under B.2. 
282. 
It is expected that as a result of this support, 8 ToT sessions will be conducted, and 
200  farmers  education  sessions  will  take  place  for  a  total  of  5,000  farmers.  This  will  be 
achieved through financing the adjustment of ToT materials as required (depending on ToT 
target),  production  and  printing  of  manuals,  delivery  of  ToTs,  and  funding  farmer-level 
training sessions.  
283.  As  a  complement to the  ToT  and  farmer  education  sessions, KIIWP2  will  work  with 
NAIS to develop awareness raising campaigns and materials, which will be disseminated in 
Kayonza. Depending on what is available at the time, and where there are needs and gaps, 
this could include development and dissemination of simple pictorial farmer pamphlets, radio 
spots, and/or roadshows52.  
284.  Education and awareness raising on agricultural insurance are important public goods 
to be provided by the Government. As such, the focus should be on improving understanding 
51 The final design of the WBG project is pending validation and has a tentative start-date of end-2021. 
52 To support the use of agricultural insurance as part of production investments, matching-grant recipients in Sub-
component B.2 will also be eligible for a contribution to the insurance premium for one season. 
79 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
about  how  agricultural  insurance  works  in  general,  its  role  in  risk  management  and 
development, and helping farmers to take informed decisions as to whether or not they want 
to buy it, their rights, product options, and how to proceed should they want to. KIIWP2 and 
NAIS  should  aim  to  collaborate  with  World  Bank  SPIU  to  coordinate  and  get  additional 
technical inputs, as well as any other donors who may have a role in education and awareness 
raising of other farmers in Kayonza, such as WFP plans. To ensure convergence of messages 
and plans, it is also important that private insurers and the Insurance Regulator (who has a 
role  in  consumer  protection),  have  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  and  be  aware  of  new 
materials and plans.  
285.  To address some supply-side constraints, KIIWP2 will support capacity building of NAIS 
stakeholders (NAIS project management unit, insurers, distribution channels)  on i. Climate 
information; and ii. Bundling distribution models for agricultural insurance.  
286.  KIIWP2  will  support  training  on  climate  variability,  climate  information  tools,  and 
interpretation.  The  climate  information  training  will  build  on  a  partnership  of  KIIWP1  with 
MeteoRwanda, and the suggested target audience is NAIS project management and technical 
staff, insurance technical staff involved in NAIS, and potentially other insurers through ASSAR. 
One training session on this topic is foreseen. Some agricultural insurance expertise should 
be financed to adjust the training for the insurance audience. 
287.  The  main  purpose  is  to  help  insurers  understand  in  more  depth  about  climate  and 
weather  patterns  and risk occurrence in Kayonza and encourage continued outreach in the 
district, and satisfaction of smallholders. One reason is that in some interviews  carried out 
during the design mission, it was reported that some insurers were struggling with high claims 
ratios, and therefore had to compensate more than the profit brought in by the premium. If 
this was a long-term issue, there would need to be other technical adjustments to products, 
or some areas might not be suitable for insurance. However, mission meetings suggested in 
some cases, for crop insurance in some sectors in the district, it could be a short-term issue, 
with the first year of NAIS coverage coinciding with a loss year.  In 2020, extreme flooding 
was experienced in non-irrigated marshlands, however it does not usually happen every year. 
As  a  result,  one  insurer  reported  reluctance  to  continue  insuring  farmers  non-irrigated 
marshland. There are also other benefits of insurance stakeholders having their capacity build 
in climate and weather issues to improve product and scheme performance for smallholders.  
288.  The  training  content  should  therefore  aim  to  raise  awareness  and  improve 
understanding of using climate information tools of insurance stakeholders to track long-term 
trends,  seasonal  forecasts,  and  actual  weather/climate-related  risk  events.  This  improves 
insurance stakeholders understanding of insurance products on offer, when they should be 
prepared for claims, and also helps them advocate for any necessary adjustments to product 
design and/or pricing, for example if shifts are observed in start and end of season, if climate 
and weather risk occurrences are more or less prevalent in some areas, or if some risks have 
occurred which the index did not capture (known as basis risk). Lastly, it can highlight the 
model in some insurance  schemes,  whereby farmer-level  climate  and  weather information 
tools, such as  forecasts  and related advice  via SMS  can be offered as  a service  to insured 
farmers.  The  insurer  or  NAIS  might  be  responsible  for  creating  partnerships  to  add  this 
service.  The  advantages  are  that  farmers  can  become  more  aware  of  climate  risk 
management and linked production practices (e.g.  when to plant according to the weather 
forecast), and they can see the value of insurance, even in years where there are no payouts. 
289.  The training on bundling distribution models for agricultural insurance KIIWP2 together 
with NAIS, will finance and support the technical development of a training module, as well 
as organization and delivery of at least 4 sessions for 4 different sets of participants (although 
the audience can be combined from different types of stakeholders). The aim of the training 
is to improve the development of the partner-agent model of insurance delivery - whereby 
insurance is bundled or packaged directly with other products offered by financial and non-
financial  service  providers  like  credit,  inputs,  small-scale  technology,  off-taker  contracts  - 
capacity building workshops will take place at the national and district level on bundling and 
distribution options. 
80 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
290.  The  workshops  will  be  targeted  at  insurers  and  financial  service  providers 
accompanying other activities in Component B, but with some opportunity for interested non-
financial  service  providers  to  benefit  as  well  (e.g.,  off  takers,  SMEs  offering  small-scale 
irrigation on pay-as-you-go credit).  The audiences should mainly be technical and business 
development staff. The workshops will also form a basis for matchmaking between insurers 
and  distribution  channels  interested  in  developing  a  bundled  approach.  As  such,  it  will  be 
important  to  consult  and  coordinate  with  other  KIIWP2  implementation  stakeholders 
overseeing  related  activities  such  as  ICCO  and  AMIR  in  the  case  of  training  of  MFIs  and 
SACCOs. It would also be important to verify with NAIS project management and technical 
staff  that there  have been  no changes  since  the  design  of  KIIWP2 to insurance  regulation 
which might prevent the bundling of products. To create use cases of agricultural insurance 
linked  to  other  business  models,  cooperative  and  private  sector  company  matching-grant 
recipients  in  sub-component  B.2,  will  also  be  eligible  for  a  matching  contribution  to  the 
insurance premium for their members/customers. 
291.  The  objective  being that if  bundling  was  used for  delivery  of  agricultural insurance, 
farmers have one point of contact and would be able to pay in more manageable instalments 
along with the loan repayments, or in some cases, the distribution channel might pay some 
or part of the premium cost if it addresses their business interest. For distribution channels it 
protects their lending risk and allows them to serve more rural clients. For insurers and NAIS, 
it becomes more achievable and efficient to reach people and achieve scale. So far, financial 
service  providers  mainly  refer  the  farmer  to  the  insurer,  rather  than  entering  into  direct 
education or selling on behalf of the insurer. One MFI reported to already offer direct bundling 
of agricultural insurance with their loans, but it was not clear to what extent. 
292.  The  training  content  should  cover  aspects  including  rationale,  benefits,  and 
opportunities  of  bundling  for  all  stakeholders  (insurers,  distribution  channels,  clients); 
examples of existing bundling models with financial and non-financial service providers (within 
and  outside  Rwanda);    roles  and  responsibilities  in  insurance  delivery  in  a  bundled  model 
(distributor  Vs  insurer);  voluntary  Vs  compulsory  bundled  approaches;  needs  and  gaps  to 
develop  more  bundled  approaches;  existing  and  potential  challenges  in  bundling.  On  the 
latter, whilst most MFIs and SACCOs, as well as some non-financial service providers like AIF 
expressed an interest in bundling, it was reported by an MFI during the design mission that 
one challenge is the speed of payouts by the insurer. This is a critical issue not only for the 
insured farmer, but also for the distributor. In the case of credit-linked insurance, the payout 
is  linked  to  the  operations  of  credit-provider  and  is  supposed  to  protect  against  default. 
Another  issue  that  might  need  additional  attention  is  how  distributors  could  plan  for  and 
manage pre-financing of the premiums. This is a requirement in agricultural insurance since 
all premiums for crop insurance must be paid before the start of the growing season to avoid 
adverse selection, whereby individuals could choose to buy insurance only if they know it will 
be  a  bad  season.  In  partner-agent  models, the  distribution  channel is  required to  pay the 
premium  costs  upfront  to  the  insurer  and  the  client  pays  back  in  instalments  (or  it  is 
sometimes  partially  or  entirely  financed  by  the  distribution  channel  as  a  business  and 
marketing strategy, e.g., to avoid side-selling in the case of off takers, or to promote the use 
of certain seeds). 
293.  Sustainability  and scaling-up  of  agricultural  insurance  is  at the  heart  of the related 
activities proposed in KIIWP2. There is a direct link to NAIS priorities and plans, with KIIWP2 
both benefitting from the presence of NAIS, its services, products, and partial subsidy, and 
also  contributing  to  its  scale-up  through  support  to  farmer  education,  capacity  building  of 
NAIS  stakeholders  and  KIIWP2  distribution  channels,  and  policy  dialogue.  The  agricultural 
insurance  activities  within  KIIWP2  also  represent  innovative  approaches  to  delivery  of 
education and the products themselves. In particular the approach to train extension workers 
in  insurance  would  be  an  innovation  within  Rwanda  and  it  would  be  a  good  international 
practice. The effort to increase  bundling of insurance with the credit and potentially grants 
under KIIWP2 would also represent an innovation within Rwanda.  Innovation and scaling-up 
of  agricultural  insurance  will  also  come  through  NAIS  collaboration  with  other  donors, 
particularly the World Bank. KIIWP2-NAIS collaboration in Kayonza can inform some World 
81 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Bank-funded activities for scale-up (e.g., extension officer training, bundling approaches). At 
the same time, the presence of World Bank-funded activities will be important for helping to 
create  a  more  conducive  enabling  environment,  bring  in  other  innovations  such  as  digital 
solutions, and build sector sustainability.  
II.3: COMPONENT C: INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND PROJECT COORDINATION  
294. 
 The  objective  of  this  sub-component  is  to  strengthen  institutions  that  can  support 
directly or indirectly the implementation of KIIWP and provide policy supports that are needed 
for the effective implementation of the project.  
SUB-COMPONENT C.1: POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT  
295.  Support  for  policy  dialogue  will  be  provided  by  KIIWP  through  an  evaluation  of 
implementation and impact of new or  existing policies related to the project activities with 
relevant  national,  and  district  level  stakeholders.  Below  are  concrete  examples  of  policy 
discussion points that can be raised and addressed in multi-stakeholder platforms and fora of 
dialogue to be supported by KIIWP: 
a.  Support to national policy on contract farming; 
b.  Support  to  law  on  financial  lease  for  agricultural  equipment  (e.g.  “special 
registry” requirement in the law that is yet to be effective);  
c.  Discussion on Value Added Tax (VAT) in rice processing that makes Rwandan 
rice less competitive with regional products; 
d.  Current issues of availability and quality of seeds, including multiplication. 
Gender and youth mainstreaming 
296.  Capacity building interventions  will be identified for KIIWP staff under the SPIU, 
including  RAB  and  district  personnel  engaged  in  KIIWP  implementation.  These  capacity 
building activities will be preceded by a needs assessment to be elaborated for the SPIU, RAB 
and district personnel. The financing of these activities will be done by the concerned entities 
and co-financed by the project, provided that these capacity building activities are benefiting 
KIIWP implementation and build the sustainability prospects of the project. Collaboration with 
the  Rwanda  Capacity  Development  and  Employment  Services  Board  (CESB)  will  be  thus 
explored and pursued. 
SUB-COMPONENT C.2: PROJECT COORDINATION  
297.  This  component  focuses  on  providing  the  coordination  arrangements  including  the 
financial and human resources for the implementation of the project.  
298.  The  institutional  arrangements  for  KIIWP2  will  remain  aligned  to  the  current 
implementation framework of IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. The Lead Project Agency will 
be the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB), an implementing 
agency  of  MINAGRI.  The  Chief  Finance  Officer  of  RAB  will  consequently  become  the  Chief 
Budget Holder for the project as it is currently for other on-going projects under the SPIU for 
IFAD-funded projects. 
299.  The current Operations Manager for KIIWP1 will also assume the same functions for 
kIIWP2.  At  the  completion  of  KIWP1,  all  staff  will  be  transferred  to  KIIWP2  in  order  for  a 
smooth implementation of both phases plus additional staffthatwill be recruited by the SPIU 
(see institutional arragements). international technical assistance will be recruited in order to 
support  the  project  team  to  implement  a  project  with  high  technical  complexity  (possibly 
areas such as irrigation development, agribusiness specialist, CSA and GAP specialist). These 
TA will be recruited by the SPIU. 
300.  At an operational level, the SPIU will:  
82 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
a)  take  overall  responsibility  for  the  planning,  management  and  supervision  of  all 
three project components and the activities under them; 
b)  assist the districts to prepare AWPBs for the project, consolidate these and submit 
the project AWPB to MAINAGRI and IFAD for comment and approval; 
c)  conduct project-level procurement of good and services, and support district-level 
procurement as appropriate;  
d)  in collaboration with participating districts, disburse and control the flow of funds 
for various contractual and partnership agreements, and ensure timely submission 
of supporting documentation;  
e)  manage relationships with, and backstop implementation by, the districts and with 
other partners e.g. research and training institutions, and service providers;  
f)  develop and implement a communication and knowledge management strategy to 
manage relations with the public, project partners, civil society and farmers;  
g)  establish arrangements for actively collaborating with other relevant development 
initiatives in the dairy sector;  
h)  prepare implementation progress reports, based on a participatory monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system and a synthesis of all district reports, and submit these 
and financial reports to local governments, MINAGRI and IFAD in a timely manner. 
301.  At  the  district  level,  implementation  will  be  monitored  by  the  Director  in  charge  of 
agriculture in collaboration with existing staff. In line with the practice for other IFAD-funded 
projects in Rwanda, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be in place. The one put in place 
by MINAGRI for KIIWP1 will also assume the same functions for KIIWP2.  
Table 23. Project management implementation flowchart 
Activity 
Appointment of 
project staff 
Procurement of office 
equipment 
Supervision visits  
Baseline study 
COI Surveys 
Mid-term Review 
Project Completion 
Report 
Installation of M&E 
system  
Installation of FM 
systems  
KIIWP1  PY1  PY2  PY3  PY4  PY5  PY6  Project 
Responsibility 
KIIWP1/2  HRD 
KIIWP1/2 
ADM 
KIIWP2 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP2 
KIIWP2 
KIIWP2 
KIIWP1 
KIIWP1 
SPIU 
SPIU M&E  Officer 
SPIU M&E  Officer 
Project  manager  and 
M&E  Officer 
SPIU  Coordinator  and 
manager 
project 
NPCO 
-  Project 
Manager 
SPIU  –  M&E  Senior 
Officer 
– 
SPIU 
Controller 
Financial 
83 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
PART III: PROJECT PROCEDURES AND PLANNING 
III.1. PLANNING AND SUPERVISION  
302.  Activities  prior  to  effectiveness.  The  Project  will  be  a  continuation  of  KIIWP1, 
including the implementation structures. Critical start-up activities are financed under KIIWP1 
(see  table  X  for  complementary  activities  between  KIIWP1  and  2).  This  includes:  (i)  re-
appointment of all staff in accordance; (ii) continuation and use of the management system; 
(iii) preparation of the first AWPB including initiation of major  procurement, as a minimum 
finalization of bidding documents; (iv) finalization of MoUs with intra-Government and other 
strategic partners; and (v) recruitment of TA to be ready at project start-up. 
303.  Planning.  Planning  will  be  guided  by  the  project’s  strategy, log-frame  and  broader 
results framework which will inform the development of annual work plans oriented towards 
planned results with clear identification of how planned activities are expected to lead to those 
results.  
III.1.1. ANNUAL WORKING PLAN AND BUDGET (AWPB) PROCESS 
304.  Principles.  The  document  which  guides  implementation  and  identifies  activities 
required to each the Project objectives is the AWPB. The AWPB will follow the fiscal year, as 
per  planning  systems  in  Rwanda.  The  AWPB  development  process  is  expected  to  start  in 
Octoberof the fiscal year. AWPBs will be cleared by the Project Steering Committee and sent 
to IFAD 60 days prior to the end of each programme year for no objection. The AWPB will be 
prepared  in  the  format  described  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for  AWPBs  by  the  SPIU  with 
substantial participation of other implementing partners - NGOs and Government agencies. 
305.  The AWPB will be informed by an assessment of current implementation progress and 
will  describe  the  strategic  direction  of  the  project  for  the  coming  year  along  with  results 
expected (targets) under each component and how those results will be achieved. This will 
be complemented by a resource plan, budget and risk analysis for each result. The AWPB will 
include  plans  for  training  and  technical  assistance,  M&E  and  procurement  for  the  year  in 
question. Each AWPB will include a detailed description of planned Programme activities by 
component, sub-component and activity, and a procurement plan for 18 months for the first 
fiscal year, 12 months for the following fiscal years).   
306.  Roll out of the AWPB process. The SPIU will establish the funds available for the 
AWPB for a particular year as per cost tables. The Project District coordinator will align the 
activities to the needs of the beneficiary sectors with due regard to the performance contracts 
entered into  by  the  District.  The  participation  of  District  authorities  and representatives  of 
beneficiaries  in this  exercise  will be  paramount,  and  an  activity  schedule,  prepared  by the 
project  district  coordinator  and  approved  by  the  District  Council.  It  will  be  drawn  up  in 
consultation with all stakeholders at district level. There will be meetings between the district 
planner and service provider, they will share project documents and estimated budget, and 
identified activities implemented by each service provider .When activities are  identified for 
the fiscal year, they form groups with RAB, MINIAGRI , district and service providers and start 
brainstorming  content  of  action  plan,  and  each  service  provider  proposes  activities  and 
estimated amount.  
307.  Once the consultations and exchanges  are done and the first draft is  produced, the 
SPIU will ensure that the activities  presented for  financing are eligible. After  consolidation, 
the draft AWPB will be submitted to the PSC for approval and later to IFAD for comments and 
acceptance,  no  later  than  60  days  before  the  beginning  of  the  relevant  financial  Year.  No 
withdrawal of funds shall be made from the Loan/Grant Accounts until the AWPB has been 
approved. If required, the SPIU may revise the AWPB half yearly.  
308.  Each AWPB shall include, among other things, a detailed description of planned Project 
activities by component, sub-component and activity, and a procurement plan for eighteen 
months (for the first fiscal year, twelve months for the following fiscal years). The SPIU will 
establish the funds available for the AWPB for a particular year as per cost tables.  
84 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
AWPB OUTLINE 
The AWPB will have three sections: (i) a narrative section (in word) describing the results of the previous year 
and the activities planned for the upcoming year; (ii) a detailed budget (in excel) (iii) a procurement plan. This 
must include as a minimum:  
a.  Executive Summary 
b.  Summary Project Description 
c.  Summary of implementation to date and results achieved  
d.  Proposed Strategic Priorities for the upcoming year 
e.  Description of Expected results and activities (per component and per sector) 
i.  Schedule of implementation (per month) 
ii.  Related procurement plan 
iii.  Links to the results framework  
f. 
Implementation constraints and risks mitigation 
g.  Budget Summary (per financier, per component, per category) 
h.  Detailed table per implementing agency and summary by project activity. E.g. for one activity, 
you may have several implementing agencies contributing to it.  
III.1.2. PROJECT SUPERVISION 
309.  The SPIU will have to produce for the supervision missions a progress report containing 
information  on  the  progress  of  activities,  outputs,  the  status  of  implementation  of  the 
recommendations of the previous mission, the material progress of activities in relation to the 
project indicators and the updated logical framework. 
310.  The supervision of the Project will be carried out jointly by IFAD and the Government 
of  Rwanda  through  the  ministries  concerned  and  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
representatives  of  the  beneficiaries  and  the  institutional  partners,  on  the  basis  of  one 
supervision mission per year. In addition, regular monitoring missions and/ or implementation 
suport mission could be carried out if required by IFAD. They will pay particular attention to 
progress towards the achievement of results and impacts, the the success of the Project as 
well as to the constraints encountered. 
III.1.3.MID-TERM REVIEW 
311.  The project will undertake a rigorous Mid Term Review (MTR) to ensure efficient project 
spending,  leading  towards  the  intended  outcomes.  It  should  be  agreed  between  the  SPIU 
Coordinator, KIIWP2 Manager and IFAD, early in year 3 which modality will be used to conduct 
the  MTR,  e.g.  an  internal  exercise  conducted  by  RAB  and  validated  through  an  IFAD 
Supervision Mission, or recruitment of consultants, either by MINIAGRI or IFAD. Some of the 
critical elements to be assessed during MRT are:  
a.  Assess the irrigation schemes technology and development status;  
b.  Assess  the  status  of  organizations  and  how  capacity  building  plans  were 
implemented;  
c.  Assess FFS approach – how is the uptake, are facilitators and farmers enjoying 
it, any visible results;  
d.  Assess the adequacy of technologies and practices proposed as well as possible 
social and environmental externalities;  
e.  Approach to private sector engagement;  
85 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
f.  Impact and relevance of capacity building activities;  
g.  Efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  Component  B  interventions,  particularly  on 
innovations for possible scaling-up such as insurance and finance;  
h.  Adequacy  of  implementation  arrangements,  including  allocation  of  human 
resource towards the project, and efficiency of planning processes;  
i.  Performance of the M&E system,; and 
j.  Performance  in  procurement  and  financial  management,  including  assessing 
the effectiveness of the TA.  
312.  The output of the MTR will be a MTR document, together with an Aide Memoire. This 
will  include  a  revised  budget  to  guide  utilization  of  the  remaining  funds;  revised 
recommendations for the use of TA; and an updated PIM. The exercise should be followed up 
by development of a second 3 year plan for project implementation.  
III.1.4.PROJECT CLOSURE 
313.  At the end of the project, a completion mission will be carried out and result in a by a 
completion report and a closing workshop. They will highlight the results, effects and impact 
of  the  project  on  the  target  groups,  and  will  allow  the  capitalization  and  lessons.  The 
completion report will be prepared before the project closure date and will address, among 
other  things,  the  following  points:  (a)  the  achievement  of  its  objectives,  (b)  the  benefits 
obtained from the Project, (c) the performance of the parties involved in the implementation 
of  the  project,  (d)  the  implementation  of  the  costs;  and  (e)  the  lessons  learnt  from  the 
implementation of the project. The PCR will be also completed from different studies and in 
particular with the end of the project outcome survey.  
314.  Project  closure  must  be  planned  6  months  earlier  that  the  IFAD  loan  closing  dates 
(financial  closure),  to  ensure  that  various  assets  are  handed  over,  and  that  all  studies, 
including PCR, are completed on time. Major infrastructure and equipment is expected to be 
handed  over  to  the  communities,  with  a  management  plan  or  following  comprehensive 
operational and management trainings.  
III.2: M&E, KM AND COMMUNICATION  
III.2.1 MONITOR AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 
M&E structure and processes 
315.  The  Project’s  Results  based Logical Framework will be the foundation of the Project 
M&E  system.  The  M&E  system  will  help  streamline  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting 
procedures, responsibilities and processes essential to track performance and progress of the 
various components and activities of the programme in comparison with the set targets in the 
Annual Work Plan and budgets (AWPBs). The M&E system will work as a useful tool to guide 
management during implementation of the programme.  The M&E system  will entail: 
a.  Data collection and reporting formats for the different reporting centers 
b.  Design and implementation of assessments of program performance on specific 
investments 
c.  the carrying out of baseline(during KIIWP1), mid-line and end-line surveys in 
adherence  to  the  quality  standards  set  out  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for  the 
measurement of Core Indicators at outcome level (the so-called COI guidelines)  
d.  Definitions  of  specific  responsibilities  and  roles  of  different  stakeholders  at 
diverse  levels  and  offices  in  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting  of  KIIWP 
implementation progress. 
e.  Integration of KIIWP activities into the AWP&Bs of Kayonza District and other 
relevant government programmes 
86 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
f.  A user friendly electronic monitoring system (MIS) for  data storage, analysis 
and reporting which will be integrated with the MINAGRI MIS.  
g.  Plans for capacity building for the SPIU and district staff to ensure that the M&E 
system is operational. 
316.  The  conceptual  thrust  of  the  M&E  Framework  will  be  based  on  the  following 
assumptions: 
a.  Timely project management activities and procedures at both the SPIU and the 
district level PIU 
b.  Kayonza District commitment to the project activities. 
c.  Staff of relevant caliber are available, recruited and motivated 
d.  Adherence to transparent procurement and fiduciary practices. 
e.  Timely provision of project operational resources to facilitate implementation 
317.  The general principles of monitoring of activities and physical progress will include the 
following; 
a.  Community interest groups such Producer Organisations, Cooperatives 
and  sub-catchment  management  committees  -  will  monitor  project 
activities at sector level and may investigate performance, supported by service 
providers.  For  example,  the  implementation  of  the  community-based 
participatory  catchment  management  plans  envisaged  to  be  done  through  a 
service  provider.  Likewise  the  Water User  Organisations  will monitor  outputs 
and activities in relation to water use in irrigation schemes  
b.  Kayonza District Level PIU and  authorities  -  will monitor inputs, activities 
and output achievements in the district. 
c.  MINAGRI and RAB will monitor overall operations for planning and facilitation 
purposes in line with the sector objectives. 
d.  MINCOFIN  will  monitor  the  utilization  of  resources  in  line  with  IFMIS 
framework 
e.  Rwanda  Environment  Management  Authority  (REMA)  –  will  monitor 
outputs and activities related to environmental monitoring and in particular the 
ESMP  as  defined  and  the  Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  Plan  as 
developed in 2018 
f.  Respective financial services implementing partners will monitor the activities 
and outputs in relation to access to financial services and provision of business 
development services 
g.  The Business Development Fund (BDF)- will monitor activities and outputs 
in relation to the implementation of the matching grant facility   
h.  The M & E unit within the SPIU-  will monitor  and evaluate outcomes  and 
overall  impact  of  the  project  as  well  as  compile  the  projects  quarterly, 
semiannual  and  annual  reports  for  dissemination  to  stakeholders  and  IFAD.  
The unit will verify data received from implementing partners through quarterly 
field visits. The unit will also liaise with all the monitoring partners and collate 
information for overall consolidation.   
i.  Stakeholders and consultation with local community should be integral part of 
project implementation  
Stakeholder communication strategy detailing how  community expectations can be managed and the 
roles that the authorities and KIIWP project teams in implementing the communication strategy  
87 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
318.  The  M&E  system  will  be  participatory,  gender  sensitive  and  results-oriented  while 
enabling  the  integration  of  physical  and  financial  progress  reporting.  All  people-centered 
indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age.  In addition, the system will enable the 
analysis of climate change vulnerability among the beneficiaries. The system will incorporate 
in-depth baseline, COI surveys and completion surveys, a mid-term review and other thematic 
studies as relevant, including qualitative studies.  
319.  The baseline surveys will be carried out during KIIWP1 and will include context-specific 
needs  assessments  of  the  concrete  barriers  to  smallholder-driven  agricultural  sector 
development in the eight drought-prone sectors and address pressing information needs for 
implementation planning. The baseline survey will also provide a benchmark for assessment 
of future outcomes and impact of the project, as it will be compared with the mid-line and the 
end-line surveys, carried out to the extent possible using the same sample of beneficiaries 
and  control  group  IFAD  will  undertake  periodic  monitoring,  evaluation  and  supervision 
Missions to assess the status of Project implementation and evaluate Project direction with 
respect to its objectives, outputs and Outcomes. 
320.  Relevant indicators have been specified in KIIWP logframe and, to the extent possible, 
quantified.  The  indicators  relate to  the  different  levels  (output,  outcome  and impact),  and 
include IFAD Core Indicators (CIs) as well as project specific indicators. This is based on the 
theory  of change,  and  demonstrates  the  logical  links  between  the  results  at  their  different 
levels and thereby enabling the meaningful analysis of whether the project is on-track towards 
its planned results even in the first few years of implementation when higher-level results are 
not yet expected. A glossary of log-frame indicators will be developed at start-up, clarifying 
the exact meaning of each indicator (in particular the Core Indicators) in the specific context 
of KIIWP2. This glossary, together with the M&E plan, will be discussed and validated during 
an  M&E  workshop  with  all  implementing  partners  that  have  M&E  responsibilities.  The 
monitoring indicators, will compare project performance each year with the targets set in the 
AWP/B for that year. 
321.  The KIIWP M&E strategy will be to establish an iterative process for identifying issues 
and  problems  to  ensure  that  the  Project  focus  is  maintained  and  expected  outcomes  are 
achieved. This will rely on data from periodic monitoring within the context of the Operational 
M & E framework and as obtained through the MINAGRI MIS, and on specific thematic surveys 
such as adoption, household and COI surveys which will be carried out in close collaboration 
with  National Institute  of Statistics  Rwanda  (NISR)  and  MINAGRI/RAB. The  NISR regularly 
carries out periodic surveys that cover a range of topics and across the country. The SPIU will 
liaise  with  the  NISR  to  ensure  that  data  in  respect  to  the  project  area  is  filtered  out  and 
analysed in order to be able to attribute the results to KIIWP interventions. 
322.  A  detailed  M  &  E  framework  will  be  developed  to  guide  M&E  processes  within  the 
project. An M&E implementation support mission will be fielded shortly after start-up to ensure 
that a solid M&E framework and plan is set up. The M&E framework developed at the beginning 
of implementation will detail the scope, organisation and contents of the M&E system; roles 
and  responsibilities;  a  plan  for  data  (sex-  and  age-disaggregated  where  appropriate) 
collection,  analysis,  reporting,  use  and  management;  timeline  for  M&E-related  activities; 
staffing and capacity building plan; budget; etc.; 
Physical progress monitoring 
323.  To supplement the project ORMS Logframe, a detailed operational logframe and an M 
&  E  framework  will  be  developed  to  ensure  the  realisation  of  the  set  targets.  This  will  be 
updated  through  the  baseline  study  and  regularly  updated  during  the  course  of 
implementation. This framework will provide the foundation for progress monitoring at output 
and  outcome  level.    Data  collection  for  updating  the  operational  M  &  E  framework  will  be 
supported  by  an  Online  Monitoring  System  with  an  inbuilt  module  linked  to  the  existing 
MINAGRI  MIS.  The  Monitoring  system  will  depend  on  the  use  of  mobile  phones  for  data 
collection  and  online  transmission  to  the  MINAGRI  SPIU  server  based  at  national  level  for 
storage and processing.   
88 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
324.  Physical progress monitoring will be based on two principles:  
a.  AWPB-based  progress  monitoring:  which  will  involve  checking  and 
reporting on implementation progress of each activity in the AWPB and 
b.  Registers  of  physical  progress:  by  recording  key  information  on  selected 
activities in four registers, which will provide a cumulative historical record of 
practically all activities undertaken by the project. 
The  purpose  of the  registers  of  physical  progress  will  be  to  systematically record 
325. 
information  on  certain  types  of  activities  and  results  of  the  project,  in  order  to  create  an 
historical,  cumulative  overview.  They  will  be  integrated  with  the  web-based  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Animal resources  (MINAGRI) M&E MIS which already has a module for the 
SPIU implemented projects. Initially, the following registers are envisaged: 
Register  of  contracts:  For  each  contract  signed  under  the  project,  with  suppliers, 
consultants  and  other  service  providers,  the  register  of  contracts  will  contain  one  line  of 
information,  which  will  include:  description  of  the  contract;  name  of  the  supplier/service 
provider; procurement method; contract sum; when the contract was signed, when the work 
started, when it was expected to be completed and when it was actually completed; number 
of invoices received and payments made 
a.  Register of training activities : The register for training activities is a very 
broad register that will be used to capture formal training courses, workshops, 
seminars, conferences, study tours, exchange visits, field demonstrations, key 
meetings, even studies and surveys. The same register can be used because 
the key information that is important to be recorded is basically the same for 
all these types  of activities, and includes:  (i) a description of the activity;(ii) 
whether  it  was  for  beneficiaries  or  staff;(iii)where  it  took  place  (venue, 
destination);  (iv)  when  it  started  and  ended;  (v)  who  was  responsible  for 
organizing the activity (person/institution); (vi) who the participants were; (vii) 
how many participants (men/women); (viii) the cost; (ix)and the duration. 
b.  Register  of  infrastructure:    In  the  register  of  infrastructure,  one  line  of 
information will summarize key facts about any piece of infrastructure that is 
constructed,  rehabilitated,  expanded,  or  equipped  under  the  project.    The 
information in this register will include: the type of structure; a description of 
the structure; where it is located; when the contract for the work (if applicable) 
was signed, when the work started, when work was expected to end and when 
it actually ended; who the main contractor  or supplier is (if applicable); who 
supervised the works; the total cost and the community contribution; and the 
estimated number of people who benefit from the structure 
c.  Register of groups : In the registering of groups, one line of information will 
summarize  key  facts  about  any  group  that  has  been  established  or  is  being 
supported  under  the  project,  for  example  farmers  producer  organisations, 
cooperatives, and infrastructure management Organizations such as the WUOs 
or   WLUOs.    The  information  in  this  register  will  include:  (i)the  type  of 
group;  (ii)  the  name  of  the  group;  (iii)  where  it  is  located;(iv)  when  it  was 
formed; (v) a brief description of the group purpose and main activities; (vi) a 
description of the project’s involvement with the group; the number of group 
members (disaggregated as men/women and youth). 
d.  Register of Matching Grants and other financial services accessed will 
summarize information on beneficiaries of the matching grants and the other 
financial services, type of grant/ service accessed, amounts of grants accessed, 
and activities funded among others.  
326.  These  registers  shall  be  kept  and  updated  regularly  at  SPIU  and  other  designated 
implementation  levels.  The  district  and  partner  implementation  level  registers  will  be 
submitted  at least on a quarterly basis  to the SPIU for  review and consolidation. To assist 
officers at district level, formats will be developed by the SPIU consistent with the register 
89 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
structures  maintained  by  the  SPIU  within  the  MIS  and  distributed  to  the  subject  matter 
specialists in charge of monitoring at that level. 
327.  The  AWP&B-based  progress  monitoring  in  principle  will  use  detailed  activities 
exactly as they are presented in tables in the AWP&B. The basic task will be to regularly note 
down,  activity  by  activity,  how  much  progress  has  been  made,  what  has  been  achieved, 
comments and whether any special action is required. In order to do this, the files used during 
AWP&B preparation will be modified and distributed to the various implementation units for 
respective monitoring. The modification will consist of protecting the planning data and adding 
a number of columns for recording progress information. 
328.  To  the  extent  possible,  special  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  need  to  integrate 
planning and monitoring as standard responsibilities in the work of project implementers, and 
ensuring that recording progress information is done regularly and consistently. In principle, 
the designated subject matter specialists from the district as well as focal persons from each 
of the implementation partner institutions will be responsible to collect and submit data for 
input into the M&E/MIS. 
329.  The progress information will be carefully analyzed by the M&E Specialist at the SPIU. 
The  analysis  will  seek  to  identify  any  implementation  constraints  to  be  addressed  by  the 
project management. The same information will be used to prepare quarterly, half yearly and 
annual reports, which will contain the full tables  with detailed, activity by activity progress 
information. These reports will be produced by the respective implementing units with formal 
reporting responsibilities to the SPIU and will be consolidated into a project-wide report for 
submission to relevant Government offices (MINCOFIN and MINAGRI etc) and IFAD. Reports 
will provide information such as (i) overview of intervention activities undertaken in the last 
quarter and cumulatively over the fiscal year; and: (ii) progress and outputs in terms of the 
agreed M&E indicators, provide lessons learnt, and knowledge gaps identified. The reports will 
also seek to identify any constraints encountered so as to seek guidance (where needed) from 
Project management for addressing the constraints. 
It should be noted that progress information will be from the beginning of the year to 
330. 
date to reflect cumulative progress.  This means that for the third quarter, for example, the 
tables will contain the progress made and achievements from the beginning of the financial 
year until the end of the third quarter, in addition to the separate results for the third quarter. 
Further, information will be provided on the cumulative progress since the  beginning of the 
programme. This is meant to assess the progress towards achieving programme targets in 
line  with  the  IFAD’s  Operational  Results  Management  System  (ORMS).  Standard  reporting 
formats will be developed during the development of the M & E system to provide guidance 
on the various monitoring focal persons/offices as defined above.  
331.  Regular  project  Implementation  Reviews  will  be  undertaken  every  quarter  as  a 
platform  for  assessment  of  project  implementation  and  performance  as  well  as  share 
experiences  in  implementation.  Participation  will  be  by  all  those  involved  with  activity 
implementation as well as selected value chain actors and stakeholders, the hosting of which 
will follow internal rotational arrangements between Kigali and Kayonza District. 
Outcome and impact monitoring and assessments   
332.  The  focus  of  impact  assessment  will  be  on  the  project’s  overall  goal  and  specific 
objectives, as follows : Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought prone Eastern province of 
Rwanda by achieving the following Development Objective: Improve food security and incomes 
of 40,000 households on a sustainable basis. Indicators for the overall project goal, objective 
and outcomes will include but not limited to the following;  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Reduction in poverty levels in eastern province of Rwanda 
Households with improved food security 
Households with improved incomes  
(Number)Percentage of persons/households reporting an increase in production 
(CI 1.2.4) 
90 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
(Number)Percentage  of  Persons/HH  reporting  adoption  of  environmentally 
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices (CI 3.2.2) 
Percentage  of  women  reporting  minimum  dietary  diversity-  MDD-W53  (CI 
1.2.8) 
Number(Percentage) of rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in 
sales (CI 2.2.5) 
Number  (Percentage)  of  rural  producers’  organizations  engaged  in  formal 
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private entities (CI 2.2.3) 
Number  of  people/households  reporting  using  rural  financial  services.  (CI 
1.2.5) 
Number  of  existing/revised/new  laws,  regulations,  policies  or  strategies 
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment 
Households satisfied with project-supported services (SF.2.1) 
Households  reporting, they can influence decision-making of local authorities 
and project-supported service providers (SF.2.2) 
333.  A  comprehensive  baseline  will  be  carried  out  during  KIIWP1  that  will  provide 
benchmarks that will guide the eventual impact monitoring. Data collection on the different 
impact  and  outcome  indicators  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  SPIU  in  liaison  with 
implementing  partners.  The  SPIU  will  engage  external  consultants  to  carry  out  the 
assessments  in  line  with  standard  impact  assessment  methodology  and  following  the 
approved COI survey framework for the case of core outcome indicators. Secondary sources 
of data will be used particularly to provide information on the overall sector goal indicators. 
Such sources will include the National Statistics Institute Rwanda (NISR) which is mandated 
to  carry  out  national  surveys  among  others  on  poverty  and  gender  studies  as  well  as 
household food security assessments. 
Environmental monitoring: 
334.  Monitoring of environment and climate related aspects of the project will be done in 
two ways:  
a.  monitoring  physical  progress  against  targets  of  proposed  climate 
adaptation/mitigation  measures,  environmental 
sustainability,  and 
sustainable natural resource management interventions. The Head of MIS 
and  the  Climate  Specialist  within  the  SPIU  will  have  the  primary 
responsibility  of  coordinating  this,  with  support  from  project  component 
leads.; and, 
b.  monitoring and ensuring the implementation of mitigation measures against 
identified  environment,  social  and  climate  risks  associated  with  project 
interventions  such  as 
irrigation.  This  will  be  done  through  the 
implementation  and  regular  monitoring  of  the  Environment  and  Social 
Management  Plans  and  their  accompanying  Monitoring  Plans  (  further 
details  are provided in the SECAP Review Note.  In addition,  with  support 
from CoEB and SPIU GIS expert, the project will mobilize several tools for 
evaluating  and  documenting  progress  in  improving  ecosystem  services 
including a rapid biodiversity survey for each irrigation scheme and satellite 
imagery  for  assessing  impacts  of  soil  and  water  and  biodiversity 
conservation measures. The project will collect geo-reference locations for 
all  project  critical  interventions  (including  boundaries  of  the  irrigation 
schemes, location of each water abstraction point, reforestation area, exact 
boundaries  of  the  catchments  and  sub-catchments  in  Kayonza  District 
through Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping, boreholes, etc.). 
By  knowing  a  location’s  coordinates,  satellite  imagery  can  be  used  to 
monitor  changes  that  have  taken  place  and  assess  if  the  project  is 
53 MDD-W is Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women. It assesses whether or not women 15–49 years of age have 
consumed at least five out of ten defined food groups the previous day or night 
91 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
effectively  implementing  measures  for  ensuring  conservation,  restoration 
and  sustainable  use  of  terrestrial  and  freshwater  ecosystems  and  their 
services. 
KIIWP Management Information System (MIS) 
335.  A web-based management information system (MIS) will be used  to support day to 
day monitoring of the project activities and outputs. The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal 
Resources  already  has  an  integrated  M  &  E  MIS.  As  a  requirement,  the  SPIU  maintains  a 
module within the MIS in which all projects under the SPIU are linked. KIIWP MIS module will 
in  a  similar  manner  also  be  integrated  with  the  MINAGRI  MIS  as  part  of  the  overall  MIS 
framework. Data collection at field level will be carried out by field staff using mobile phones 
and uploaded into the MIS from where it will be accessed by the M & E Specialist at SPIU who 
is  responsible  for  its  management.    District  staff  will  only  have  user  rights  while  the  M&E 
Specialist will have editing rights to ensure data quality and consistency. The officer will liaise 
with the responsible IT staff of MINAGRI for technical performance of the system. The field 
staff will ensure that any errors in data entry are promptly communicated to the M&E Officer 
at SPIU who will then grant temporary permission to the affected staff for reloading of the 
data. A Technical Assistance support has already been recruited and will support the SPIU in 
building the capacity of the staff to use the system well. In addition a technical manual will 
also be developed to enhance the use of the system by the staff.   
Monitoring responsibilities for different stakeholders 
336.  The KIIWP monitoring and evaluation function will involve key personnel at different 
levels. 
337.  Evaluations will be undertaken by independent experts or consultant firms under the 
supervision of the Head M & E/MIS at SPIU. Other Project staff will work together with the 
experts to learn lessons from the evaluations and apply them to improve project management 
and implementation. 
338.  The Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)- The  Project  Steering  Committee  will  be 
responsible for providing policy guidance, review and approval of the Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets as well as the Annual Progress Reports and Audits Reports. 
339.  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI)/RAB-  The 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MINAGRI)  will  monitor  the  overall  operations  for  planning  and 
facilitation purposes for the implementation for the attainment of objectives under KIIWP. 
340.  Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU)-  The SPIU based within RAB as  the 
programme Implementation Unit will be responsible to ensure that respective departments 
within Kayonza District adopt and follow appropriate monitoring mechanisms, processes and 
procedures  put in  place  by  the  project.  The  SPIU  will  also  support the  district  level  PIU  to 
establish  suitable  means  of  data  collection  and  ensure  they  are  embedded  into  the 
implementation  of  different  activities.  The  SPIU  will  also  monitor  and  evaluate  the  overall 
impact of the project and compile the projects quarterly, semiannual and annual reports for 
dissemination to the respective stakeholders. The M & E Unit within the SPIU led by the Head 
M & E/MIS will be responsible for coordinating the monitoring and evaluation function of the 
project. The unit which is already staffed with one M & E  officer and staff supervising other 
cross cutting responsibilities, will be re-enforced with a GIS Specialist who will be responsible 
for paying particular attention to geo-spatial data collection and analysis and integration with 
the overall M & E framework. 
341.  Kayonza  District  Project  Implementation Unit  (PIU)-  The  district  level  project 
implementation unit comprising of subject matter specialists and headed by the Director of 
Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  will  be  responsible  for  Monitoring  activities,  inputs  and 
outputs achievements in the district. The director  will ensure that the data has  been input 
into the MIS, for timely access by the SPIU.  
342.  Sector level monitoring- KIIWP is expected to be implemented in 9 out of 12 sectors 
in Kayonza district. Actual implementation of the project will therefore take place in each of 
92 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
these sectors. The sector administrators and technical staff will ensure that KIIWP activities 
are  integrated into the respective sector  annual action plans  and monitor  project activities 
against stated targets.  The sector  technical  staff  will  provide  backstopping  to  beneficiaries 
and will be instrumental in ensuring that monitoring tools and procedures are incorporated 
into activity plans of the different interventions. The staff in these sectors will also ensure that 
data  collection  processes,  procedures  and  responsibilities  are  adhered  to  and  reporting 
undertaken in accordance with the design of the respective project activities.  
343.  Activity implementation level- Implementation of the KIIWP activities will involve 
various  partners  and  stakeholders.  These  will  be  given  clear  monitoring  procedures  and 
reporting  formats  for  the  activities  under  their  authority  for  on-ward  transmission  to 
respective higher monitoring levels.  
344.  Beneficiary level monitoring- Beneficiaries of different interventions will coordinate 
with activity implementers and or sector staff on the channels to be used to collect information 
and transmit it to higher levels 
Information needs flow of KIIWP 
In order for different levels of programme stakeholders to guide the project’s planning, 
345. 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation, they will require different types  of information 
from various sources. 
346.  At community level: In order for beneficiaries to own the interventions and ensure 
ease  of monitoring by the various stakeholders and for the future and sustainability of the 
project,  each  sector  will  prepare  detailed  planning  matrices  and  action  plan  showing  the 
activities to be undertaken, costs involved, responsible persons and timing of the activities.  
The work plans will be prepared using simplified easy formats to accommodate the changing 
information/data  needs  that  conform  to  and  feed  into  formats  for  higher  reporting  levels. 
Groups  of  beneficiaries  will  also  maintain  record  books  with  important  information  on  the 
project’s implementation. Information will also come from service providers working with the 
beneficiaries and will be compiled into reports that will be submitted to the sector level.    
347.  At the sector level: At the sector level, all the received community reports  will be 
compiled  and  consolidated into  one  sector  report under  supervision  of the sector  technical 
leader.    Besides  consolidating  the  report,  the  sector  staff  will  ensure  that  the  important 
aspects  in  the  work  plans  are  well  articulated  in  the  community  reports.  They  will  also 
incorporate information generated during project implementation monitoring to constitute a 
comprehensive sector report. The sector report will be forwarded to the district level.  Sources 
of  information  at  the  sector  level  include  discussions  with  technical  team  leader,  sector 
agronomists,  veterinary  officers,  sector  administrators,  projects  monitoring  reports,  sector 
action plans and other necessary documents. 
348.  At  district  level:  The  received  sector  reports  will  be  consolidated  into  one  district 
report will be compiled by the district director of agriculture and animal resources with input 
from  subject matter  specialists  at the  district.  The  M&E  officer  will  play  a  supporting  role. 
Sources  of  information  at  this  level  will  include  but  not  limited  to  the  project  monitoring 
reports, field supervision reports, meetings and consultations amongst staff involved in the 
KIIWP implementation.  
349.  At  SPIU  Level:  The  compiled  district  report  and  other  reports  coming  in  from 
implementing partners will be consolidated into one project wide report by the SPIU based at 
RAB  under  the  supervision  of  the  SPIU  coordinator.  The  consolidated  report  will  then  be 
circulated to MINAGRI, MINFOC and IFAD. 
350.  Feedback of information will follow the reverse order from IFAD through the SPIU to 
the  district,  sector  and  beneficiary  levels.  Feedback  will  also  be  provided  through  project 
reviews and planning meetings at various implementation levels.  
93 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Reporting and supervision 
351.  The different stakeholders will have specific roles in progress reporting as follows; 
352.  Quarterly Reports : All KIIWP activities integrated into the district development plans 
will  be  reported  upon  every  3  months  by  respective  units  implementing  them.  Where  the 
private sector implementers are involved in KIIWP activities, the district will be responsible 
for monitoring the implementation and reporting on those activities in liaison with the SPs. 
353.  Semi-annual Progress Reports : Consolidation of quarterly reports will be done by 
the SPIU to prepare consolidated 6-months progress reports to IFAD.  The progress reports 
will include an overall assessment of KIIWP’s achievements against the targets in the AWP & 
B. The reports will be submitted within six weeks from the end of each reporting period. 
354.  Annual Progress Reports : The annual progress reports  will be a consolidation of 
the  progress  of  achievements  attained  during  a  financial  year  and  also  assess  the  overall 
performance of the project against set objectives. This will be done by the SPIU with input 
from the district PIU and implementing partners. 
355.  Back to Office Reports : These will be produced on demand and following field visits 
to the project area. The reports will be submitted within one week  of undertaking the field 
activities. The reports will contain feedback on the purpose of the field visits, the people met 
during  the  visits,  the  salient  findings,  the  lessons  learnt  and  recommendations  for 
improvement.  
In- country M&E capacity development  
356.  The SPIU  has  related  staffed  that  coordinates  the  function  of the  M&E  system.  The 
M&E unit is headed by the Head of M&E/MIS who is supported by an M&E Specialist, a Gender 
and  Social  Inclusion  Officer  and  a  Knowledge  Management  Officer.    In  addition,  KIIWP2  
identified  extra  needed  staff,  a  GIS  specialist  will  ensure  that  adequate  geo-spatial  data 
analysis and its linkage to the overall M&E system is undertaken by the project. The officer 
will also be responsible for supervision of the ongoing mapping of the catchment areas and 
delimitation of irrigation plots before their use by the farmers.  
357.  To  further  strengthen  and  ensure  smooth  operationalization  of  the  project  M&E 
system, Capacity building will be provided to all staff at the various levels in several areas:  
a. 
Planning and Budgeting as well as use of M&E information in planning. 
This will be provided to all project staff both at the district level, sector level 
and at SPIU 
b.  Reporting: Capacity building will be provided to staff on preparation of project 
reports following agreed formats and guidelines.  
c.  Data  collection  and  management  through  the  MINAGRI  MIS:  ongoing 
support to M & E and IT capacity will be provided in setting up of the monitoring 
system  and  appropriate  linkage  of  the  KIIWP  SPIU  Module  infrastructure  to 
ensure  smooth  running  of  the  system  –  This  will  also  include  designing  the 
required forms for data capture at field level and coding them into the electronic 
tablets/mobile phones. Support for this function has already been identified and 
training  for  relevant  staff  will  soon  commence  including  training  in  data 
collection by the field staff. 
d.  M  &  E  staff  will  be  trained  on  the  basics  of  Results  Based  M&E  systems 
including use of M&E information in Planning and Budgeting, Designing 
and  Conduct  of  thematic  and  Outcome  surveys;  Report  writing  and 
Dissemination of results and link to knowledge among others 
94 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
KIIWP Evaluation Plan  
358.  The KIIWP evaluation plan is envisaged as in the table below 
Table 24. KIIWP Evaluation Plan 
Year 
Schedule (Quarters) 
Nature of Evaluation  Scope (Area of 
Coverage and / or 
Content) 
1
s
t
2
n
d
3
r
d
4
t
h
Responsible 
Person 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Baseline Survey 
All the selected 9 sectors 
in Kayonza District 
SPIU Head MIS 
Supervision Missions 
All project components  
SPIU Coordinator  
Diagnostic studies 
Specific topical area e.g 
nutrition , climate change  
Supervision Missions 
Special Studies 
All project components  
Specific topical area e.g 
nutrition , climate change  
Subject matter 
Specialists and 
the Head MIS 
SPIU Coordinator  
Subject matter 
Specialists and 
the Head MIS 
Mid-Term Review  
All project components  
SPIU Coordinator  
Supervision Missions 
Beneficiary 
Assessments 
and COI Survey and 
other special studies  
Supervision Missions 
Special Studies 
Supervision Missions 
Final COI Survey at 
completion/Impact 
Evaluation 
Special Studies 
Supervision Missions 
Project Completion 
Review 
Special Studies 
All project components  
All programme activities 
SPIU Coordinator  
Head MIS 
Sample sectors in the 
district 
All project components  
Specific topical area in 
identified  
All project components  
All project components  
Specific topical area in 
identified  
All project components  
All project components  
Specific topical area in 
identified  
Head MIS, 
District and 
Sector staff 
SPIU Coordinator  
Head SPIU 
SPIU Coordinator  
SPIU Coordinator 
and all 
component heads 
Head MIS, 
District and 
Sector staff 
SPIU Coordinator  
SPIU Coordinator  
Head MIS, 
District and 
Sector staff 
III.2.2. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION 
359.  Learning  and  knowledge  management  (KM).  The  core  relevance  of  the  M&E 
system is in the use of the information it elicits for planning and decision-making as well as 
accountability. Knowledge Management (KM) will be an integral part of KIIIWP to ensure that 
Project implementation is a continuous learning process in which quantitative and qualitative 
data will be compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons learned, together with thematic 
studies  and stories from the field that document successful approaches, explain challenges 
encountered and results achieved. It will particularly relevant to inform policy development 
and engagement, specifically in generating knowledge from the many innovations that KIIWP 
2  will  promote.  This  will  be  ensured  with  constant  communication  and  generation  of 
Knowledge products that will come from (i) the research institutions results and applications 
with producers; (ii) case studies generated from successful stories and identified innovations; 
and more. The Project M&E system will form the foundation of KM and learning system and 
will thus be a primary instrument of information capture and storage, based on the indicators 
95 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
detailed in the  results  framework.  Tools,  such as  case  studies,  stakeholder interviews  and 
surveys,  will  be  used  to  deepen  understanding  of  factors  contributing  to  successes  and 
failures,  and  to  enable  full  documentation  of  impact.  The  Knowledge  management  and 
Communication Officer at the SPIU will be responsible for all KM activities with guidance from 
the Head MIS and in liaison with other component heads. Collaboration with relevant research 
and  learning  institutions  to  design  and  undertake  studies  and  analyses  as  well  as 
communicate lessons learnt will be encouraged. 
360.  A KM strategy for the drought-prone agricultural sectors (in alignment with the broad 
KM and communication strategy of MINAGRI) will be developed built on three core pillars of 
KM: people, processes and technology. KM activities will participate in and benefit from M&E 
data collection efforts. On the one hand, KM products will build on and benefit from evidence 
gathered through the M&E system. On the other  hand, KM  activities  will gather  qualitative 
data that can offer further insights into the findings of quantitative M&E data.  In addition, a 
knowledge  Management  and  Communication  Action  Plan that  outlines  specific  activities  on 
how information is to be obtained, analysed, and disseminated, will be developed in line with 
the KM strategy will be developed to translate the strategies into action. Plans to support the 
implementation of the KM Action Plan will be integrated in the Project’s AWPB. In this regard, 
the  KM  &  Communication  Action  Plan  shall  include  an  outline  how  knowledge  will  be 
disseminated using, but not limited to, the communication channels.  Effective communication 
at  all  levels  will  be  critical  to  promotion  and  awareness  raising,  learning  and  adoption 
innovative techniques and practices under the respective value chains as well as issues related 
to mainstreaming of gender and nutrition in the selected value chains and encourage youth 
participation in rural agricultural development.  Quarterly review meetings with implementing 
partners  will  be  organised  by  project  management  to  discuss  progress  towards  results  in 
relation to each quarterly progress report, the format of which will explicitly include a focus 
on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. Study tours, exchange visits and 
learning routes will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer. In order to facilitate the online 
dissemination of generated knowledge products to government and other stakeholders, the 
Project will ensure adequate sharing of information through the MINAGRI website as well as 
encourage use of other online knowledge sharing mechanisms such as the use of social media 
and  short  messaging  services.  The  project  will  also  encourage  the  access  to  climate  and 
weather information as well as market information by the various value chain actors. 
361.  Concurrently, a downward and upward flow of information about project progress to 
beneficiaries  and  implementing  partners  in  the  field  is  of  utmost  relevance  in  fostering 
ownership and participation. Systems for these information exchanges will be developed and 
used on a regular basis, including stakeholder review meetings, planning workshops, and a 
newsletter  to  be  shared  with  all  WLUOs,  FOs  and  cooperatives  involved  in  project 
implementation.  The  project  will  collaborate  with  the  Agricultural  Information  and 
Communication  Centre  within  MINAGRI  to  produce  relevant  knowledge  products  and 
communication materials, such as press releases, extension materials, and radio spots. 
III.3: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRAGEMENTS  
Summary of financial management arrangements 
362.  Financial Management System: KIIWP II financial management arrangements follow 
the Government of Rwanda financial management system with some enhancements proposed 
to  mitigate  on  risks  identified.  A financial management  assessment  for  KIIWP  II has  been 
carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Undertaking Financial Management 
Assessment  at  Design.  The  objective  of  FMA  is  to  provide  assurance  that  KIIWP  II  will  be 
implemented  using  sound  financial  management  practices  (timely  and  efficient  accounting 
systems), and punctual professional reviews; both internally (internal audit) and externally 
(external  audit).   The  assessment  was  based  on existing IFAD  Rwanda  portfolio  under the 
SPIU  as  KIIWP  II  will  be  adopting  similar  processes  and  procedures.  The  assessment  was 
combined with reviews at Kayonza District and the Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB).  
96 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
363.  The Government  of  Rwanda  (the  Borrower)  will  be  required  to maintain  acceptable 
financial management systems including accounting, financial reporting, and auditing systems 
for  the  KIIWP  II.  Some  project’s  specific  additional  measures  have  been  incorporated  to 
enhance financial management of the project. 
364.  Overall,  the  financial  management  risk  is  rated  as  ‘moderate’  after  considering 
mitigation  measures.  The  project  faces  risks  in  quality  and  timeliness  of  financial  reports 
arising  out  of  delays  in  customisation  of the Integrated Financial  Management  Information 
Systems (IFMIS) whose current coding does not facilitate IFAD reporting requirements. There 
are also risks around funds flow arrangements given the justification complications associated 
with  accounting under  the  current  structure  of IFMIS  and  reporting under  MS Excel  in the 
absence  of  a  restructured  chart  of  accounts.  There  has  also  been  inadequate  counterpart 
financing, falling short of targeted contribution at design. In-kind contribution has not been 
consistently  recorded  and  activities  implemented  by  GoR non-tax  paying entities  have not 
accounted for the would be tax contribution had the activities been implemented by private 
companies.  
365.  To mitigate on these risks, IFMIS will be customized as previously agreed to facilitate 
reporting by project component, expenditure category and financier.  In the absence of this, 
a stop gap measure will be running a parallel accounting software, TOMPRO like is the case 
with RDDP. This, however is not a desirable solution as it will come with a need of another 
Accountant to deal with the work load arising from “double work”. MINECOFIN ha commited 
to completing the customision of IFMIS in two phases, with phase 1 completing in April, 2021 
and phase 2 completing in June, 2021. This will be critical for the overall quality of financial 
management of KIIWP II.  
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary responsibilities 
366.  The  project  will  be  implemented  through  the  Government  of  Rwanda’s  existing 
structures. The Lead Project Implementing Agency (LPA) will be RAB under the MINAGRI 
through the SPIU for IFAD funded projects  which will directly manage all components. The 
implementation will be at the Kayonza District. 
367.  Kayonza District: The key implementing agency is Kayonza District. Some activities 
will be paid at district level based on the agreed AWPB while key investment activities  will 
directly  be  paid  by  SPIU  as  they  will  be  centrally  procured.  Kayonza  District  will  receive 
quarterly advances based on the approved AWPB through a project dedicated account. The 
SPIU  will  provide  suitable  templates  to  enable  the  Project  SPIU  at  the  district  to  provide 
acceptable accountabilities of advances received.  
368.  The  SPIU  will  be  the  overall  accounting  hub  for  the  project.    The  SPIU  will  be 
responsible for ensuring the implementation of Project activities and will have the following 
fiduciary responsibilities:  
a.  the  preparation  of  Annual  Work  plans  and  Budgets  ensuring  a  bottom-up 
approach and timely submissions for inclusions in GoR overall approved budget 
estimates;  
b.  Procurement planning, execution and support service;  
c.  Disbursement  of  funds  to  other  implementing  agencies  as  per  funds  flow 
structure,  
d.  Management of withdrawal applications and disbursements;  
e.  Financial  management  of  the  Project,  including  supervising  and  ensuring 
compliance with government regulations.   
f.  Financial reporting and consolidation of financial statements for audits.  
g.  Any requests for No Objection to IFAD will emanate from the SPIU. 
97 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds 
369.  There  will  be  three  types  of  disbursement  mechanisms  for  KIIWP  II  (i)  Advance 
Withdrawal; (ii) Direct Payment; (iii) Reimbursement. Disbursements from IFAD will be made 
by way of an advance to the Designated Account  and subsequent replenishments based on 
expenditure incurred as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoEs). There will be one 
designated  account that  will  receive funds  from  IFAD.  The  Designated  account  will have  a 
corresponding dedicated project operational account in Rwanda Francs  (RWF) managed by 
SPIU. Kayonza District will also have dedicated project operational account at the district level 
for receiving funds to facilitate activities to be carried out at the district. The project operations 
bank accounts both at the SPIU and district will be opened at  the Reserve Bank of Rwanda 
and will be linked to IFMIS. Two separate Counterpart fund accounts will also be opened, one 
at SPIU level and the second at the district.  
370.  Once GoR and the Government of  Spain have agreed on the financing modalities  of 
the Spanish Trust Fund (STF), a separate designated account to receive the financing will be 
opened.  There  will  be  no  need  to  open  separate  operating  accounts  in  respect  of  the  STF 
financing. 
371.  Below  is  a  diagram  illustrating  the  flow  of  funds  from  IFAD  to  various  points  of 
payments by the KIIWP II: 
Figure 4 KIIWPII Funds flow chart 
98 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
372.  See key below for the payments points under the project. 
a.  Transfer  of  Government  of  Rwanda  counterpart  funds  to  a  separate  bank 
account that will be managed by SPIU. 
b.  Payments for eligible expenditure from counterpart funds bank account at SPIU 
level. 
c.  Transfer of counterpart funds from SPIU to Kayonza District. 
d.  Payment  of  eligible  expenditure  by  Kayonza  District  from  counterpart  fund 
account held at the district.  
e.  Transfer of IFAD funds to KIIWP II US$ designated account managed by SPIU. 
f.  Transfer  of  IFAD  funds  to  SPIU  operational  account  in  local  currency  for 
payments  at  SPIU  level  and  transfers  to  Kayonza  District  and  other 
Implementing Partners. This accounts will be held in a commercial bank.  
g.  Direct payment to suppliers/contractors/service providers or partners by IFAD. 
This will be on exceptional basis and for payments of more than USD 100,000 
as will be guided in the letter to borrower. 
h.  Transfer  of  IFAD  loan  funds  from  the  SPIU  operating  account  to  Kayonza 
District. 
i.  Transfer  of  IFAD  loan  funds  from  the  SPIU  operating  account  to  other 
Implementing Agencies. 
j.  Payment of eligible expenditure by Kayonza District using IFAD loan funds. 
k.  Payment  of  eligible  expenditure  by  other  Implementing  Partners  that  have 
received IFAD loan funds. 
l.  Payments for eligible expenditure denominated in RWF by the SPIU.  
m.  Payments of eligible expenditure for transactions entered into in USD by SPIU.  
373.  GoR  counterpart  financing.  Counterpart contribution in  the  Rwanda  portfolio  has 
fallen short of target in all projects. Whereas counterpart funds have been adequate to meet 
the tax needs of the projects, there has been under reporting or under declaration of taxes 
where GoR non-tax paying agencies have implemented taxable activities. IFAD will demand 
commitment from GoR to provide cash contribution on a timely basis and to report promptly 
on any inkind contributions including taxes waived whenever government agencies are used 
to implement activities. There will be a separate bank account for counterpart funds both at 
SPIU and at the district, managed by SPIU and district project staff respectively, just like the 
project operational account. 
374.  Withdrawal  Applications  for  Advance  Withdrawal  and  Reimbursements  may  be 
submitted  once  ninety  90  days  (quarterly  basis)  have  lapsed  from  the  submission  of  the 
previous  withdrawal  application.  However,  if  the  requested  withdrawal  amount  is  at  least 
twenty  per  cent  (20%)  of  the  authorized  allocation,  a  withdrawal  application  may  be 
submitted even if ninety (90) days have not lapsed. This will be included in the letter to the 
borrower (LtB). 
375.  The Designated Account limit will be set at the total 18 months of AWPB. The DA limit 
may be reviewed and adjusted if there are increased payments as the project progresses. In 
that case SPIU would write to IFAD with the expected cash flow projections and the proposed 
adjusted ceiling for considerations. It is very important that projections are done accurately 
and on a timely basis as IFAD will require to include the project in disbursement plans. 
Planning and budgeting 
376.  The GoR national budget calendar will be followed. Considering that the budget has to 
be  input  into  IFMIS  in  accordance  with  the  national  budgetary  rules  and  timetable  the 
99 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
clearance process by IFAD should be well planned and executed to precede the GoR budgeting 
calendar.  
377.  The project will be implemented based on approved Annual Work Plans and Budgets 
(AWPBs).  The  budgeting  process  will  be  done  jointly  among  SPIU,  Kayonza  District  and 
implementing  partners  using  a  bottom–up  approach.  The  exercise  will  bring  together 
Accountants,  M&E  Officers,  Procurement  Officers  and  component  technical  staff  to  ensure 
activities are realistic, align to the log frame and the procurement plan is aligned to the AWPB. 
The SPIU will consolidate the AWPB, present it for approval by the PSC and submit it to IFAD 
with a request for a No Objection in accordance with the financing agreement and the PIM. 
378.  Disbursement  arrangements  and  Flow  of  Funds  –  Project  design  has  put  into 
consideration financial management requirements that will ensure that the loan proceeds and 
other  financing  sources  will  be  used  for  their  intended  purposes.  This  has  been  based  on 
lessons learned under KWAMP, KIIWP I and the RDDP that has been rolled into IFMIS. 
379.  The SPIU led by the Head of Finance and Chief Accountant will coordinate the budget 
preparation  processes  with close  coordination with  project coordinator  and  the  component 
heads. At Kayonza District, the activities to be carried out will also need to be included in their 
respective budget for approval by the District Council. Payments cannot be made if the budget 
provisions have not been made and approved by Parliament at RAB/MINAGRI level and by 
District Council at Kayonza District level.   
380.  As  there will be timing differences between GoR and KIIWP II budget initiation and 
approval, there can be significant differences between the AWPB for which IFAD eventually 
issues  a  ‘No  Objection’,  and  the  budget  that  had  been  appropriated  and  approved  in  the 
printed  estimates.  The  appropriated  amounts  is  a  block  limit,  from  which  implementing 
entities have a window in May/June at submission of AWPB, to provide the breakdowns for 
the  AWPB  signed–off  by  the  Accounting  Officer  of  the  Ministry.    SPIU  will  ensure  the 
breakdowns included in the accounting system is in line with the AWPB for which IFAD has 
provided No-Objection and spending is in line with this.  
381.  The Head of Finance at SPIU will closely work with planning officers at RAB/MINAGRI 
and MINICOFIN to ensure the project is not affected by regular budget cuts which are usually 
based  on  estimated  and  actual revenue  collections  by the  government. The mitigated risk 
under budgeting area is therefore considered substantial that require keen monitoring. While 
there  are  supplementary  budget  processes  which  ensure  what  may  have  been  omitted  is 
rectified, this takes time, and thus, it is critical to ensure there is adequate budget for the 
project at the start of the year. Over-budgeting also poses a risk of failure to absorb funds, 
which in turn leads to failure by the project to demonstrate capabilities to absorb funds. This 
may lead to reduction in allocations affecting implementation and eventual failure to absorb 
the total loan funds. 
382.  The  authority  to  incur  expenditure  is  the  approval  of  the  AWPB  with  expenditure 
incurred outside the approved AWPB declared ineligible for financing from the loan funds. The 
detailed  cost  tables  in  the  PDR  are  indicative  of  the  costs  to  be  incurred  over  the  project 
period and can be altered during the process of the AWPB. 
383.  Schedule 2 of the financing agreement will specify the disbursement categories of the 
project. As per the IFAD disbursement handbook, schedule 2 of the financing agreement can 
also  be  amended  with  reasonable  justification  submitted  to  IFAD  by  the  GoR  requesting 
reallocation of funds. It is however difficult to request for a reallocation of funds from investing 
activities to recurrent activities like operation costs and salaries. 
384.  AWPB shall indicate the financing sources (IFAD loan,  STF loan, GoR, Private Sector 
and beneficiaries) for each activity, every item should be linked to a proper cost category and 
component/sub-component.  This  is  important  as,  each  funding  source  will  Finance 
expenditure  items  as  per  the  financing  rule  in  the  financing  agreement  which  should  be 
reflected in the AWP. 
100 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
385.  Payments to suppliers, contractors  and service providers  will be made will be made 
from IFAD at 100% net of taxes. 
Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
386.  The accounting systems, policies, and procedures to be used by the KIIWPII will follow 
GoR  systems.  Rwanda  IFAD  portfolio  is  moving  towards  having  all  projects  financial 
management done in IFMIS. This requires customization of IFMS to facilitate reporting that 
meets IFAD requirements of reporting by Component, Sub Component, Expenditure category 
and  Financier.  Previous  projects have  met the IFAD  system  by running  a  parallel  software 
(TOMPRO) in addition to use of IFMIS, which has not been customized. 
387.  There has been delays in customization of IFMIS. This will potentially lead to manual 
accounting,  where  MS  Excel  will  be  used  to  disaggregate  data  generated  in  IFMIS  as  is 
currently set to meet IFAD reporting requirements. There is risk is data generation will not be 
timely, may be inaccurate, cumbersome and is prone to manipulation. To mitigate this risk, 
will implement TOMPRO accounting software pallarallel to IFMIS.  The key financial reporting 
parameter  for  IFAD  project  is  a  financial  system  that  will  be  able  to  i)  extract  SoE  for 
withdrawal applications, ii) reporting expenditure per component and comparing budget vs 
actual  for  the  same  for  the  current  year  and  cumulatively,  iii)  reporting  expenditure  per 
category and comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively 
and iv) reporting of expenditure per financier. 
388.  The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line with the 
Organic Law on State Finances and Property (No.12/2013/OL of 12/09/2013), as guided by 
Manual of Public Financial Management – Policies and Procedures. The CEO of RAB will be the 
Chief Budget Manager for KIIWPII, with delegated powers to SPIU. The authorized personnel 
will  play  the  key  role  of  sanctioning  all  withdrawals  from  the  bank  account under  them  as 
described above. 
Financial reporting 
389.  The Head of Finance at SPIU will be responsible for all financial reporting for the project 
and will produce a consolidated financial statements for the project. The financial reporting 
will  comply  with  International  Public-Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS).  GoR  is 
transitioning  from  IPSAS  Cash  to  IPSAS  Accrual,  prior  to  full  transition  any  departures  or 
modifications from IPSAS will be disclosed in the financial statements. 
390.  On annual basis, the consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited 
by Office of the  Auditor General and audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within 
six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD guidelines. IFAD will, in addition, to 
the  annual  audited  financial  statements  require  interim  financial  reports  on  a  six-monthly 
interval. For management decision and control, detailed monthly and quarterly management 
accounts will be produced. 
Statements of Expeditures (SOE) 
391.  SoEs  will  be  prepared  by  the  project  for  processing  of  Withdrawal  application.  The 
detailed guidelines and SoE templates has been elaborated under financial guidelines issued 
by IFAD which will be included in the Letter to the Borrower. The SPIU Accounts staff shall 
assist  in  the  compilation  of  the  expenditures  from  the  implementing  agencies  including 
Kayonza  District  which  upon  meeting  the  IFAD  threshold  shall  be  submitted  in  form  of 
Withdrawal Applications to IFAD, through the MINAGRI and MINOCOFIN. This activity shall be 
carried  by  the  SPIU  every  quarter  or  if  the  withdrawal  limits  has  been  attained.  Kayonza 
District will prepare the SoE on monthly basis and submit to SPIU.  
392.  The SPIU will prepare the consolidated SoEs which shall be used in the preparation of 
the Withdrawal Applications using the guideline below: 
393.  Every  category  should  be  typed  on  a  separate  summary  sheet,  which  should  be 
numbered sequentially, and details of categories e.g. civil works clearly marked on the section 
– description of category. 
101 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
394.  Reporting period on the summary sheet to be clearly indicated with the earliest paid 
voucher indicating the starting period and the latest end period e.g. 1st Nov 2020 to 31st 
Dec, 2020. 
395.  The  rate  of  exchange  will  be  the  ruling  rates  when  funds  are  transferred  from  the 
special account to project operational account and should be used when exchanging to the 
US Dollar equivalent. The rates will be applied on FIFO basis until the prior transfer is fully 
exhausted. 
396.  The  IFAD  forms  used  including  the  checklist  and  Designated  Account  (DA) 
Reconciliation shall be attached to form the Withdrawal Application. Other documentations for 
attachment shall include: 
-  Bank Reconciliation Statement for the last month of reporting. 
-  Cash book copy of the last reporting date showing the balances. 
-  Copy of the bank statement for the last reporting month. 
-  DA statement  
-  DA reconciliation statement 
-  SPIU bank account reconciliation statement 
o The  summary  sheets  will  be  prepared  according  to  categories  and 
numbered sequentially. 
o The amount spent per component should be clearly indicated. 
o The  summary  sheets  signed  by  the  Project  Coordinator  and  Head  of 
Finance and to be signed by authorized representative from MINECOFIN. 
o Designated Account Reconciliation statement duly signed by the Head 
of Finance 
o Checklist withdrawal application duly signed by the Project Coordinator 
and Head of Finance. 
o Application 
for  withdrawal 
to  be  duly  signed  by  authorized 
representative. 
o All  the  above  supporting  documents  together  will  be  forwarded  to 
MINAGRI  for  further  processing  before  being  forwarded  to  IFAD  for 
replenishment. 
Financial management organization and staffing 
397.  The  project  financial management  arrangements  follow the Government  of  Rwanda 
financial  management  arrangements  in  line  with  the  Organic  Law  on  State  Finances  and 
Property  (No.12/2013/OL  of  12/09/2013),  as  guided  by  Manual  of  Public  Financial 
Management  –  Policies  and  Procedures.  KIIWPII  will  have  a  dedicated Accountant  at SPIU 
under the supervision of a Chief Accountant and the Head of Finance at SPIU. The Accountant 
shall be supported by another Accountant at Kayonza District, who will have dual reporting 
responsibility, to SPIU and the District Head of Finance. 
398. 
The Project Accounting team duties and responsibilities shall include: 
  Contributing to the preparation and update of the Financial Manuals. 
  Ensuring  the  project’s  financial  procedures  as  detailed  in  the  Project 
Implementation and Financial Manuals and other guidelines that may be issued 
are  strictly  followed  by  all  Project  staff  and  implementing  agencies  at  the 
national and district levels. 
  Facilitating, as much as possible, the timely disbursement of project funds 
102 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Compiling  the  Expenditure  Returns  for  the  SPIU,  Kayonza  District  and  other 
implementing agencies, for submission to MINECOFIN. 
  Liaising with the implementing officers from the Project implementing agencies, 
including Kayonza District and the lead Project agency to ensure that SOE’s are 
prepared in timely manner. 
  Preparing  periodic  and  statutory  financial  reports  and  advising  the  Project 
Coordinator on the Project’s financial status and trends; 
  Ensuring  adherence  to  Government  of  Rwanda’s  financial  practices  and 
circulars as issued from time to time, to ensure only legible payments are made 
from the Project’s funds. 
  To  carry  out  periodic  backstopping  visits  to  the  implementing  agencies, 
providing financial advice and recommendations where necessary. 
  Facilitating  and  ensuring  that  external  auditors  are  availed  all  necessary 
documents during the audit as detailed in the Financing Agreement, and making 
a follow up on audit recommendations. 
  Ensuring that the financial transactions are well documented, filed and that the 
Project  financial  transactions  are  entered  into  the  Government  existing 
accounting systems. 
  Any other duty (related to the Project’s activities) as may be assigned by the 
Project Coordinator. 
Internal controls  
In  order  to  effectively  safeguard  project  resources,  internal  controls  have  been 
399. 
instituted at the SPIU in the whole framework of financial and administrative procedures. The 
identified  controls  range  from;  proper  record  keeping  and  posting,  authorization  of 
accounting,  procurement  and  administrative  documents,  balancing  and  checking,    physical 
security  of  assets,  double  signing  (approval)  arrangements,  to  financial  reporting  and 
monitoring. These are described in the Manual of Public Financial Management – Policies and 
Procedures. There will be internal audit function, as noted below,   to check overall compliance 
to  internal  controls  and  provide  support  towards  improving  systems,  procedures  and 
processes. Controls are also in-built into the IFMIS, being cutomised by MINECOFIN for project 
financial management. 
Internal audit 
Internal  audits  will  be  conducted  to  provide  assurance  that  the  Project  is  being 
400. 
implemented  in  accordance  with the  PIM,  complies  with GoR  regulations  and  is  complying 
with Project financing covenants. The project will utilise the internal audit function at SPIU 
and Kayonza District to carry out internal audit. 
401.  The  internal  audit  of  KIIWPII  will  be included  in the  annual  audit  plan  for  the  SPIU 
Internal Auditor who will carry out an audit of the project at least once in a year. 
402. 
IFAD supervision and implementation support missions will consistently demand and 
review  the  rolling  internal  audit  plans,  internal  audit  reports  produced  and  shared  as  per 
internal audit plans and implementations of internal audit recommendations and action plans.  
403.  Other key controls are summarised below: 
103 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 25. Key controls 
Fixed Assets 
Fixed Assets Register (FAR): 
Other KIIWPII Key Controls 
a)  KIIWPII shall maintain a consolidated fixed Assets Register (FAR) which is a record of fixed 
assets for the project including assets held by SPIU and the IA; 
b)  The KIIWPII register format includes details of assets-make, model, Specification, quality, 
rate, value, supplier, receipts, issues, balance, location, etc. It also has the date of receipt 
of the asset & the payment voucher reference; 
c)  Each class of assets has a separate page in the FAR. 
d)  Any alteration in the FAR must be dully authorized. 
e) 
It will reflect the book balance of a class of assets at any point of time. 
Fixed Assets Issue Register (FAIR) 
a)  While the FAR is maintained according to class of assets, the FAIR is maintained according 
to the staff member who holds the asset. There will be one folio for each staff member who 
has custody of an asset. 
It will record the date of issue & return of each asset. 
It will bear the signatures of the employee when s/he receives the asset. 
b) 
c) 
d)  The register has to be periodically reconciled with the FAR. All issues in the FAR should be 
reflected in the FAIR. 
e)  The register helps in locating assets at the time of physical inventory taking. 
  KIIWPII will follow the following fixed Assets internal controls: 
a)  Tagging  &  labelling  of  assets-  assets  are  labelled  or  tagged  so  that  they  can  be  easily 
identified & their ownership established. 
Insurance of assets- KIIWPII will insure all project assets. 
b) 
c)  Physical inventory of assets at regular intervals. 
d)  Log  books  for  vehicles,  the  log  book  records  the  details  of  use  vehicles  &  is  usually 
maintained by the driver and checked by PA. It helps in identifying personal use of KIIWPII 
assets. It is also used for calculating fuel consumption appropriateness. 
e)  KIIWPII  vehicles  are  not  available  as  Personal  to  holder.  They  should  be  packed  after 
working hours and cannot be used for private use. 
f)  Cross  referencing  of  financial  &  fixed  assets  records-  done  to  avoid  payment  to  supplier 
before assets are recorded in the FAR. For internal controls purposes it is vital to reconcile 
the financial accounting records with assets records. 
Physical verification of fixed assets. 
a)  Conducted by an inter departmental team (not only Accounts, include Procurement, M & E 
, etc) 
b)  Should be undertaken under the supervision of external / internal auditors at least once a 
year. 
c)  Surprise checks during audit/supervision visits. 
d)  Meant to existence, condition & custody of assets. 
e)  Physical balances compared with book balances 
f)  Variances reported 
g)  Variances have to be adjusted in financial records after due authorization. 
Physical Asset Inventory Form (PAIF) 
a)  This is the form used for recording the result of physical asset verification. 
b)  PAIF records the asset code, book balance, physical balance, condition, variance & possible 
reasons for variance. 
c)  Surplus & shortage are equally serious & need further investigation. 
d)  Should be signed by all members of the verification team. 
e)  Preferably, it should be counter signed by the auditors. 
Cash  and 
Bank 
a)  Bank reconciliations prepared by the 15th day after month end. 
b)  Bank  reconciliations  are  prepared  within  Project  Accounting  Software  and  not  off  the 
system. 
c)  Prepared  by  the  Accountant,  checked  by  the  Project  Accountant  and  approved  by  the 
Project Coordinator/Coordinator with hard copies formally kept on file. 
Advances 
a)  As described in the module, advances are not expensed they are to be monitored in Project 
Accounting Software in a control account for advance takers 
b)  Advances  are  aged  on  a  monthly  basis  and  the  aging  report  is  provided  to  the  PD  on  a 
monthly basis 
c)  Advances  are  retired  after expenditure  justifications  have  been  submitted,  accepted  and 
after the journal voucher has been formally approved. 
104 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Other KIIWPII Key Controls 
Personnel 
Costs 
a)  Formal  payrolls  are  prepared  by  the  Accountant,  checked  by  Project  Accountant  and 
approved by Project Coordinator. 
In preparing the payroll care is taken to recover any outstanding advances 
b) 
c)  The  Project  Coordinator  should  ensure  salaries  included  in  payroll  are  as  per  the 
employment contracts. 
d)  Salary adjustments necessarily require IFAD’s No Objection prior to being effective 
e)  Payroll taxes are a responsibility of employees; these taxes are deducted from employee 
salaries and remitted to the Tax Authority by KIIWPII only acting on agency basis 
External audit  
404.  External audits will be executed by the Auditor General who have been carrying out 
the  external  audit  of  IFAD  projects  implemented  by  the  Government.  Any  changes  in  the 
Terms  of  Reference  will  require  the  Fund’s  No  Objection.  IFAD  will  require  specific  audit 
opinions: (a) general opinion on the financial statements, (b) opinion on the balances of funds 
held in the special account.  
405.  The  recently  closed  KWAMP  and  the  ongoing  projects  are  audited  by  the  Auditor-
General as part of its mandate. Previous audits done by the Auditor General have been rated 
highly  satisfactory  by  IFAD  noting  the  level  of  detail  and  the  use  of  INTOSAI,  acceptable 
standards to IFAD. It is proposed that in line with IFAD's commitment to support continued 
development  of  government  systems,  KIIWPII  external  audits  will  be  carried  out  by  the 
Auditor  General.  KIIWPII  financial  statements  will  be  prepared  in  accordance  with  the 
International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards.  IFAD  audit  guidelines  will  be  used  in 
preparation  of  audit  terms  of  reference  and  key  disclosures  as  required  by  IFAD  will  be 
included in the audited financial statements. In addition to the opinion of financial statements, 
opinions on the Statements of Expenditure and the operation of the Designated Account shall 
be provided. Any other requirement will have to be adhered to as shall be provided for in the 
IFAD  audit  guidelines.  A  Separate  Management  Letter  highlighting  observations  on  the 
internal controls, recommendations and management responses will also be a requirement. 
406.  Standard TOR for audit engagements as spelt out in the IFAD Handbook for auditing 
and financial management for projects shall be used. The prepared TORs are subject to IFAD 
clearance/No Objection. 
407.  Draft financial statement for audit to be shared with IFAD for clearance together with 
TOR no later than four months following the end of the financial year. 
408.  The Audited financial statements shall be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after 
the end of the fiscal year. In addition to the audit report, the independent auditor will prepare 
a management letter. This will include comment and recommendations on the adequacy of 
the financial management system, and on the system of internal control. The management 
letter  should  also  include  a  follow  up  section  on  the  status  of  implementation  of  previous 
years’ recommendations. 
409.  The detailed instruction regarding project audit are outlined in the IFAD guidelines for 
project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
410.  Nature  of  project  eligible  expenditures  -  Project  expenditure  categories  have  been 
allocated in accordance with the standard expenditure categories.  Detailed cost tables  are 
presented in  this  document.  Transaction-based  disbursement  procedures  will  be used.  The 
eligibility of expenditure should require: 
a.  The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services 
required  for  the  Project  and  covered  by  the  relevant  AWPB  and  procured 
according  to  Rwandan  procurement  regulations  to  the  extent  that  they  are 
consistent with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. 
b.  The  expenditure  shall  be  incurred  during  the  project  implementation  period, 
except that expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the project that may 
be incurred after the project completion date and before the closing date 
105 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
c.  The expenditure shall be incurred by a project party 
d.  If the agreement allocates the amount of the financing to categories of eligible 
expenditures and specifies the percentages of such eligible expenditures to be 
financed, the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has not 
been depleted, and shall be eligible only up to the percentage applicable to such 
category. 
e.  The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance with the terms of the 
financing agreement 
f.  All  payment  vouchers  will  be  examined  to  ascertain  completeness  and 
eligibility. The following checklist will be used: 
KIIWPII Document checklist for eligibility of expenditure 
  Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
1.  Complete  Written  Voucher, 
duly approved 
2.  Confirmation 
by 
Procurement  Specialist  that 
the 
was 
Procurement 
properly done in accordance 
with  Rwandan  procurement 
regulations and IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines 
3.  Attach Copies of relevant No 
Objections from IFAD, where 
applicable 
4.  Attach  Contract  Monitoring 
form where applicable 
5.  Availability  of  supporting 
documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d)  Bank  guarantee,  where 
applicable 
e)  Delivery  notes/reports 
(Make  Cross  Reference 
where bulky) 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure 
Vote 
Book has been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
8.  Reviewed  optimality  of  the 
disbursement method? 
9.  Banking instructions 
10. Correspondence bank 
11. Percentage of financing 
1.  Attendance sheets 
2.  Attendance 
sheets 
should be reconciled to 
DSA paid 
3.  Availability 
supporting 
documentation 
a)  Training report 
of 
b)  Hotel 
Receipts/ 
bills for meals and 
accommodation( 
should 
reconciled 
attendance 
sheets) 
be 
to 
4.  Procurement record on 
how  the  venue  was 
selected 
5.  Justification 
for  any 
and 
fuel 
refunds 
related support 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure 
Vote  Book  has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
Consultancies 
(Tick) 
1.  Time 
sheets 
in 
comparison  with  the 
work done;  
2.  Attach 
Copies 
of 
relevant No Objections 
IFAD,  where 
from 
applicable 
3.  An acceptable report  
106 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Workshops- Abroad 
(Tick) 
1.  Invitations 
and 
related 
IFAD’s No Objection 
2.  Availability  of  supporting 
documentation 
a)   Boarding 
passes 
reconciled  DSA  days 
taken 
b)   Back to Office Reports 
3.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure 
Vote 
Book has been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
4.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
4.  Availability 
supporting 
documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence 
payment 
of 
of 
d)  Bank 
guarantee 
for advances 
5.  Fund availability in 
Budget- 
a)  Ensure  Vote  Book 
has been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
7.  Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
FM Supervision plan 
411.  Supervision. KIIWP II will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual implementation 
support missions, followed initially by shorter follow-up missions six months later as may be 
assessed. Supervision will not be conducted as a general inspection or evaluation, but rather 
as  an  opportunity  to  jointly  assess  achievements  and  lessons,  and  to  reflect  on  ways  to 
improve  implementation;  and  impact.  From  a  financial  management  perspective,  IFAD 
missions  will  keenly  follow  up  the  fiduciary  risk  at  various  levels,  including  the  use  of  the 
report-based  disbursement,  assess  the  changes  in  risk  profile  and  propose  mitigation 
measures. 
III.4: PROCUREMENT 
412.  Applicable procurement framework.  Procurement under KIIWP2 shall be carried 
out according to Rwandan procurement regulations to the extent that they are consistent with 
the  IFAD  Project  Procurement Guidelines54.  Rwandan  procurement  regulations  include  Law 
no.  62/2018  of  25/08/2018  governing  public  procurement55  and  the  Ministerial  Order  no. 
002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement56. 
413.  Standard procurement documents and IFAD systems.  KIIWP2 will use the full 
package  of  standard  procurement  documents  released  by  the  Rwanda  Public  Procurement 
Authority57, which will be adapted to include mandatory references to IFAD policies such as 
the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption58, the IFAD policy to preventing 
and  responding  to  sexual  harassment,  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse59,  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Countering  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  Policy60  and  IFAD’s  Social, 
Envornmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)61. KIIWP2 will be set up on the 
No-Objection Tracking Utility System (NOTUS) and Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) function 
of the IFAD Client Portal (ICP) from project start up, thus ensuring effective supervision and 
prior  review  of  procurement  processes  by  IFAD,  as  well  as  adequate  contract  monitoring 
within ROLL. 
414.  Institutional  arrangements.  Coordination  and  central  procurement  capacities  will 
be  focused  in  the  Procurement  Unit  of  the  existing  MINAGRI  SPIU,  which  counts  an 
54 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39501080 
55 Available here: https://rppa.gov.rw/index.php?id=609&L=%27%27%22%27%27%27A%3D0%27%27%27  
56 Available here: https://rppa.gov.rw/index.php?id=609&L=%27%27%22%27%27%27A%3D0%27%27%27 
57 Available here: https://rppa.gov.rw/index.php?id=613  
58 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189366/fraud_e.pdf/ab42fc11-b213-49af-8df3-
e70af2076650  
59 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506  
60 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41942012  
61 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/secap  
107 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
experienced Head of Procurement in charge of the procurement function for all IFAD-funded 
projects  implemented  by  the SPIU  and  a  dedicated  Procurement  Specialist  recruited  under 
the first phase of KIIWP1, who will reprise his role as Procurement Specialist under KIIWP2. 
Capacity at SPIU level will be strengthened  with the addition of a Procurement Assistant to 
support  activities  under  KIIWP2  and  the  other  IFAD-funded  projects  implemented  by  the 
SPIU. The Procurement Assistant will be competitively recruited from the market, based on 
the ToRs included in Annex 1 below and subject to IFAD’s No-Objection. 
415.  The  Kayonza  District  will  be  actively  involved  in  procurement  activities  wherever 
possible.  Specifically,  selected  procurements  of  goods  with  an  estimated  value  of  USD 
40,000.00 to be delivered at district-level will be delegated to the District’s Corporate Division, 
which includes two procurement officers, under the supervision of the SPIU. Procurement at 
district-level shall be carried out according to the Borrower’s procurement regulations to the 
extent that  they  are  consistent  with the IFAD Project  Procurement Guidelines.  The  District 
Tender Committee will be responsible for the advertisement of tenders and the approval of 
recommendations to award. 
416.  Procurement  planning.  The  Procurement  Specialist  will  participate  to  the 
preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), ensuring that the final document is 
realistic, reasonable and result-oriented. To help with smooth planning and implementation 
of  the  AWPB,  the  budget  estimated  shall  be  done  after  completion  of  market  research 
particularly for procurement related activities. Thereafter, it is the Procurement Specialist’s 
responsibility to draft a realistic  and consolidated procurement plan that shall cover all the 
activities funded by KIIWP2, on the basis of the latest IFAD procurement plan template62. The 
procurement plan prepared for KIIWP2 shall be for a period of 18 months, with successive 
12-months plans to be prepared for the following periods of implementation. The procurement 
plan shall be realistic and consistent with the AWPB, forming a part of it, and the Procurement 
Specialist shall submit it on NOTUS for IFAD’s review and No-Objection at least 60 days prior 
to the beginning of the new financial year. 
417.  Procurement process. The Procurement Specialist will be responsible for managing 
the procurement  process,  under  the  supervision  of  the Head  of  Procurement  and  with the 
assistance of the Procurement Assistant, including the update of the procurement plan, the 
evaluation of bids, proposals and quotations, contract award and management. 
418.  Public Tender Committee. For evaluation of recommendations to award, KIIWP2 will 
use  the  Public  Tender  Committee  already  appointed  by  the  Chief  Finance  Officer  of  RAB. 
Pursunt  to  article  5  of  Ministerial  Order  no.  002/20/10/TC  of  19/05/2020  establishing 
regulations on public  procurement, a public  tender  committee is  appointed for  a term of 3 
years, which may be renewed only once. 
419.  Procurement methods and IFAD prior review thresholds. Proposed methods of 
procurement for  goods,  works,  consulting  services  and related non-consulting  services,  as 
well  as  the  IFAD  prior-review  thresholds  will  be  laid  out  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  of 
KIIWP2, as may be amended from time to time. 
420.  The  procurement  section  of  this  PIM  has  a  dynamic nature.  It  will  be  reviewed  and 
updated periodically based on lessons learned during implementation and on developments 
that may occur during the Project’s life. Any changes/amendments to the procurement section 
will be made in order to improve the Project’s efficiency and effectiveness and will be subject 
to IFAD’s No-Objection. 
62 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41917572  
108 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
PART IV: ANNEXES  
ANNEX 1: TORS OF SPIU STAFF 
The following ToR are to complement the additional staff that KIIWP2 will add. Most of the 
other staff not shown here, will be recruited under KIIPW1, hence they will keep the same 
ToRs.  
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE KIIWP2 PROCUREMENT SPECIALIST 
Position: KIIWP2 Procurement Specialist 
Place of assignment: Kigali, Rwanda 
Duties and reporting lines: Under the direct supervision and authority of the Head of 
Procurement Department of the SPIU, the Procurement Specialist will be in charge of all 
procurement processes carried out under KIIWP2, from the identification of the need to the 
completion of the contract, with the exception of those delegated to the Corporate Division 
of the District of Kayonza. The Procurement Specialist will also be responsible in guiding the 
Corporate Division of the District of Kayonza in the conduct of procurement activities 
delegated to the latter. 
Tasks and responsibilities: 
  Establish and regularly update a data base of technical specifications of goods to be 
acquired by the project and a data base on suppliers, service providers, contractors 
for tendering process; 
  Prepare bidding documents and requests for proposals; 
  Undertake publication formalities and/or send the bidding documents to prospective 
bidders; 
  Attend any bid opening sessions and establish attendance and opening session 
reports in close collaboration with project parties and with project internal tender 
committee; 
  Organize the panel of evaluation of bids or proposals; 
  Attend the evaluation team of bids as non scoring member and assist with the 
elaboration of evaluation reports; 
  Communicate with RPPA, PCU and IFAD through the Head of Procurement Unit for all 
problems pertaining to the procurement process; 
  Organize the reception of goods and works delivered by the suppliers and contractors 
(Client’s certificate of reception); 
  Provide guidance to the Corporate Division of the District of Kayonza in the conduct 
of procurement activities delegated to the latter. 
  Carry out any other assignment or relevant duties in the field of his/her competences 
as may be assigned by the PC and the Authorities. 
Outputs: 
  Effective and efficient procurement process of acquisition of goods services and 
works at the PCU level and respect of the basic principle of the best value for 
money. 
109 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Pragmatic and systematic filing system of procurement documents at the PCU 
level; 
  Province and districts positively assisted in their procurement process with clear 
and transparent evaluation reports to avoid the repetition of launching several 
similar tenders. 
  Reception of goods and works in accordance with the technical specification and 
the bidding documents; 
  Full satisfaction of participants in workshops, seminars, travels on the practical 
dispositions taken for their organization including payment of allowances and 
board and lodging conditions. 
Competencies: 
Functional Competencies 
  Possess competencies in government procurement and office/contract management;  
  Possess the ability to give sound advice on procurement issues that would impact on 
the project’s financial and physical performance; 
  Good communication and interpersonal skills required;  
  Strong personal management and communication skills; 
  Excellent knowledge of MS Office, internet use and procurement databases. 
Corporate Competencies 
  Displays cultural, gender, religion, race, nationality and age sensitivity and 
adaptability; 
  Highest standards of integrity, discretion and loyalty. 
Qualifications and experience: 
Education 
  Bachelor’s Degree in Procurement/Supply Chain 
Management/Economics/Accounting/Finance or other relevant degree; 
  Master’s Degree in Procurement or any related field is an advantage; 
  Professional qualification in procurement from an internationally recognised and 
accredited institution (i.e. CIPS) desired. 
Experience 
  At least 8 years of experience in project procurement funded by international 
organizations, preferably international development partners;  
  At least 5 years’ experience in effectively managing teams; 
  Extensive knowledge of IFAD procedures is an advantage. 
Language Requirements 
  Fluency in written and spoken English;  
  Demonstrated capacity to produce high quality technical reports. 
110 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Duration of the assignment: The duration of the assignment will be one year, renewable 
depending on satisfactory performance. 
111 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TERMS OF REFERENCE: SOCIAL INCLUSION, GENDER AND YOUTH SPECIALIST AT DISTRICT LEVEL  
Under  the  authority  of the  Project  Operations Manager,  and in  close  collaboration  with the 
SPIU  Gender  &  Youth  Specialist,  the  KIIWP  Social  Inclusion,  Gender  and  Youth  Project 
Specialist is responsible to coordinate and facilitate the implementation of the social inclusion, 
gender  and  youth  related  interventions  defined  by  the  Project  at  the  district  level.  The 
Specialist  will  ensure  the  operationalization  of  social  inclusion,  gender  and  youth 
mainstreaming in the Project’s investments and proper coordination of the related activities. 
In reference to the cross-cutting issues, the Social Inclusion,  Gender and  Youth Specialist, 
shall perform the following functions: 
  Overall coordinate all the social inclusion, gender, youth related activities of the Project 
at  the  district  level;  ensure  that  vulnerable  households  are  included  in  all  Project’s 
activities, that women and men equally benefit from Project’s interventions and that 
young people are adequately reached by the Project.  
 
Identify any capacity gap from Project’s implementation partners or service providers 
that  limit  achievements  of  social  inclusion,  gender/  youth  related  objectives,  and 
propose practical solutions to address the gap.  
  Prepare  contents  for  trainings  on  gender  and  youth  related  topics;  revise  existing 
training  materials  and  ensure  that  the  materials  the  Project  develops  are  gender 
sensitive in their language and image, considering literacy level of target groups.  
  Provide  capacity  building  during  trainings/workshops,  preparation  and  follow  up, 
particularly  at  the  beginning  of  the  Project  and  in  relation  to  mobilization  strategy, 
identification and selection of target groups.  
  Organize  specific  separate  sessions  for  women  and  youth  during  the  mobilisation 
process  and during the development of participatory sub-catchment plans, ensuring 
that  the  needs  of  women,  youth  and  vulnerable  categories  are  taken  into  account. 
Interacting with women in communities to gain better understanding of women’s’ and 
youth  perceptions  and  guiding  implementers  in  approaches  to  better  integrating 
women and youth into project activities as well as having them in leadership positions. 
  Organize  women’s  leadership  trainings  and  keep  track  of  monitoring  women  in 
leadership positions. 
  Reviewing  (regularly)  participation  of  women  and  youth  in  KIIWP  activities  and 
decision-making processes and making recommendation to improve processes.  
  Review basic project implementation processes and outputs to provide feedback and 
suggestions  when  needed  on  how  to  achieve  best  possible  project  outcomes  with 
respect 
inclusion,  gender  equity,  women’s  empowerment,  youth 
mainstreaming. The basic processes to which the specialist should provide inputs are: 
(i) Preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget; (ii) Design and implementation of 
project M&E system; (iii) Project Progress Reports; (iv) Project Supervision Reports.  
to  social 
  Review  project  plans  and  budgets  to  ensure  that  adequate  attention  is  paid  (and 
resources allocated) to support practical and strategic support to women, youth and 
vulnerable groups as in line with project design document and percentage of outreach 
by categories is respected.  
  Work  with  the  M&E  Officer  to  ensure  that  the  M&E,  logframe  is  gender  and  youth 
sensitive and reflective of the real time situation. Address any gaps in the supervision 
reports for further follow up. Furthermore, work with M&E unit to ensure that lessons 
learned, and success stories of women and youth are fully captured and reflected in 
relevant reports sections (i.e. Knowledge Management). 
112 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Work  in  close  collaboration  with  SPIU Gender &  Youth  Specialist:  revise the Gender 
and Youth Strategy of the Project; maintain close communication with pre-identified 
service  providers  (such  as,  Kilimo  Trust,  RYAF  among  others);  ensure  that  GALS 
methodology is adequately delivered to the targeted groups. Maintain communication 
with the SPIU Nutrition Specialist on cross-cutting thematic areas. 
  Ensure that the project implementation teams are sensitized to gender and diversity 
issues  that  they  should  expect  and  explore  in  their  interaction  with  the  community 
through regular trainings and sensitization programmes.  
  Establish  and  maintain  working  relationships  with  the  District  authorities  to  build 
synergy  in  gender-sensitive  interventions  in  Project  activities  and  establish 
coordination  mechanisms;  ensure  coordination  and  partnership  with  the  Gender 
Officers  or  with  other  relevant  stakeholders  at  the  District  level  for  the  delivery  of 
gender awareness trainings.  
Expected outputs: 
  Specific contents for gender-awareness training for Project staff and local service 
providers are outlined. 
  Delivery of AWPB, Progress reports, project documentation related to gender issues 
and activities. 
  Coordination mechanisms for the delivery of gender related activities are settled.  
Minimum requirements:  
At least a bachelor’s degree in social sciences or related fields with expertise in gender issues. 
3 years working experience. Having worked with an IFAD project is an advantage. 
Languages: 
Fluency in Kinyarwanda and English  
113 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE SPIU PROCUREMENT ASSISTANT 
Position: SPIU Procurement Specialist 
Place of assignment: Kigali, Rwanda 
Duties and reporting lines: Under the direct supervision and authority of the Head of 
Procurement Department of the SPIU, the Procurement Assistant will assist in the day-to-
day project procurement activities and support all procurement processes across IFAD-
funded projects implemented by the SPIU. 
Tasks and responsibilities: 
  Support with the preparation and review of procurement plans in order to assess the 
need for updates/upgrades and ascertain their completeness, concurrence with the 
AWPB, and consistency with Rwandan procurement regulations and IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines; 
  Support with the preparation and review of procurement documents, processes and 
procedures for goods, works, consulting services, and related non-consulting 
services; 
  Support with the preparation and review of the procurement, contracting and 
implementation processes and timeliness and appropriateness of procurement 
actions; 
  Support with contract administration and management procedures; 
  Support with systems in place for procurement planning, implementation and 
monitoring; 
  Support with document filing and retention, as per required standards; 
 
Identify deficiencies and make recommendations for improvements and control 
mechanisms in the procurement procedures and processes; 
  Submit assignment reports and any other relevant ancillary documents as required 
by the Head of Procurement Department of the SPIU; 
  Carry out any other procurement-related duties as requested by the PC and Head of 
Procurement Department of the SPIU. 
Outputs: 
  Effective and efficient assistance provided to the Head of Procurement 
Department of the SPIU and to the other SPIU colleagues. 
Competencies: 
Functional Competencies 
  Possess competencies in government procurement and office/contract management;  
  Possess the ability to give sound advice on procurement issues that would impact on 
the project’s financial and physical performance; 
  Good communication and interpersonal skills required;  
  Strong personal management and communication skills; 
  Excellent knowledge of MS Office, internet use and procurement databases. 
114 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Corporate Competencies 
  Displays cultural, gender, religion, race, nationality and age sensitivity and 
adaptability; 
  Highest standards of integrity, discretion and loyalty. 
Qualifications and experience: 
Education 
  Diploma in Procurement/Supply Chain Management/Economics/Accounting/Finance 
or other relevant degree; 
  Bachelor Degree in Procurement or any related field is an advantage; 
  Professional qualification in procurement from an internationally recognised and 
accredited institution (i.e. CIPS) desired. 
Experience 
  At least 2 years of experience in project procurement funded by international 
organizations, preferably international development partners;  
  Extensive knowledge of IFAD procedures is an advantage. 
Language Requirements 
  Fluency in written and spoken English;  
  Demonstrated capacity to produce high quality technical reports. 
Duration of the assignment: The duration of the assignment will be one year, renewable 
depending on satisfactory performance. 
115 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR A GIS SPECIALIST SUPPORTING M&E 
The  GIS  specialist  will  be  part  of  the  SPIU  and  will  support  the  project’s  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation (M&E) through the usage of Geographical Information Systems (GIS). The primary 
duties of the GIS specialist will include establishing procedures and standards to support the 
monitoring of project activities with GIS tools and measure the progress towards achieving 
its  deliverables  that  are  specified  in  the  project’s  logical  framework.  He/She  will  analyse 
spatial data through mapping software and designing digital maps with geographic data and 
various  other data sets. The expert will work in close collaboration with the M&E Specialist 
and the Knowledge Management and Communication Officer. The specific tasks include the 
following: 
a) GIS data collection and usage manual. The GIS expert will develop a manual specifying 
what  GIS  data  is  to  be  collected,  how  it  is  collected  and  how  it  is  used  for  planning  and 
reporting. The GIS manual should specify how the usage of GIS will support the project’s M&E 
system. It should cover: 
  GIS software and hardware requirements of the project; 
  Data layers to be collected; 
  Data standards (rules by which data are described and recorded); 
  Procedures specifying the steps how data is collected, quality checked, stored, 
analysed and used, as well as roles and responsibilities;  
  Data management, analysis and visualization for project planning and reporting as 
well as external communication. 
b) Implementation plan and budget. The expert will produce a detailed implementation 
plan for the application of GIS approaches in the M&E of the project including a budget for its 
implementation.  
c) Support project M&E with GIS.  The GIS Specialist will support M & E in collection of 
geospatial  data  relating  to  locations  of  agribusinesses,  community-based  organizations, 
catchment  rehabilitation  areas  as  well  as  infrastructure  and  areas  being  developed.  The 
Specialist  will  also  analyze  the  spatial  data  using  a  mapping  software  to  produce  maps 
showing the spatial distribution of various kinds of data. He/She will create "shape files" to 
merge  topographical  data  with  external  data  by  layering  external  data  over  topographical 
maps and also support M & E in discovering patterns and trends through the spatially mapped 
data. 
d) Assemble GIS data from third parties. The expert will supervise service providers 
engaged by the project to map project interventions, ensuring data quality checks on the 
collected GIS data. 
e)  Data  management,  analysis,  visualization  and  reporting.  The  expert  will  manage 
GIS data, and produce analytical reports on geographical data utilising data visualisations and 
maps to support the M&E unit and management to plan for and monitor the implementation 
of project activities. The expert will also provide IFAD with geospatial datasets in accordance 
with  corporate  GIS  procedures  that  follow  standard  requirements  with  regards  to  naming 
convention, attribute structure and records, and metadata. He/She will also manage a digital 
library of geographic maps in various file types and will liaise with the knowledge management 
officer for dissemination or such maps and other reports.  
116 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TERMS OF REFERENCE: ACCOUNTANT 
Duties and responsibilities: 
Under the direct supervision of the Chief Accountant, the specific duties of the Accountant 
are as follows: 
  Capture in the books and files all supporting documents of expenditures  paid from 
the petty cash;  
  Prepare all documents that are required for the payment of suppliers’ invoices duly 
approved by his/her supervisor;  
  Monthly declaration of withholding taxes deducted from suppliers’ invoices; 
  Verification of supplier’s invoices before payment; 
  Timely posting all project accounting vouchers on the accounting software; 
  Exercise proper custody of all posted vouchers and other accounting documents; 
  Verify and check bank statements and accounting software printouts; 
  Supervise and direct the accounting and logistical functions in order to ensure 
efficiency; 
  Prepare and submit periodical financial reports on deadlines; 
  Prepare Withdrawal Applications; 
  Regular spot check of petty cash fund and other reconciliation reports; 
  Timely replenishment of operation account with project bank account; 
  Authorisation of payments vouchers; 
  Acting on the position of  the Chief Accountant in his/her absence; 
  Facilitate financial audits and implementation support missions; 
  Regular follow up of smooth functioning of the accounting software, and make 
contact with ICT staff and software suppliers; 
  Submit account printouts by components to the heads of components for analysis 
and comments; 
  Advice the project team on accounting and administration matters; 
 
Implement any other relevant duties assigned by the Chief Accountant. 
Expected outputs: 
  Financial reports prepared and submitted on time; 
  Withdrawal applications prepared and submitted for replenishment; 
  Accounting documents maintained properly.    
Qualifications: The Accountant should have at least a bachelor's degree in accounting or 
finances with a practical experience of at least 5 years in financial management. 
Key competences: 
  Fluency in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
  Skills in accounting applications such as TOMPRO, PASTEL, SUN; 
  Good communication skills; 
  Fluent in Kinyarwanda, English or French (reading, writing and speaking)  
  Ability to meet crucial deadlines. 
  A previous experience with IFAD-funded projects would be an advantage.  
Duration: 2 years renewable performance based contract with a 6 months' probation 
period. 
117 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE KIIWP2 AGRONOMIST AND FFS SPECIALIST 
Duties and reporting lines: Under the direct supervision and authority of the Head of 
Procurement Department of the SPIU, the Agronomist Specialist will be in charge of the 
overall coordination of the activities related to crop production, mechanization and 
extension services carried out under KIIWP2. He/she will be in charge of the overall 
coordination of Sub-component A.3. 
Tasks and responsibilities 
  Contribution to research and development in particular in the review and correct 
application of adapted FFS modules, the CSA baseline conclusions and on the link 
between ongoing research centers in the area that could be implemented in the 
project; 
  Active participation and inputs on the planning and contribution to the AWPB; 
  Revision of all related technical documents produced by the project; 
  Co- responsible for selection of technical related service providers; 
  Attend supervision missions; 
  Contribute to M&E data and various reports; 
  Participate and coordinate FFS implementation and preparation as well as its 
technical soundness; 
  Follow-up and coordination of the activities related to sustainable mechanization 
development in coordination and under constant collaboration with the 
mechanization expert and the experts at the MINIAGRI.  
  Carry out any other assignment or relevant duties in the field of his/her competences 
as may be assigned by the SPIU coordinator and the Authorities. 
Competencies: 
Functional Competencies 
  Possess competencies in government procurement and selection of service 
providers;  
  Possess the ability to give sound advice on implementation activities and 
coordination; 
  Possess good technical competencies in agronomy, extension services and in FFS;  
  Good communication and interpersonal skills required;  
  Strong personal management and communication skills; 
  Excellent knowledge of MS Office, internet use and procurement databases. 
Corporate Competencies 
  Displays cultural, gender, religion, race, nationality and age sensitivity and 
adaptability; 
  Highest standards of integrity, discretion and loyalty. 
118 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Qualifications and experience: 
  A Bachelor or higher degree in agricultural agronomy or agricultural science; 
  Extensive experience on agriculture, including knowledge on sustainable practices 
and mechanization;  
  Proven skills in the management and coordination of agricultural/agronomic 
initiatives. 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as a very good command of spoken and written 
English 
  Awareness and on crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting. 
Language Requirements 
  Fluency in written and spoken English;  
  Demonstrated capacity to produce high quality technical reports. 
Duration of the assignment: The duration of the assignment will be 2 years, renewable 
depending on satisfactory performance. 
119 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
ANNEX 2: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR CONSULTANCY SERVICES TO CONDUCT A BASELINE 
SURVEY FOR NUTRITION INDICATORS IN KIIWP2  
MINIMUM DIETARY DIVERSITY SCORE FOR WOMEN OF REPRODUCTIVE AGE (MDD-
W) 
Background.  MDD-W  captures  daily  diet  diversity  of  women  of  reproductive  age  (15–49 
years  of  age).  It  is  a  proxy  indicator  to  judge  adequacy  of  micronutrients  (e.g.  vitamins, 
minerals) consumption by women. It is also a proxy to gauge the adequacy of nutrition intake 
of the household members. MDD-W is expected to provide a broader picture of the household 
nutrient  intake  taking  into  consideration  that  women  are  more  likely  to  be  nutritionally 
vulnerable  in  most  societies  because  of  their  disadvantaged  position  in  relation  to 
intrahousehold  distribution  of  nutritious  foods  in  the  resource-poor  settings  which  are  the 
primary targets for IFAD financed operations.  
Additionally, women and, in particular women of reproductive age (15-49 years), are more 
vulnerable due to their higher physiological demand of nutrients as compared to adult men. 
A consistent use of the same methodology over time to measure women's diet quality in the 
same population will allow assessment of impact of IFAD's investment of nutrition adequacy 
of the targeted household.  
Objective  of  the  study.  The  primary  objective  of  the  survey  is  to  establish  the  baseline 
values of key indicators for nutrition indicators, in the frame of the implementation of KIIWP.  
The specific objective of the baseline survey is to collect data to establish levels of all results 
indicators to enable tracking of implementation. 
The  Project  intends  to  hire  a  consultant(s)  to  conduct  this  baseline.  Specifically,  the 
consultant(s) will assess the following indicators:  
  Output Indicator: Number of persons provided with targeted support to improve 
their nutrition  
  Outcome Indicator: Percentage of women, 15-49 years of age, who consume at 
least 5 out of 10 food groups (MDD-W) 
Counting output indicator 
This  indicator  refers  to  the  number  of  people  that  have  directly  benefited  from  Project-
supported  activities  designed  to  help  improve  nutrition  either  during  the  past  12  months 
(annual reporting) or since project start-up (cumulative reporting). Note that the nutrition-
sensitive activities are not generic, but they are tailored to address context-based nutrition 
problems.  Activities  include  people  participating  in  nutrition-related  trainings  (nutrition 
education  in  Farmers  Field  Schools),  infrastructure  (e.g.,  access  to  drinking  water  and 
sanitation), technical assistance on the use of inputs and technologies intended to improve 
nutrition outcomes (e.g., bio-fortified or nutrient rich seed varieties, labor-saving implements/ 
technologies), socio-cultural-related issues impacting on nutrition outcomes such as Gender 
and  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  training.  As  nutrition  education  sessions  are  held  in 
villages/communities  with  a  group  of  people  (from  FFS),  the  total  number  of  people 
participating in these sessions should be counted as people reached. 
Measuring outcome indicator (MDD-W) 
To evaluate the minimum dietary diversity of women of reproductive age, the methodology 
includes  classification  of  food  into  10  food  groups  and  assessing  whether  women  have 
consumed at least 5 groups out of 10 in a day. Women are asked what food they have eaten 
in the past 24 hours. The food list is then divided into groups.  
120 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
The 10 food groups are (i) Grains, white roots and tubers, and plantains (ii) Pulses (beans, 
peas and lentils) (iii) Nuts and seeds (iv) Dairy (v) Meat, Poultry and fish (vi) Eggs (vii) Dark 
green leafy vegetables (viii) Other vitamin A rich fruits and vegetables (ix) Other vegetables 
(x) Other fruits. (See, Annex A for sample questionnaire).  
If the women’s diets include food items that can be categorized in a minimum of five food 
groups,  then  she  is  expected  to  have  met  the  minimum  requirement  for  micronutrient 
consumption.  The  amount  of  each  food  group;  however,  must  be  15  g  or  more.  Specific 
technique/methodology has been prescribed to administer the question to women, as outlined 
in the guideline on MDD-W63. 
The survey, data collection and analysis  of this indicator  is  mandatory. Through a 24-hour 
open recall, the survey would assess the following:    
  The percentage of women that had a dietary diversity above the MDD-W cut-off (5 or 
more), as  well as the percentage of women that had consumed food items in every 
standard food group.  
  Women’s  consumption  of  nutrient-dense  foods,  which  may  have  implications  on 
micronutrient adequacies and health outcomes. 
  Source of food if from own production or from markets.  
Multipliers 
  Women (percentage) (Mandatory) 
  Women (number) (Mandatory) 
  Households (percentage) (Mandatory) 
  Households (number) (Mandatory)  
  Women-headed households  
  Non-women-headed households  
  Household members (number) (Mandatory) 
Specific Tasks of the consultant(s) 
The key tasks of the consultant(s) will include:  
Task 1: Obtaining necessary clearance for the survey 
  Adhere to local formalities and obtain any required clearance related to conduct the 
survey, including acquiring all permissions necessary for  conducting the survey  and 
relevant permissions from national and/or local authorities as needed. 
Task 2: Sample selection 
  An appropriate sample and size based on an appropriate design should be generated.  
  Sampling to consider only geographical/beneficiaries targeted for support. 
Task 3: Development of questionnaires 
  Questionnaires  drafted  in  accordance  with  the  indicator  variables  of  the  logical 
framework; 
  Adapt  the  questionnaire  to  the local  food  cultures,  local names  of  foods  consumed, 
social and cultural context; 
  The  questionnaires  are  translated  into  Kinyarwanda  and  programmed  for  electronic 
data collection (as relevant); 
  The  questionnaires  will  be  pre-tested  during  the  inception  phase,  on  at  least  10 
respondents. Pilot test the questionnaires under real local conditions. Monitor time per 
module  for  estimation  of  average  time  per  questionnaire,  and  any  programming 
challenges.  
63 FAO and FHI 360. 2016. Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women: A Guide for Measurement. Rome: FAO Available 
at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5486e.pdf  
121 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Task 4: Detailed Field Procedure Plan 
The Field Procedure Plan should detail the following: 
  Protocols  for  ensuring  full  adherence  to  the  sample  frame  and  high-quality  data, 
including rules for household re-visits and substitutions; 
  Travel and lodging logistics; 
  Management information/reporting tools to track household interviews; 
  Necessary  protocols  to  ensure  selected  households  can  participate  in  a  follow-up 
survey as part of the requirements for the construction of a household panel dataset;  
  Supervision and spot check plans to ensure adherence to data collection protocols and 
confirm  quality  of  data  collection  including  5%  re-visits  to  a  random sample  of  the 
evaluation sample to confirm the validity of the data;  
  The  Field  Procedure  Plan  should  be  reviewed  together  with  the  KIIWP,  prior  to 
commencement of the field exercise;  
  The Consultant(s) must adhere closely to the plan as conditions allow during survey 
implementation. 
Task 5: Recruiting, training, and contracting of experienced field staff 
  Recruit  enumerators  with  experience  in  conducting  household/Dietary/KAP  surveys, 
and familiarity with tablets and electronic data collection and geo-tagging; 
  Train  all  enumerators,  supervisors,  and  data  manager  on  the  administration  of  the 
questionnaires;  
  The training should also serve as a screening process for skilled interviewers and data 
entry agents; Consequently, the consultant(s) must recruit more interviewers for the 
training than will be ultimately needed to cater for those who drop out. The training 
should include theoretical training, classroom and field practice and final evaluation of 
the enumerators.  
Task 6: Data collection 
  Develop appropriate tools and instruments for gathering information, including Data 
collection by Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing, or any appropriate software; 
  Develop a monitoring system to track questionnaires completed and replacements;  
  Provide weekly reports to the client detailing number  of interviews completed, plots 
mapped, challenges  faced, modifications made to the Field Procedure Plan, and any 
other notable occurrences;  
  The  KIIWP/  SPIU  M&E  officer  (or  other  staff  assigned)  will    work  closely  with  the 
consultant(s) to ensure data quality; 
  Correct all inconsistencies and problems identified by the client in data quality checks, 
which may require re-visiting households (the list of data quality checks will be shared 
in advance of the start of data collection); 
  Provide  a  final  Field  Report,  submitted  at  the  end  of  the  data  collection  period, 
summarizing the weekly progress reports and detailing the overall response rate. 
  Present the final results to key the KIIWP and SPIU. 
Task 7: Reporting 
Following the data collection, cleaning and analysis by the consultant(s), the reporting shall 
follow: 
  Draft  Baseline  survey  report.  The  report  should  include,  but  not  limited  to,    the 
Background of the consultancy, Executive summary including recommendations; Table 
of  contents;  Project  Goals;  baseline  survey  objectives;  ;  Methodology:  scope  and 
coverage;  survey  design  and  sample  size;  organization;  quality  control;  data 
processing and management; level of reliability of the estimates of the indicators being 
evaluated;  Main  findings  (aligned  to  the  Results  Framework);  Conclusions  and 
recommendations; Appendices to include TOR; Bibliography; etc. The draft report will 
be presented to KIIWP and to the SPIU. 
122 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
  Final Baseline report incorporating comments and suggestions from the  Project, and 
relevant SPIU staff. The report structure shall remain as in the draft. The report will 
be presented to SPIU. 
  Raw  data  sets  of  all  data  collected  (in  EXCEL  or  STATA)  and  captured,  including 
pictures taken in the course of the consultancy.  
Experience, staffing & qualifications   
The selected Consultant(s) should possess the following:  
  Legal  status  recognized  by  the  Government  enabling  it  to  undertake  a  household 
survey; 
  Demonstrated  prior  experience,  with  references,  in  household  baseline  surveys 
(Dietary)  –  knowledge  of  local  formalities  and  customs  in  conducting  household 
surveys; 
  Demonstrated capacity for implementing electronic data collection; 
  Capacity  in  data  management;  strong  knowledge  of  the  relevant  applications,  the 
relevant programming language;  
  Core team of a Lead Consultant with a minimum of a Master qualification with evidence 
of experience in Statistics, Social Sciences, food security and nutrition, with experience 
in Research, Monitoring and Evaluation, of not less than 10 years. The team should 
also include, at a minimum, a Statistician, Food security and nutrition expert, a Survey 
Specialist or a Sociologist, all with at least 5 years’ experience.  
123 
ANNEX 3: IFAD PROCUMENET RISK MATRIX 
124 
Risk Rating System3L: Low RiskL2M: Medium Risk1H: High RiskDivisionCountryProjectDateINHERENT RISK RATING2.912.96#Description of Risk FeatureRatingAssessment BasisRemarks Recommendation /MitigationRatingACOUNTRY RISK ASSESSMENT2.903.001Legal and Regulatory Framework3.003.00aCountry procurement law, regulations and manual exist33 they all exist, 2 only two exist, 1 only one exist or noneGoverned by Law no. 62/2018 governing public procurement, Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, Standard Bidding Documents and Standard Contracts. In November 2010, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning also released a Public Procurement User Guide. Training modules on public procurement (Introductory and intermediate level) are all available on RPPA website.3bExistence of Standard Bidding Documents for Goods, Works and Services33 all exist, 2 only for NCB & ICB, none for Shopping, 1 none existsAll available in French and accessible on RPPA's website and all seen to be World Bank standard. Only bidding documents for NCB/ICB are available in English. The SPIU uses a complete set of SPDs for all IFAD-funded projects. The SPDs were found to be compliant with IFAD's requirements and policies.3cProcurement Monitoring3Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsThis dimension has been rated 'A' by PEFA. Procurement data maintained by RPPA was seen to be comprehensive, and published annually.  Such monitoring data is accessible on the RPPA website (http://www.rppa.gov.rw), including audits of procuring entitites.3dProcurement Methods3Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsThis dimension has been rated 'A' by PEFA, Procurement methods were observed to be followed according to the law.3ePublic access to procurement information3Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsIn its 2016 assessment, PEFA found that procurement entities were  not fully complying with this dimension. Only 3 of the 6 criteria were met, while sufficient information on contract awards, resolution of procurement complaints and annual procurement statistics were missing. However, the recent introduction of Rwanda's online e-procurement system (UMUCYO, accessible here: umucyo.gov.rw) has increased public access to contract awards, also allowing the 2018-2019 RPPA Annual Activity report to include complete annual procurement statistics. Furthermore, the RPPA website now also includes data on resolution of procurement complaints. IFAD-funded projects are already registered on the UMUCYO. For IFAD-funded projects, the e-procurement system is used both at SPIU and District-level.32Accountability and Transparency2.803.00aProcurement Complaints Management3Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsKIIWP practices meet all legal requirements, including the six criteria. A national independent review panel (IRP) is appointed by an Order of the Minister in charge of public procurement and sits at RPPA. The IRP has the power to receive appeals on public procurement at the national level, based on the dissatisfaction of complainants with decisions of a procuring entity, from the publication of the tender to contract signature.3bCountry Corruption Perception Index score 2The score is published on Transparency.org. 0 to 29 = 1, 30 to 60 = 2, 61 to 100 = 3Overall inherent risk rating bracket of medium risk. In 2019, Rwanda ranked 51st in the world with a score of 53.All procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors, consultants and service providers, shall observe the higheststandard of ethics during the procurement and execution of contracts financed under IFAD funded Projects, in accordance with paragraph 69 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. The Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws.3c2-tiered system to handle complaints33 as stated, 2 only a single level system, 1 no systemThe normal order of appeal is: first to the Procuring Entity and, if not resolved, then to the Independent Review Panel of RPPA.3dExistence of a debarment system33 full existence, 2 existence of complaints body that is the authority, 1 does not existAny criminal act will result in the bidding company being subject to criminal prosecution as well as debarment by RPPA in accordance with the Rwandan law. A list of blacklisted companies is published on the RPPA website.3eExistence of an independent and competent local authority responsible for investigating corruption allegations33 existence of independent Anti-Corruption agency, 2 existence of an office within a government ministry/agency that carries out some/all of these functions, 1 does not existThe Office of the Ombudsman is an independent public institution, which was established in 2003 under Article 182 of the Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda. Its organization and functions were established by Law no. 25/2003 of 15 August 2003, which was modified and complemented by Law no. 17/2005 of 18 August 2005. It became operational in 2004. Apart from investigating cases of injustice in public administration and private institutions, the Ombudsman has the additional task of preventing and combating corruption and other related offences. As result, the Office of the Ombudsman serves as both an ombudsman and an anti-corruption authority.3NET  RISK RATINGIFAD Procurement Risk MatrixESARWANDAKayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIWP) - Phases I and II09-Feb-21Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
125 
BPROJECT INSTITUTIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT2.922.931Capability in Public Procurement3.003.00aExistence of a Procurement Unit with at least 2 staff members (Design stage, reference is to govt agency)Existence of a Procurement Officer (Implementation)33 as stated, 2 one staff member, 1 does not exist (at Design stage)3 as stated, 2 someone else doing Procurement, 1 procurement function not consistently handled by anyoneThere is a head of procurement unit with a separate procurement officer attached to every project. KIIWP has a dedicated procurement officer. The procurement unit at the District of Kayonza counts two procurement officers.3bStaff member(s) have at least 7 years experience in donor-funded public procurement33 as stated, 2 for less than 7 years and/or  experience in public procurement but not donor-funded, 1 for less than 3 years experience Head of procurement - 13 years of experience, KIIWP procurement officer -  more than 10 years of experience. District procurement officers have also more than 7 years of experience.3cWhat is the general quality of documents produced by the procurement office?33 for very good bidding documents, evaluation reports and contracts, 2 for mediocre documents, 1 for documents with bad qualityThe general quality of documents produced by the procurement office was judged to be adequate.3dDo procurement staff have immediate access to the legal and regulatory framework documents?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe legal and regulatory framework documents are all available on the RPPA website. The procurement staff is well acquainted with the newest developments in the legal and regulatory procurement framework.3eAre the procurement and financial management functions separated?33 for total separation, 2 for some separation, 1 for procurement being done by FM staffThere is total separation between the procurement and financial management functions, both at SPIU and at District level.32Public Procurement Processes2.832.86iProcurement Methods2.502.50aProcurement methods for Goods consistent with IFAD Guidelines23 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 for noneThe procurement methods for goods are generally consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines, except for the application of domestic preferences to NCBs  and the lack of mandatory references to IFAD's policies (the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption, the IFAD policy to preventing and responding to sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse and the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy) in the bidding documents used for NCB.Additionally,  procurements of goods and related non-consulting services  are delayed by the use of open tendering for low-value procurements. This is due to the SPIU following national procurement thresholds mandated by the RPPA instead of those listed in the LtB. According to the national thresholds, any procurement activity whose value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be carried out via open competitive bidding.The KIIWP Team was reminded that, according to the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, domestic preferences are only allowed for ICBs and that bidding documents shall always contain a mandatory reference to IFAD's policies. IFAD will ensure that procurement processes fully comply with its Project Procurement Guidelines by reviewing procurement documents on a prior and post review basis.Following consultations with both the SPIU and the RPPA, on November 19th, 2020, IFAD sent a letter to the Rwandan Ministry of Finance, requesting an increase in procurement thresholds to be applied to IFAD-funded projects implemented by the SPIU. As of the time of the KIIWP2 design mission (January 2021), no response was received by IFAD. It is recommended for IFAD to keep following up until feedback is received from the Rwandan Ministry of Finance.2bProcurement methods for Works consistent with IFAD Guidelines23 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 for noneThe procurement methods for works are  generally consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines. However,  procurements of works and related-non consulting services are delayed by the use of open tendering for low-value procurements. This is due to the SPIU following national procurement thresholds mandated by the RPPA instead of those listed in the LtB. According to the national thresholds, any procurement activity whose value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be carried out via open competitive bidding.Following consultantions with both the SPIU and the RPPA, on November 19th, 2020, IFAD sent a letter to the Rwandan Ministry of Finance, requesting an increase in procurement thresholds to be applied to IFAD-funded projects implemented by the SPIU. As of the time of the KIIWP2 design mission (January 2021), no response was received by IFAD. It is recommended for IFAD to keep following up until feedback is received from the Rwandan Ministry of Finance.2cProcurement methods for Services  consistent with IFAD Guidelines33 for large-value method for firms, small value method for firms and method for individual consultants; 2 for two of the above; 1 for only one or lessThe procurement methods for consultancies are generally consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines.3dEasy access to bidding documents by foreign firms33 bidding documents are free and could be issued/sent electronically; 2 foreign bidders have to wire funds to Project to buy bidding docs; 1 bidding docs not practically available to foreign biddersForeign firms can easily access bidding documents on the e-procurement system.3iiProcurement Planning3.003.00aAre procurement plans prepared ahead of time and consistent with annual work plans/budgets?33 prepared ahead and consistent, 2 one of either, 1 noneFor KIIWP1, the 2020/2021 procurement plan was submitted before the beginning of the financial year. Minor discrepancies between the procurement plan and the corresponding AWPB were found by IFAD and promptly addressed by the SPIU.3bDo procurement people participate in the annual work planning processes?33 if required by regulation  and practised, 2 if required by regulation, 1 if none of aboveYes, the head of the procurement department and the procurement officer attached to that particular project participate. They are in charge of preparing the procument plan.3cAre Procurement Plans done using an effective format with planned and actual rows across 3 different categories33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe SPIU recently adopted IFAD's most recent procurement plan template.3PEFA Framework Procedure:  
1.  Open www.pefa.org  
2.  Scroll down and search by country 
3.  Choose whole country, not regions within a country 
4.  Choose latest report. Download entire report 
5.  Examine Pillar PI-19 or PI-24 (depending on Framework used) to see assessment 
6.  Summary information from section of report should be in Remarks of the Matrix 
7.  Score as follows: 
PEFA 
A 
B 
C 
D 
IFAD Matrix 
3 
3 
2 
1 
126 
127 
iiiProcurement Processes33aMinimum number of quotations established by law33 for three or more; 2 for two, 1 if it does not state or less than twoA minimum of 3 quotations is established by law.3bMinimum number of days for advertised procurement under competitive bidding processes33 for minimum of 30 days; 2 for minimum of 20 days; 1 for less than 20 days or not stated45 calendar days for ICB, NCB 30 calendar days,shopping 3 working days.3cIs there enough time provided for bidders to ask questions and receive answers in the bidding process?33 if bidders have a minimum of 3 days for the RFQ method and 7 days for competitive methods to ask questions, 2 if less than 3 days for RFQ and less than 7 but more than 4 days for competitive methods, 1 if not mentioned in RFQ and less than 4 days for competitive procurements21 days for international tender, 15 days for NCB, and 4 days for shopping.3dAre clarifications provided to all bidders?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneClarifications are provided to all bidders.3eAre bids received prior to the deadline securely stored?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneIn the e-procurement system, bid submission closes automatically at the deadline. Bids are securely stored electronically.3fAre procurement securities securely stored?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneOriginal procurement securities are kept under lock and key.3gAre public bid openings conducted for advertised procurements, and within an hour of receipt of bids?33 for both, 2 for bid openings being conducted more than an hour after receipt, 1 for bid openings not being conductedBid openings are conducted publicly via the e-procurement system. 3hAre minutes of bid openings taken, and sent to bidders who submitted bids?33 for both, 2 for minutes being taken but not being sent, 1 for noneThe e-procurement system displays the opening bid report to every bidder through the e-procurement portal immediately after bid opening.3iAre evaluations conducted by a suitably qualified ad-hoc evaluation committee?23 for both, 2 for qualified but not ad-hoc, 1 for ad-hoc or noneThe tender evaluation committee is suitably qualified but it is not ad-hoc. Bid evaluation is conducted by 5 persons; i.e chairperson (gender specialist), vice chairperson (environmental specialist), secretary (procurement officer for the project) and 2 members (M&E specialist & livestock officer). Mandate for the evaluation committee is for three years, but cannot exceed two mandates. The committee is selected by the Chief Finance Officer of RAB. This is consistent with article 5 of Ministerial Order  no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, which establishes that the Chief Budget Manager of every procuring entity must appoint a public tender committee for a term of 3 years, which may be renewed only once.IFAD can strongly encourage government through policy dialogue to nominate ad-hoc tender evaluation committees, and it is recommended that it do so through the COSOP consultations with the government.2jIn evaluation, is responsiveness based on criteria requirements in the bidding documents?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneResponsiveness criteria are specifically stated in the bidding documents.3kAre evaluations completed within the bid validity period?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe bid validity period is no more than 120 days. Evaluation should be within 21 days from the date of opening of bids except when there are sound reasons raised by the procuring entity, as prescribed by the procurement regulations. No issues of bid validity period being exceeded was recorded.3lAre conditions precedent to contract effectiveness clearly stipulated in the contract? (i.e., advance payment security, performance security, insurance, etc)33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none All conditions precedent to contract effectiveness are clearly stipulated for standard contracts for goods, works or services published on RPPA website.3mDoes the agency maintain a complete record of the process? This would include copies of all public advertisements, pre-qualification documents (if used, the pre-qualification evaluation report documenting any decisions not to pre-qualify certain potential bidders), the bidding documents and any addenda, a record of any pre-bid meetings, the bid opening minutes, the final bid evaluation report (including a detailed record of the reasons used to accept or reject each bid), appeals against procedures or award recommendations, a signed copy of the final contract and any performance and advance payment securities issued, etc.33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneyes - each tender is filed in a separate box file.3nAre all contracts awarded advertised publicly?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneAll signed contracts are advertised publicly on the e-procurement system.3ivContract Administration and Management2.913.00aExistence of authority levels in the contract management process33 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for noneDone by end user department in coordination with the procurement department. In 2020, the SPIU has adopted specific contract monitoring forms for each signed contract, which are kept by the responsible contract monitoring officer. All contract documents are kept by the procurement department. 3bExistence of approval thresholds for contract amendments23 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for noneContract amendments are approved internally by the SPIU, regardless of their value. The specialist in charge makes a request for amendment to SPIU coordinator that submits it to the evaluation committee for approval.Pursuant to the IFAD Procurement Handbook, IFAD's No-Objection will be required for all prior-review contracts where the amendment increases the original contract value by more than 10 per cent or extends the original contract duration by 25 per cent or more.3cIs there an effective contract monitoring system/framework in place?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneA contract monitoring form is kept and updated by accounts department. Procurement files include relevant information concerning the execution of the contract.3dIs there a process to monitor delivery of goods to verify quantity and quality?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThere is a reception committee - logistics/procurement/end-user3eIs there a framework for approval of deliverables and payment process for consulting services contract?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneInception/draft/final reports have to be validated, and later a progress report approved by the end-user department.3fIs there a process for resolution of final payment and contract closure?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe Coordinator and Program Manager appoint a final report validation committee, which determines if the contract has been executed as per the contractual provisions before closure and final payment.3gAre contract disputes handled in accordance with a formal complaints/arbitration system?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe normal order of appeal is: first to the Procuring Entity and, if not resolved, then to the Independent Review Panel of RPPA.3hAre works contracts supervised by independent engineers or a named project manager?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneIndependent supervision companies are employed for some civil works. Other activities are supervised directly by competent SPIU staff.3iAre contracts completed on schedule and within the approved/ contracted contract price?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneThe sample of reviewed procurement activities showed that contracts are completed on schedule and within the approved/contracted contract price.3jDoes the organization have contract registers that register all contracts (with names, prices and dates), per procurement category?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneKIIWP1 is already registered on the Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) of the IFAD Client Portal. KIIWP1 staff maintains the information on the CMT updated.3kAre adequate contract administration records maintained? (These would include contractual notices issued by the supplier, contractor, purchaser or employer; a detailed record of all changes or variation orders issued affecting the scope, qualities, timing or price of the contract; records of invoices and payments, progress reports, certificates of inspection, acceptance and completion; records of claim and dispute and their outcomes; etc.)33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneContractual notices, records of invoices and payments, progress reports and an updated CMF are kept on file. CHECK WITH CONTRACTS.3 
ANNEX 4: AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE 
1. 
The mission was supported by the Sida-financed INSURED programme to finance the 
participation of an agricultural insurance expert (Emily Coleman). The mission is thankful to 
the inputs  and advice received from the  Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) for  the 
IFAD-funded  projects  on  agricultural 
findings  and 
recommendations  on  insurance  were  informed  by  meetings  with  financial  and  insurance 
institutions,  including  several  SACCOs  and  MFIs,  SACCO  Refinance  Unit  of  BDF,  National 
Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS), Access to Finance Rwanda (AFR), ACRE Africa Rwanda, 
Risk Shield Ltd., PRIME, Radiant, UAP Insurance Rwanda, the World Bank, WFP, IFC, One Acre 
Fund, and Africa Improved Foods (AIF). 64 
In  addition, 
insurance. 
the 
2. 
Agricultural insurance  is  part of GoR’s  strategy to de-risk and build the resilience of 
the agricultural sector, for livestock, and for crops - both rainfed and irrigated.  A pilot phase 
of the National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS) was launched on 23rd April 2019 and is 
due  to  end  in  March  2021.  After  which  NAIS  will  be  continued  and  has  already  received 
Government commitment as such. The pilot began in Nyanza District, but the NAIS is currently 
operating in all 30 Districts of the country. In the context of KIIWP and KIIWP2, support to 
NAIS is one important element alongside other project activities to i. Increase food security 
and protect livelihoods and ii. Increase productivity and access to finance for productive inputs 
and technology.  
3. 
NAIS  is  under  oversight  of  a  team  at  MINAGRI,  but  includes  inter-ministerial 
coordination.  Up  until  end  of  2020,  NAIS  was  receiving technical support services  under  a 
Memorandum of Understanding with and financial support from Access to Finance Rwanda. 
The  NAIS  team and the AFR-hired technical service providers assume some responsibilities 
such  as  research,  product  design,  some  farmer  education.  AFR  have  commissioned  an 
assessment of the pilot support to NAIS which is estimated to be available in March 2021. 
4. 
Three  insurance  companies,  Radiant,  PRIME,  and  SONARWA,  who  won  the  right  to 
offer  the  subsidized  product  following  a  tender  for  the  pilot  scheme,  are  responsible  for 
underwriting the product and carrying the risk. They also assume responsibilities to varying 
degrees  on  scheme  operation,  such  as:  mobilization  and  education  of  farmers;  loss 
assessment; and new product design in some cases. At the end of the pilot phase in March, 
the tender will be reopened to insurers wishing to participate. The design mission met with 
an insurer who is not currently eligible to offer NAIS products but aims to apply to the new 
tender. Whilst it is possible not all previous insurers will continue due to some of the challenges 
faced. 
NAIS covers both livestock and crops under its scheme. The premium (or sum insured) 
5. 
covers the ‘investment cost’ of farmers, or the cost of inputs. For crops, the total insurance 
cost per hectare/sum insured varies between 7.08% and 8.25% of the input cost per season 
depending  on  the  commodity. GoR  subsidizes  40%  of the  cost  of the  premium,  whilst the 
remaining 60% is expected to be paid by the farmer – no matter the wealth category – as 
there is currently no targeting or variation  in premium subsidies. In terms of products and 
value chains covered, for crops, NAIS started with maize and rice and now has products for 
French beans, chili, and Irish potato. There are plans to add other crops: banana, cassava, 
beans and soya beans - in season B 2020/21. Other commodities may be added depending 
on demand and government priorities. Under livestock insurance, coverage for dairy cows has 
been  active,  with  poultry  and  piggery  insurance  being  added.  Insurers  spoken  to  in  the 
mission reported high claims ratios from season data available in 2020, reaching over 100% 
and in some cases 150%. For crops, it is understood floods were a particular issue in Season 
A 2020, and as such, there is reluctance to insure non-irrigated farmers in marshlands in the 
future.  For livestock, a key cause of high losses  was reported to be the prevalence  of tic-
borne diseases and lack of vaccinations. These high losses indicated there are other measures 
that  need  to  be  in  place  as  well  as  insurance  to  reduce  losses,  and  also  for  insurance  to 
function and be sustainable. Such measures in KIIWP will include irrigation; land husbandry; 
64 Meeting notes, contacts, and documents can be made available on request 
128 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
input provision; farmer field schools to train on farm management including pest and disease 
management, farmer record keeping; and weather and climate information services which is 
already in development under KIIWP. 
Table 26. NAIS products: cost of crop insurance premiums 
# 
PRODUCTS 
INVESTMENT 
COST (SUM 
INSURED/HA) 
PREMIUM 
RATE (%) 
TOTAL 
PREMIUM 
FARMER 
CONTRIBUT
ION (60%) 
GOVERNMENT 
SUBSIDY 
(40%) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Maize 
Rice 
429,250  
590,320  
Irish potatoes 
2,394,500  
Chili 
2,151,500  
French beans 
2,018,250  
8.25 
7.08 
8 
8 
8 
35,413  
21,248  
14,165  
41,795  
25,077  
16,718  
191,560  
114,936  
76,624  
172,120  
103,272  
68,848  
161,460  
96,876  
64,584  
Source: Laetitia Mahoro, Head of Agriculture Insurance, Radiant Insurance Company 
There are two crop insurance product types under NAIS: 1. Based on average yields, 
6. 
which entails in-field crop cutting experiments to be conducted during the season, currently 
the responsibility of the insurer who contracts a private provider to do so; and  2. A hybrid 
product, based on average yields and combined with weather data from satellites and weather 
stations. In Rwanda, pure weather index-based insurance (WII), has not worked well in the 
past due to the varying topography and microclimates. In addition, yield products are able to 
capture other pertinent risks such as pests and disease, although, in Kayonza, drought and 
rainfall variations are the most prevalent cause of loss.  In Kayonza, it is understood that the 
hybrid product using WII is not operational. Livestock insurance covers mortality, and for dairy 
cows, loss assessment is the responsibility of rural vets. Livestock producers are required to 
report a loss within 4-hours of occurrence. For both crops and livestock, it is important loss 
assessment is as efficient as possible in order to reduce costs and ensure timeliness of claims 
payments (currently aimed at 15 days after loss). 
7. 
In terms of delivery, the mobilization of farmers and education activities have mainly 
been targeted at the level of producer cooperatives. This has been conducted by NAIS staff 
and by insurers themselves. There is some limited experience with financial service providers, 
but where they are involved, they are so far providing a ‘referrer’ role, by which they do not 
enter into direct education, selling, or other scheme operation responsibilities, but refer the 
farmer to the insurer in order to buy a policy. Other models mentioned in mission meetings 
are  with  NGOs  for  particular  commodities.  Delivery  models  with  other  non-financial 
institutions such as input providers, agrodealers, or bundling of agricultural insurance directly 
with  credit  arrangements  were  not  yet  found.  There  is  interest  of  some  delivery  channels 
(financial  e.g.  SACCOs,  and  non-financial,  e.g.  buyers),  insurers,  and  NAIS  in  developing 
bundling and additional delivery models. Despite some reported willingness to pay of farmers 
of the remaining 60% of the premium, there is also some challenges in low uptake at the 
moment.  It  is  not  clear  if  this  is  only  due  to  lack  of  education,  or  whether  some  wealth 
categories may struggle to pay the remaining 60% and need other financing arrangements, 
or premium payment options.65 
NAIS is still at the beginning of its operations, although government commitment is 
8. 
clear.  Despite the short experience, much has already been achieved, and consequently there 
65 To be eligible for agricultural insurance, the premium needs to be paid in full at the beginning of each season (for 
crops), or year (for livestock). In some innovative schemes, an aggregator or delivery channel, such as a financial 
service provider or SME providing seeds or technology may pay or pre-finance the premium allowing the farmer to 
pay back in instalments. 
129 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
are already emerging lessons on possible areas of support which can contribute to scale and 
sustainability, in order to benefit producers, delivery channels, insurers, and GoR’s objectives.  
9. 
In  addition,  when  KIIWP2  is  operational,  it  can  build  on  information  from  the  AFR 
planned  pilot  evaluation  due  to  be  published  in  March  2021,  and  the  World  Bank  focused 
technical support to NAIS and the insurance sector  which is  pending validation and due  to 
start at end 2021/beginning 2022. KIIWP2 will work together with NAIS on some identified 
aspects  with  a  focus  on  Kayonza,  which  can  inform  some World Bank-funded  activities  for 
scale-up  (e.g.,  extension  officer  training,  bundling  approaches).  At  the  same  time,  the 
presence  of  World  Bank-funded  activities  will  be  important  for  helping  to  create  a  more 
conducive  enabling  environment.  Following  a  request  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) in 2018, the World Bank Group - Finance, Competitiveness 
and  Innovation  Global  Practice  -  in  close  collaboration  with  MINECOFIN  and  MINAGRI  
analysed  the  national  agricultural  insurance  landscape66    and  proposed  areas  for  potential 
World Bank funding.  
10. 
As such, the World Bank tentatively plans to  support: 1. Establishing an appropriate 
institutional  framework  for  NAIS  (i.e.  a  NAIS  Steering  Committee  and  Technical  Working 
Group to guide and implement PPP in agricultural insurance); 2. Collect and manage data for 
agricultural insurance  (e.g. yield,  weather,  and livestock  data);  3. Adopt  a  smart  premium 
subsidies  regime  (which  also  considers  bundling  agricultural  insurance  products  with 
agricultural credit and inputs, and discussing establishing a premium subsidy regime for NAIS, 
targeted at each segment of the farming community according to GoR priorities; 4. Expanding 
investments in financial education and awareness creation (including train extension officers, 
and  financial  and  non-financial  distribution  channels  to  provide  insurance  literacy;  and 
supporting  the  scale-up  of  all  types  of  digital  services  for  the  operation  of  agricultural 
insurance.67 
66  Rwanda:  National  Agricultural  Insurance  Scheme.  Situation  analysis  and  options  for  strengthening;  World  Bank 
Group - Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice; 2019. 
67 Rwanda NAIS Policy Note-FINAL; World Bank Group - Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice; 
June 15, 2019. 
130 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Knowledge management: Definition 
ANNEX 5: KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
1. 
For the purposes of this strategy, Knowledge Management (KM) is defined as “a set of 
processes, tools and behaviours that connect and motivate people to generate, use and share 
good  practice,  learning  and  expertise  to  improve  projects’  efficiency  and  development 
effectiveness”68.  
2. 
The present document is a draft plan developed at the time of project design. After 
start-up, this draft should be completed and refined with support from IFAD. The KM strategy 
and plan will be validated by project stakeholders through a national workshop. The workshop 
will  be  an  opportunity  to  refine  the  thematic  focus  and  dissemination  strategy  of  policy 
relevant studies, but also to better understand the key information needs for KIIWP2 to be 
successful. 
Knowledge management: Goal, objective and activities 
3. 
The overall goal of this KM plan is to support learning and adaptation for improved 
project  performance.  It  will  also  enable  development  and  dissemination  of  knowledge 
products  that  can  promote  wider  changes  at  national  level,  as  well  as  the sustainability  of 
project results. 
4. 
KM  strategy  is  closely  linked  to  the  policy  engagement  agenda,  which  in  turn  will 
reinforce  the  project’s  exit  strategy.  In  this  sense,  KM  activities  will  focus  in  particular  on 
shedding more light on the following two key questions:  
1.  What incentives work well for the different actors at coalition level, leading to 
a  sustained  use  of  irrigation  schemes  and  conservation  and  protection  of 
watersheds?  
2.  How  can  the  policy  and  regulatory  frameworks  be  modified  to  sustainable 
improve Kayonza’s farmers production and productive while conserving natural 
resources? How can they get better access to markets? 
5. 
The specific objectives of this plan are:  
  To support learning, adaptation and improved project performance 
during implementation; 
  To  raise  awareness  among  people  in  Rwanda  on  the  importance  of 
changing  behaviour  and  adopting  more  sustainable  practices  through 
highlighting  mainstreaming  issues  such  as  gender,  youth,  nutrition  and 
environment;  
  To capture, use and share lessons learned; 
  To  improve  the  design  of  future  projects  in  Rwanda  and  elsewhere 
based on the lessons learned previous KM plans in the SPIU; 
  To  influence  policy  processes  and  promote  good  results/activities  for 
potential  scaling-up  in  other  projects  by  the  government  or  other 
development partners; 
  To  raise  awareness  of  project  activities  and  results,  and  publicize 
successful experiences; 
  To  align  development  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  products 
with  the  theory  of  change  of  the  project  so  that  the  key 
68 IFAD, 2019 
131 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
messages/focuses  on  mainstreaming  issues    are  clearly  conveyed  and 
reinforced; 
  To  boost  the  project  profile  among  decision  makers  by  increased 
visibility; 
  To engage with and inform rural people about project activities; 
  To build a community of stakeholders. 
6. 
As part of project management and coordination, quarterly review meetings with 
implementing  partners  will  be  organized  by SPIU  to  discuss  progress  towards  results  in 
relation to each quarterly progress report. The format of reporting will include lessons learned 
in  terms  of  challenges  and  good  practices.  The  quarterly  review  meetings  will  be  a  good 
opportunity for building common understanding among implementing partners and this would 
contribute  to  coherently  achieving  the  project’s  development  objectives.  These  meetings 
should  also  review  the  theory  of  change  to  reflect  how  the  project  is  contributing  to 
mainstreaming issues. In addition to the data collected from the project’s M&E activities, the 
knowledge products will be based on (i) the research institutions’ results and applications with 
producers; (ii) case studies generated from successful stories and identified innovations.  
The  dissemination  activities  will  be  implemented  in  three  broad  action  areas:  a) 
7. 
raising  awareness  on  the  importance  of  sustainable  practices  and  promoting  behavioural 
change as well as innovation to support it; b) producing policy-relevant material and sharing 
lessons  learned  on  what  works  and  what  does  not  in  terms  of  water  users  organizations 
(WUOs), insurance, access to finance, CSA and sustainable mechanization.  
132 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Knowledge management structure  
8. 
The  implementation  of  the  knowledge  management  strategy  requires  strong  and 
visible leadership from the management team,  and  all SPIU staff.  It  will  also  require 
strong partnerships with institutions, partners and the private sector. Each member 
of  the  Unit  has  the  responsibility  to  engage  in  developing  knowledge  products,  facilitate 
connections  between  the  field  and  headquarter,  offer  technical  support  to  knowledge-sharing 
and learning.  
At the same time, KM will be the primary responsibility of the KM officer at SPIU 
9. 
level. The KM officer will work in close collaboration with the M&E officer to ensure that:  
i)  M&E  findings  on  project  results  are  widely  disseminated in  a  clear, 
synthetized, and interesting way;  
ii)  Knowledge  products  are  backed  up  by  solid  M&E  evidence  (and 
therefore,  the  M&E  system  collects  all  data  necessary  for  the 
envisaged knowledge products to be developed);  
iii)  Field  visits  to  collect  stories  by  the  KM  officer  are  also  used  for 
triangulating M&E data, and the way around;  
iv)  Case  studies,  stakeholder  interviews  and  surveys,  will  be  used  to 
deepen  the  understanding  of  factors  contributing  to  successes  and 
failures, and to enable full documentation of impact.  
Stakeholders and audiences  
10. 
KIIWP2 KM activities will be differentiated depending on the different audiences they 
aim to reach. The tables 1 and 2 below are examples of KM stakeholders/audiences and KM 
to  be 
products 
completed/adjusted/completely modified at start-up and updated during implementation.  
that  could  be  used 
these.  Both 
tables  are 
to  reach 
these 
133 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Table 1: KIIWP2 KM Stakeholders.  
Stakeholders 
What do they want/need to know? What do 
we want to communicate to them? 
Local 
  Beneficiaries 
  Local communities 
  Project staff 
  Local offices of government agencies and 
project partners 
National  
  Project partners 
  Other similar projects 
  Government agencies 
  General public 
International 
  Donors/financiers 
  Development agencies  
  Communities of practise/interest groups 
  Other projects 
  General public 
  Policy makers  
Table 2. KIIWP2 KM products 
  Purpose and activities of the project  
  Opportunities to partner, participate, or 
benefit 
  Notifications about project events and 
meetings  
  Project results and outcomes 
  Experiences of beneficiaries 
  Relevant lessons learned 
  Results of successful pilots and trials of 
new technologies, crops etc.  
  Guidelines and methodologies 
  Results of studies, surveys and 
assessments undertaken 
  Policy relevant lessons 
Products 
  Stories from the field 
  Lessons learned 
  Project briefs  
  Policy briefs 
  Reports and studies 
  Technical guidelines 
  Working papers 
  How-to-do-note 
  Research publications 
 
 
Inputs to partners 
publications 
Inputs to government 
policies and strategies 
  Articles 
(newspaper/magazine) 
  Blog posts 
  Newsletters 
  Press releases 
What knowledge can they share and with who? 
  Good for sharing information on project activities, results and 
lessons learned with a wide variety of audiences from 
beneficiaries to high-level decision makers.  
  Typically short (a few pages) and not too technical, but with 
enough detail to be useful or to encourage audience to seek out 
more information. 
  Addressing particular issues in significant detail, normally 
longer and more analytical and targeted towards audiences with 
specialist knowledge or interest in the topic. 
  Require considerable investment of time and resources to 
produce 
  Useful opportunities to put project knowledge into action and to 
use partners and government resources to leverage its impact 
and raise awareness of the project. 
  Useful for communicating information about project activities 
and results achieved and reaching a wide general audience. 
  Newspapers, websites and blogs are normally eager for content 
and are normally keen to publish interesting stories from 
projects. 
134 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Products 
What knowledge can they share and with who? 
  Videos 
  Photos 
 
 
  Podcasts 
Interviews 
Infographics 
  Radio sessions  
Tools 
  These make great content for the project to disseminate 
through social media – publishing videos and photos of project 
activities, beneficiaries, field visits etc. online is a good way to 
attract interest (but make sure you get permission where 
necessary). Interviews often provide good soundbites for 
sharing through social media, perhaps together with links to 
longer articles or publications. 
  Use local radio and invite famers, technicians involved in 
irrigation scheme management to talk about their success 
stories 
  Spread technical information as well as use it to invite farmers 
to participate to the project as a self-targeting tool 
Useful  KM  tools  and  templates  can  be  accessed  on  the  IFAD  KM  Resource  Centre, 
https://ifadkmcentre.weebly.com/integrating-km-in-
through 
link: 
this 
11. 
accessible 
projects.html. 
135 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
ANNEX 6: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU) TEMPLATE 
REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
RWANDA AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
Rwanda  
Memorandum of Understanding 
“MoU” 
Between 
XXX 
Through 
SPIU of IFAD Funded Projects 
And 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
For 
136 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
137 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
This Memorandum of Understanding, hereunder referred to as “MoU” is entered into by and between:  
XX through SPIU of IFAD Funded Projects, having its principal place of business at ……  
And 
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI),….  represented  by  ….,  the  Acting 
Coordinator of SPIU/MINAGRI, here under referred to as “the Service Provider”; 
WHEREAS  
To  this  effect  and  for  the  implementation  of  the  ……  the  client  and  the  Service  Provider,  collectively 
referred to as “PARTIES” and individually as “PART”. 
HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOW: 
Article 1: Purpose of this MoU and Scope of activities 
Article 2: Value of the activities and Terms of Fund Disbursements. 
2.1 Value of activities to be executed  
The total estimated amount for all activities to be done by the Service Provider  is…… Rwandan Francs 
taxes exclusive.  
Details related to the activities and related budget are on the annex. 
2.2 Terms of Funds Disbursements 
The client shall transfer the funds for activities/works to be executed by the Service Provider in accordance 
with following installments:  
All payment will be done on the following bank account:    
138 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Article 3: Documents forming this MoU 
Parties in this MoU hereby acknowledge being in possession of the following MoU documents listed below 
in the order of their priority. 
1)  This MoU;   
2)  … Narrative Text. 
Those documents are considered as complementary and explanatory to each other.  In case of conflict or 
ambiguity between any of the above listed documents, priority shall be given in the order as listed above. 
Article 4: Partnership Mechanisms 
This MoU expresses a convergence of will between “Parties”, it indicates an intended common line of 
action and parties imply legal commitment. 
Parties agree that, upon execution of this MoU, completion of planned activities and their execution shall 
be done based on availability of required resources and funds. 
Parties intend to use their best efforts in good faith to work together to achieve the Project Objectives. 
Whenever necessary during the implementation, parties shall hold several meetings to discuss any issue, 
and the Service Provider shall accept any invitation to participate in the Project management-meeting if 
need be.  
Article 5: The use of funds   
The funds shall be exclusively received by the Service Provider for the activities performed and described 
in this MoU and other supporting documents. 
The client is entirely and fully responsible and accountable of the disbursement of funds under this MoU. 
139 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Article 6: Execution of activities 
The Service Provider shall execute the activities and/or perform the services as set out in the approved 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for…… Financial Year (FY) and in accordance with this MoU.  
For activities  related to the  acquisition of  maize  and beans grains,  the  Service  Provider  will work  with 
………… 
Activities to be done under this MoU are subject to revision in consideration of any revision done on the 
approved AWPB. 
Article 7: Reporting requirement 
The Service Provider shall submit ….. financial and progress reports to the project.   
Article 8: Performance evaluation  
The performance evaluation of the implementation status shall be carried out by client/project staff in 
accordance with performance indicators and Project’ targets, quantity and quality of the work, timeframe 
as well as the terms in particular to this MOU.  If necessary, the evaluation report shall be discussed during 
a joint meeting where parties will be agreed on the findings and way forward to address issues highlighted 
in the report.    
If needed, a participative  workshop to identify Service  Provider’s weaknesses and strengths, based on 
which parties will agree on measures to be taken to improve the situation or to replicate the successful 
operations in other sites.  
Article 9: Coordination of activities under this MoU 
The Client appoints following staff to ensure the coordination of activities under this MoU: …………. 
The team will be responsible and accountable for: 
140 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Article 10: Force Majeure 
No party shall be liable for breach of any aspect of this Agreement where this breach can be reasonably 
ascertained to have been occasioned by an act of Force Majeure including but not limited to Acts of 
War, Rebellion, Lockouts, Strikes or Blockades, Government Policy, Pandemic, Natural Disaster or any 
other Act which was not reasonably foreseen at the date of signing of this MoU.   
In case of force majeure, parties shall make a joint assessment aiming at analyzing the case and agreed 
on the way forward.  
Article 11: Governing Law, privileges and conflict of interest 
This MoU is governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Rwanda.   
Nothing in this MoU or relating thereto shall be construed: 
(i) 
As relieving the Service Provider from conforming to any national law applicable in its relations to 
third Parties, including its employees, or to any national law applicable to it by reason of trade, 
business or activities.  The Service Provider shall comply with applicable laws and shall keep the 
client informed of any conflict or problem arising in relation to national authorities. 
(ii) 
As constituting a waiver of privileges or immunities that may be conferred on the client, or as 
conferring any privileges or immunities on the Service Provider or its employees.   
Article 12: Settlement of disputes  
Any dispute between the parties arising out of the interpretation or implementation of this MoU shall be 
settled amicably through consultations and negotiations between the parties. In the event after ten (10) 
days amicable settlement of a dispute has failed, either party shall be at liberty to exercise its option to 
terminate this MoU.   
However,  in  the  event  such  dispute  is  subject  to  liability  or  to  any  other  unfulfilled  obligation,  the 
concerned party shall be held responsible to the other.   
141 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Articles 13: Termination 
The client reserves the right to terminate this MoU or a part thereof (one or several activities of the 
AWPB) if it considers that the continued implementation of the MoU is impossible or impractical for 
either of the following reasons: 
  Unforeseen causes beyond the control of the client such as, the lack of funds from the donor, the 
revision of the AWPB, the cancellation of termination of the financing agreement for KIIWP2; 
 
In the event of repeated default, delay or unsatisfactory performance on the part of the Service 
Provider; 
If some activities under this MoU should be terminated, the following shall apply: 
  The client shall complete all payments that may be due up to the effective date of termination; 
  The Service Provider shall take all reasonable measures in order that any work/activity in progress 
is delivered to avoid any loss or damage; 
  Adjustments to amounts due and any claims arising from or connected to termination of this MoU 
or part thereof shall be dealt with in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this MoU. 
The notices of termination shall specify the reasons for termination and take effect starting from the 
date indicated in the notice.  However, it is understood that the provisions of this MoU applicable to the 
winding up of the MoU, the liquidation of claims and the settlement of disputes shall remain in force for 
such additional period as may be necessary. 
Article 14: Change and amendments 
No modification of or change in this MoU, waiver of any of its provisions or additional provisions shall be 
valid or enforceable unless previously approved in writing by the parties to this MoU or their duly 
authorized representatives in the form of an amendment to this MoU duly signed by the parties hereto. 
The client may, at any time, give written notification of change agreed between the GoR and the donors 
in the activities of the AWPB of KIIWP2 to be executed and/or their delivery schedule, even if such 
changes do increase the activities under this MoU, involve additional expense, or reduce the time frame 
within which the activity must be completed. 
142 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Article 15: Duration and Annual Addendum to this MoU 
Subject to the provisions of article 6, this MoU is concluded for a period of … (X) months from the effective 
date.    
If needed, this period can be extended to allow the Service Provider to finalize all activities; 
Also, this MoU can be subject to annual addendum in accordance with approved AWPB.   
The annual addendum shall base on the following:  
-  Approved annual work plan for the next fiscal year; 
-  Quality of activities completed; 
-  Comply with MoU provisions and other supporting documents; 
Article 16: Confidentiality 
Each party agrees that it shall not, at any time, after executing the activities of this MoU, disclose any 
information in relation to these activities without consent of both parties. 
Article 17: Notices 
Any notice affecting the rights or obligations of either party to this MoU shall be given in writing and 
delivered in person, physical address or by email to the addressee given below: 
Article 18: Procurement 
All procurement activities to be carried out under this MoU shall be in conformity with the …. Letter to 
the ……………………as may be amended from time to time, and shall be conducted in accordance with the 
Law No. 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 governing public procurement and the Ministerial Order No. 
002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement, to the extent such are 
consistent with the IFAD Projects Procurement Guidelines, as may be amended from time to time.  
143 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
Article 19: Corrupt and Fraudulent Practices 
19.1  The  Revised  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  Its  Activities  and  Operations 
(hereinafter, the "Revised Policy") applies to individuals and entities that receive, apply to receive, are 
responsible for the deposit or transfer of, or take or influence decisions regarding the use of proceeds 
from IFAD financing or financing managed by IFAD, including, but not limited to, implementing partners, 
Project  Partners,  contractors,  suppliers,  subcontractors,  sub-suppliers,  bidders,  consultant  and  any  of 
their agents or personnel (all such individuals and entities are collectively referred to as "Third Parties" or 
"Third Party"). Pursuant to the Revised Policy, Third parties shall refrain from engaging in the following 
practices, which are considered to be  prohibited practices  when engaged in connection with an IFAD-
financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
a “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of 
anything of value in order to improperly influence the actions of another party; 
a  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that 
knowingly  or  recklessly  misleads,  or  attempts  to  mislead,  a  party  in  order  to  obtain  a 
financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation; 
a “collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including improperly influencing the actions of another party; 
a “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to improperly influence the actions of 
that or another party; 
(v) 
an “obstructive practice” is 
(aa)  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering  or  concealing  evidence  that  may  be 
material  to  an  investigation  by  IFAD  or  making  false  statements  to  investigators  in 
order to materially impede an investigation by IFAD; 
(bb)  threatening, harassing or intimidating any party in order to prevent that party 
from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to an investigation by IFAD or from 
pursuing such an investigation; and/or 
(cc)  the commission of any act intended to materially impede the exercise of IFAD's 
contractual rights of audit, inspection and access to information, provided for under 
article 19.2 below. 
144 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
19.2 In pursuance of this policy: 
(i) 
Third Parties shall disclose, in the course of a procurement process or any time thereafter, 
information relating to themselves or any of their key personnel concerning: 
(aa)    relevant  criminal  convictions,  administrative  sanctions  and/or  temporary 
suspensions; 
(bb)  agents engaged in connection with a procurement process or the execution of a 
contract, including the commissions or fees paid or to be paid; and 
(cc)    any  actual  or  potential  conflict  of  interest  in  connection  with  a  procurement 
process or the execution of a contract; 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Third Parties shall promptly report to IFAD any allegations or other indications of prohibited 
practices that come to their attention by virtue of their involvement in an IFAD-financed 
and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity; 
IFAD possesses  jurisdiction to investigate  allegations and other indications of prohibited 
practises and to impose sanctions on Third Parties for such practices in connection with an 
IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity; 
Third Parties shall fully cooperate with any investigation conducted by IFAD, including by 
making  personnel  available  for  interviews  and  by  providing  full  access  to  any  and  all 
accounts, premises, documents and records (including electronic records) relating to the 
relevant  IFAD-financed  and/or  IFAD-managed  operation  or  activity  and  to  have  such 
accounts, premises, records and documents audited and/or inspected by auditors and/or 
investigators appointed by IFAD; 
Third  Parties  shall  maintain  all  accounts,  documents  and  records  relating  to  an  IFAD-
financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity for a period of 3 (three) years after 
completion of the bid; 
should IFAD determine that a Third Party has engaged in any of the prohibited practices 
defined under article 19.1 above, it may impose on the Third Party any of the administrative 
sanctions provided by the Revised Policy, Section F, (ii); 
during  the  course  of  an  IFAD  review  or  investigation,  or  pending  the  conclusion  of  a 
sanctioning process, IFAD may decide, at any time, to temporarily suspend payments to a 
Third Party or to temporarily suspend its eligibility to participate in IFAD-financed and/or 
IFAD managed operations and activities for an initial period of six (6) months, subject to a 
145 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
(viii) 
(ix) 
possible extension of that suspension for an additional period of six (6) months, as provided 
by the Revised Policy, Section F, (i); 
public  entities  receiving  IFAD  financing  or  financing  managed  by  IFAD  and  any  of  their 
agents or personnel and private entities receiving IFAD financing or financing managed by 
IFAD and any of their agents or personnel shall terminate or suspend the contract if such 
termination  or  suspension  is  required  as  a  consequence  of  a  temporary  suspension  or 
sanction imposed or recognized by IFAD; 
furthermore, Third Parties' attention is drawn to IFAD's policy of unilaterally recognizing 
debarments imposed by other International Financial Institutions if such debarments meet 
the requirements for mutual recognition under the Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of 
Debarment Decisions.69 
Article 20: Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
24.1 The Fund requires that all beneficiaries of IFAD Funding, including the employer  and any bidders, 
implementing  partners,  Project  Partners,  suppliers,  sub-suppliers,  contractors,  sub-contractors, 
consultants, sub-consultants, and any of their agents (whether declared or not) and personnel comply 
with IFAD's Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. 
For the purpose of this provision, and  consistent with IFAD’s Policy on Preventing and Responding to 
Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse as it may be amended from time to time, the terms set 
forth below are defined as follows: 
Sexual harassment means “any unwelcome  sexual advance, request for sexual favour or other verbal, 
non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature that unreasonably interferes with work, alters or is made 
a condition of employment, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. 
Sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  means  “any  actual  or  attempted  abuse  of  a  position  of  vulnerability, 
differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially 
or politically from the sexual exploitation of others (sexual exploitation); the actual or threatened physical 
intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions (sexual abuse)”. 
24.2 Employers, suppliers and bidders shall take all appropriate measures to prevent and prohibit sexual 
harassment  and  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  on  the  part  of  their  personnel  and  subcontractors  or 
anyone else directly or indirectly employed by them or any of subcontractors in the performance of the 
contract.  Purchasers,  suppliers  and  bidders  shall  immediately  report  to  the  purchaser  or  IFAD  any 
incidents of sexual harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse arising out of or in connection with the 
performance  of  the  contract  or  prior  to  its  execution,  including  convictions,  disciplinary  measures, 
69 The Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of Debarment Decisions, dated 9 April 2010, was signed by five of the 
leading International Financial Institutions, namely, the African Development Bank Group, the Asian Development 
Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank and the 
World Bank Group. 
146 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
sanctions or investigations. The purchaser may take appropriate measures, including the termination of 
the contract, on the basis of proven acts of sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse arising out 
of or in connection with the performance of the contract. 
24.3  The  bidder  or  subcontractor  or  supplier  is  required  to  disclose  any  relevant  prior  sanctions, 
convictions, disciplinary measures or criminal records. 
Article 21: Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing 
The  Fund  requires  that  all  beneficiaries  of  IFAD  funding  or  funds  administered  by IFAD,  including  the 
employer,  any  bidders,  implementing  partners,  Project  Partners  and  suppliers,  observe  the  highest 
standards of integrity during the procurement and execution of such contracts, and commit to combat 
money laundering and terrorism financing consistent with IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering 
the Financing of Terrorism Policy. 
For the Client: 
For the Service Provider:  
Acting Coordinator  
SPIU/MINAGRI 
Email:  info@minagri.gov.rw  
Notice shall be considered as effective as of the date of delivery to the addressee. 
Article 22: Entry into Force and effectiveness  
This MoU comes into force on the date of its signature.  
Date: ………. /……… / 2021 
147 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
For MINAGRI: 
For RAB – SPIU/IFAD Funded Projects: 
For Approval: 
148 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
ANNEX 7: POTENTIAL PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN KIIWP/IFAD AND WFP  
I.  Under KIIWP1 (KIIWP Phase 1; completion in 2022) 
1. 
Community mobilization and engagement: KIIWP1 would adapt and scale up the 
WFP  Community-based  Participatory  Planning  (CBPP)  approach  that  is  being  used  by  the 
ongoing of the SMART/WFP project, for the upcoming catchment management planning that will 
guide the rehabilitation and conservation activities on the ground. CBPP is a pragmatic and 
easy-to-use  planning  tool  for  communities,  government  extension  staff  and  cooperating 
partners.  Under  KIIWP1,  the  SPIU  will  align  its  interventions  related  to  community 
mobilization  and  engagement  to  the  WFP’s  methodology  already  implemented  in  Kayonza 
District. KIIWP1 and KIIWP2 will build on and benefit from WFP’s experience and capacity to 
place the  community in  the  driver’s seat  of  planning  and  contribute  to their  own  resilience 
placed in the resilience building efforts and development.  
II. Under KIIWP2 
A.  Improved production of nutritious-sensitive crops (FFS/ Cooperatives) 
2. 
Market analysis, selection of NS crops: joint identification and selection of main 
agricultural  commodities  that  have  high  nutrient  value,  are  climate  smart,  and  can  ensure 
profitability for farmers (e.g. improved beans, OFSP, dark green leafy vegetables; also include 
underutilized species available in the territory). The selection criteria should consider those 
crops/vegetables that are included in the food basket for schools, in the frame of the Home-
Grown School Feeding Programme, in order to have a market secured. The selection will also 
count on the nutrition and market analysis prepared by FAO (NsWP).  
3. 
This aligns very well with WFP’s intended engagement in the district, linking to targeted 
schools in Rwinkwavu sector of Kayonza; we will readily consider the proposed link to school 
feeding.  it  is  important  to  complement  the  market-oriented  agricultural  promotion  with 
household-level education and awareness raising, as what tends to happen is that farmer end 
up  selling the  ‘good’/premium  products  and  often  consume  less nutritious/safe  products  at 
home.  
4. 
Access  to  improved  seeds  (IFAD/WFP  plus  other  partners).  WFP  facilitating 
relations  among  cooperatives,  seed  multipliers  and  off-takers  that  potentially  include 
HarvestPlus varieties (currently in partnership with RAB) in the purchase of improved and bio 
fortified  seeds  varieties  (iron  beans,  OFSP).  There  is  a  need  to  explore  access  to  seeds 
together. Possible ideas: 
a.  Provision of seeds could be combined with insurance potentially facilitated by 
WFP, depending on the value chain (if there is an insurance product existing), 
and the model for provision (on credit, provided by project etc).  
b.  One Acre Fund provide inputs including seeds. They are open to exploring value 
chains they  do  not  currently serve.  They  have currently  defining  a  MoU  with 
WFP.  
c.  AGRA  can  be  also  be  part,  as  it  has  been  supporting  MINIAGRI  and  RAB  in 
improved seed production, certification and availability opening also to private 
sector. They as well supported in policy development regarding seed system. 
B.  Capacity building of cooperatives (post-harvest) 
5. 
Training on nutrition sensitive Climate Smart practices and technologies to be 
embedded into trainings at cooperative level, including aflatoxin control, storage, drying and 
milling  (for  beans,  soya,  sorghum),  sun  drying  (e.g.,  bananas).  These  practices  help 
addressing micronutrient deficiencies and provide an additional source of protein consumption 
on the long term. 
6. 
Scale-up results, baseline studies on TLST and on activities: this work by WFP 
could  be  integrated  in  the  analysis  of  TLST  and  on  sustainable  mechanization  under  CSA 
149 
Rwanda – KIIWP 2023 – 2028  
                             Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                          
practices and technologies baseline report and be mainstreamed through FFS, demonstration 
and trials, manufacturing and capacity building of staff. Work with WFP also on the link with 
access to finance to help farmers to have access to these technologies. 
7. 
Explore combination on WFP’s expertise/existing materials on Post Harvest Handling 
and Storage to incorporate as part of a more holistic FFS approach that include production, 
IMP, PHHS and even possibly farming as a business. Also, explore opportunities for including 
SMART beneficiaries as part of this approach 
C.  Access to financial services (cooperatives)  
8. 
Link  MFIs  and  SACCOs  supported  under  KIIWP2  with  VSLAs  supported  by 
WFP in common project areas. WFP is rolling out the savings-promotion approach to the 
SMART project areas, as well as FtMA in general within the district and beyond (building on 
the work ICCO-TFM has conducted in the past). 
9. 
This  would  include:  match-making;  condition  of  accessing  financing  under  KIIWP2 
introduced to serve some of these groups; technical support to market assessment/mapping 
of groups; technical support to product development; financial education (including insurance 
and savings for insurance and other things) targeted at WFP-facilitated VSLAs ; in insurance 
capacity building to MFIs, SACCOs, coops, to include insuring VSLAs as one model.  
10. 
One  key  element  will  be  supporting  MFIs  and  interested  stakeholders  in  developing 
specialized financial products linked to these groups- not limited only to savings/loans, but 
possibly insurance bundling as well. 
11. 
Business  planning  &  Matching  Grants:  Jointly  identified  private  actors  could  be 
supported  with  business  planning  and  to  apply for the matching  grants  under  KIIWP2.  The 
MG  window  is  currently  being  drafted  as:  Category  3,  private  sector  joint  ventures  with 
cooperatives: eligible investments are large warehouses, rice-processing facilities, etc.  
12. 
Linkages  with  market  (FtMA).  Establish  the  linkage  with  the  HGSFP  (public 
procurement): a pilot could be done in the sectors where SMART is ongoing. This includes the 
selection of the crops to be promoted at cooperative/FFS level (see above); fulfil the criteria 
set by the Procurement guidelines for school purchases, WFP is finalizing together with the 
Ministry of Education.  
o 
Identification  of  other  markets:  for  maize,  beans,  rice  in  the  frame  of  FtMA 
(One way is as per above: Jointly identified private actors could be supported 
with  business  planning  and  to  apply  for  the  matching  grants  under  KIIWP2. 
There are a number of national and/or regional players that can be engaged for 
these  products, including AIF and Minimex for maize, but also EAX, BRG, 4B 
holding and Sarura for beans. For Rice, WFP is still in the exploratory phase for 
the main players but the principles will be the same.  
D.  Promotion of consumption of nutritious foods (not yet explored) 
13. 
Partnership  in  the  WFP  SBCC  campaigns  for  the  promotion  of  consumption  of  local 
micronutrient rich foods. In RDDP the project partially financed the governmental campaign 
on milk consumption. How the project could partner in the campaign and how they do it. This 
would be district wide. 
150 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/14
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
2/14
High
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Over the last 20 years, Rwanda has enjoyed political stability which, combined with
good governance and policy consistency, has created an enabling policy
environment ensuring successful delivery of development programs. The next
legislative and presidential elections are due in 2023 and 2024 respectively.
Counterpart funding in some previous IFAD-supported projects has materialized
below the expected levels.
Mitigations:
GoR has already demonstrated strong commitment in co-financing KIIWP1. Ndego
and Kabare feasibility studies in KIIWP1 have been fully financed by GoR.
Kayonza is one the priority districts for GoR investments, which is affected by
recurrent drought that bring an additional burden to the systemic challenges faced
by smallholder farmers. GoR committed to provide cash contribution for taxes on a
timely basis and report promptly on any in-kind contributions including taxes waived
whenever government agencies are used to implement activities. There will be a
separate bank account for counterpart funds both at SPIU and at the district,
managed by SPIU and district project staff respectively, just like the project
operational account. 
GoR has assigned a staff to keep track and record district and national level
government staff’s in kind contributions. The Single Project Implementation Unit
has already recruited a professional staff to count/value on GoR’s in-kind
contribution.
Governance
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Over the last 20 years, Rwanda has enjoyed political stability which, combined with
good governance and policy consistency. Transparency International’s Country
Corruption Perception Index score puts Rwanda at medium risk in terms of
corruption (54 points in 2020). Guided by the Vision 2020 and the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy, since the year 2000, the Rwandan
government has been implementing a comprehensive and ambitious
decentralization reform, which materialized by the adoption of the National
Decentralization Policy. The policy's objective were the promotion of good
governance, the reduction of poverty as well as the promotion of efficient, effective,
and accountable service delivery. While progress has been achieved through
strengthening the capacities of districts and the territorial reorganization of
decentralized state entities, some challenges still persist. In order to mitigate the
infection spread of COVID-19, the Government imposed strict contingency
measures including total or partial lockdowns, border closures, and restriction of
movements. While these measures were necessary for public safety, they may
pose risks on project implementation.
Mitigations:
3/14
GoR has enhanced its efforts to prevent corruption by identifying and reducing
vulnerability to corruption. A number of multistakeholder consultative bodies have
been established, including the National Council to fight against Corruption and
Injustice and Corruption Advisory Councils at national, district, sector, and cell
levels, KIIWP2 will contribute to enhancing the quality of governance at the district
level. 
Mitigations: GoR has enhanced its efforts to prevent corruption by identifying and
reducing vulnerability to corruption. A number of multistakeholder consultative
bodies have been established, including the National Council to fight against
Corruption and Injustice and Corruption Advisory Councils at national, district,
sector, and cell levels. KIIWP2 will contribute to enhancing the quality of
governance at the district level.
Based on a needs assessment, KIIWP will strengthen institutional capacities at
national and district levels:, the Project will provide support to RAB and the District
authorities’ staff in order to improve their capacity to monitor and support project
activities. Relevant institutions will also be supported, including the Rwanda
Environmental Management Authority, Ministry of Environment, and Rwanda Water
Boards. Stakeholder participation will be by: (i) participatory community-driven
preparation of sub-catchment plans; (ii) strengthened FFS, cooperatives,
Infrastructure Management Institutions; (iii) community competition grants; (iv)
engagement in the selection of irrigation systems and technology. The project will
ensure capacity development of farmers and farmers’ organizations in areas
including irrigation management (SC.A2), climate-smart agriculture and
technologies (SC.A5), and business and marketing skills (SC.B1).
In order to mitigate the COVID-19 related risks, MINAGRI has already put in place
special guidelines allowing farmers to continue agricultural activities even during
lockdowns, including access to agricultural inputs and facilitation of transporting the
produce to local markets. Most importantly, all members of the SPIU and
government staff involved in the IFAD-funded projects have already been
vaccinated against COVID-19 so that they can continue their implementation tasks
with limited risks. In addition, 3% of the total project cost (US$1.8 million) has been
earmarked under the “unallocated” category in order to quickly respond to
emergencies and any other unforeseen circumstances. The emergency related
sub-component is set up under Component C, and GoR and IFAD will discuss and
agree on necessary restructuring in the project activities, if deemed necessary.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
COVID-19, combined with heavy rains in Q1 2020, as well as subsequent
measures to contain the spread of the virus, deepened the country’s economic
slowdown such that real GDP growth was slightly negative at -0.2 percent in 2020.
Although the outlook remains highly uncertain, the IMF projects a rebound in real
GDP growth to 5.7 percent in 2021, albeit below potential.
Mitigations:
KIIWP will promote increased and diversified agricultural production to enhance
farmers’ resilience to a wide range of shocks. US$1.8 million, which is about 3% of
the total project cost, has been allocated for emergency under the “unallocated”
category. This would allow a relatively quick adjustment of project activities in the
face of any emergency situation such as a surge in COVID-19 infections. Finally,
the RPSF that is currently being implemented in Rwanda focuses on expanding the
capacity of National Strategic Food Reserve (NSFR). The NSFR has played a
critical role during COVID-19 by purchasing produce from farmers’ cooperatives
and smallholders while providing food assistance to households in need. KIIWP2
beneficiaries in the event of a new crisis will benefit from the NSFR’s enhanced
purchasing capacity.
Fragility and Security
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Kayonza District faces climate-induced fragility is a drought-prone area, which
impacts on the livelihoods of the population while COVID-19 may continue to pose
social, economic, and health risks.
4/14
Mitigations:
Mitigations: KIIWP2 will significantly reduce the climate-related fragility and drought
problem in Kayonza District by several measures including (i) improving access to
water for agriculture, livestock and rural population; (ii) promoting climate-smart
agriculture (CSA) technologies and practices; (iii) training beneficiaries on climate
risk and its management; and (iv) supporting and promoting understanding of
agricultural insurance products offered by National Agricultural Insurances Scheme
(NAIS). In addition, the project will promote increased and diversified agricultural
production to mitigate shocks. These activities will enhance the resilience of
households and have an impact on livelihoods, income and food security.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
The policy environment surrounding KIIWP2 is relatively favorable as a series of
new laws and policies coming into force that are fully supportive of the development
of water infrastructure and cooperative development. Indeed, the sustainable
development of irrigated agriculture as a key driver to boost agriculture production
and productivity is fully acknowledged in most of Rwanda’s flagship policy
documents.
Mitigations:
Sub-component C2 will address policy issues. KIIWP2 will support policy dialogues
through an evaluation of implementation and impact of new or existing policies
related to the project activities. The dialogues will involve national and district level
relevant stakeholders. KIIWP2 will focus on policy areas including: (i) national
policy on contract farming; (ii) laws on financial lease for agricultural equipment
(e.g. special registry requirement in the law that is yet to be effective); (iii) value
added tax (VAT) in rice processing that makes Rwandan rice less competitive than
regional products; and (iv) current issues of availability and quality of seeds
including multiplication.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Identified gaps in terms of operationalization of new policies, laws, regulations and
institutional framework will be addressed with KIIWP support. To this end, KIIWP 1
will conduct an evaluation of implementation and impact of new or existing policies
related to the project activities with relevant national, and district level stakeholders.
Mitigations:
Sub-component C2 will address policy issues. In addition to above mentioned four
areas of policy support, KIIWP2 will be supporting and promoting in coordination
with the World Bank (WB) agricultural insurance as offered by NAIS. This may
provide valuable insights to enhancing policy dialogue on agricultural insurance
and other risk mitigation strategies and instruments.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Growing population and associated pressure on agricultural lands and grazing
areas. Because of the growing pressure on farm land, deforestation in Kayonza
District has by far surpassed afforestation and grazing areas are shrinking.
5/14
Mitigations:
The watershed and catchment management approach, including participatory
preparation of catchment management plans, will lead to longer term
environmental rejuvenation and returns on improved soil and sustainable access to
water. In addition, the Project will promote CSA technologies and these will
increase soil fertility, enhance resilience and reduce carbon emissions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Increased frequency of drought in Eastern province. The District is characterized
by high frequency of rainfall deficit, late rainfall onsets, early rainfall cessations, and
is prone to drought. Droughts are responsible for famine and food shortages, a
reduction in plant and animal species and displacement of people in search of food
and pasture. The Government of Rwanda had to provide household food relief and
water for livestock to support the affected districts. Rwanda suffered from two
consecutive years of droughts. In 2017, erratic and below-average rainfalls were
recorded for the rainy season spreading from September to December (SOND).
Mitigations:
KIIWP2 will promote adaptation to climate change through provision of water in
drought seasons and climate smart agricultural practices. Project beneficiaries will
also be trained on climate risk and climate risk management and received climate
information coupled with agricultural advisories. 
KIIWP2 will also support understanding and access of project beneficiaries to
agricultural insurance products offered under Rwanda’s National Agricultural
Insurance Scheme (NAIS). The products insure against crop and livestock damage
and losses due to climate change and other reasons. This is one way to protect
some of the project’s investments in improved productivity, including but not limited
to provision of physical inputs, increased access to markets and agricultural
financial services. It can also help create stability for retail lending institutions at risk
of mass default in the event of a widespread climate-related shock.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The Eastern Province of Rwanda was hit by a severe drought in 2016, followed by
two years of poor rains. This severely impacted local communities, mainly in
Kayonza District, with more than 47,000 households becoming food insecure and
the GoR, in partnership with WFP, providing food relief. Farmers in these drought-
prone areas were also affected by pressure of farm land and loss of soil fertility due
to unsustainable environmental management. KIIWP intervention area comprises
nine drought-prone sectors of the twelve sectors in Kayonza District. The area has
been selected on the basis of its high vulnerability to drought and high poverty and
food insecurity levels.
Mitigations:
6/14
Mitigations: Kayonza District has a high untapped potential of water resources that,
if fully mobilized, would significantly improve crop production, climate resilience,
food security and nutrition. KIIWP2 aims to mobilize this potential Impact expected
from the project’s activities include: a) increased productivity and income with
possibility of having more cropping seasons; b) temporary and permanent
employment opportunity; c) 2,000 ha afforested and reforested as part of upstream
catchment rehabilitation using endemic and fruit tree species and promotion of
agro-biodiversity within the buffer zones; d) adaptation to climate change through
provision of water in drought seasons and climate smart agricultural practices; e)
crop diversification and increased value of production in hillside areas; f) enhanced
food security; g) increased value of agricultural production; h) reduced post-harvest
losses; i) increased sales in output markets; and j) improved access to water for
livestock and humans.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Kayonza, and building on the experience of KWAMP, the successful IFAD-
supported Community-based Watershed Management Project, implemented in the
neighboring Kirehe District, which completed in June 2016. There is risk of high
cost of hillside irrigation in case the proposed technologies are not carefully
adjusted to the constraints of the target areas and the capacity of the beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
Additional analyses was undertaken to mitigate the risk (high cost of hillside
irrigation) of the initial design of the irrigation schemes and capacity to operate and
maintain the same. This allowed to (a) reduce the unit cost of irrigation; (b) reduce
the risk of the management of these schemes. The detailed design of the irrigation
schemes will be optimised and recommend a suitable rationing based on further
analysis, close consultation with concerned farmers and cooperatives, and
prevailing conditions towards optimising profitability, making sure that the
investments are suitable to the capacity of the target group. The Project will also
establish and support Water Users Organizations and other relevant Infrastructure
Management Institutions.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Rwanda has an overall solid track record in project implementation and
management, characterized by a recognized result-based approach and high level
of financial management and procurement compliance, demonstrated by the
performance of Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU). However, limited
technical capacity, governance and institutional capacities at the district level could
lead to slow disbursement, lower project benefits as well as delays in
implementation. Raising awareness and capacity building are key elements in
KIIWP2, especially of FOs and District, Sector and Cell level staff. Adequate
capacity to operate and maintain the irrigation infrastructure will be critical for their
long term sustainability.
Mitigations:
7/14
The institutional arrangements for KIIWP2 will be fully aligned with the current
implementation framework of IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. In particular, the
SPIU is already in place with core staff and is effective in guiding the process of
designing and implementing projects together with IFAD (and the World Bank).
Involvement of experienced technical staff from KWAMP will also speed up project
implementation. The project will also provide support to RAB and the District staff
in order to improve their skills on technical aspects. International technical
assistance will be envisaged for some thematic areas. Relevant institutions will also
be supported (e.g. Environmental Management Authority; Rwanda Water Board). In
addition, three types of Infrastructure Management Institutions (Scheme Steering
Committees, Hydrographic Basin Committees, and Irrigation Water Users
Organizations) will be established during KIIWP1 in order to ensure (i) good
governance, (ii) water management and maintenance and (iii) monitoring. These
institutions will be further strengthened through capacity building in KIIWP2 to make
sure that adequate capacity is in place at project closure.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Insufficient human resources dedicated to M&E in the SPIU.
Mitigations:
An M&E plan will be developed to guide M&E processes, define roles and
responsibilities as well as set a plan for realization of set targets through the project
life. An M&E Manual will be developed by the SPIU describing how the MES/MIS
system works, the tools and processes for its smooth operation. M&E activities will
be coordinated by the SPIU M&E expert and supported by additional professional
staff already hired as part of KIIWP1, who will work closely with subject-matter
specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The Project will
partner with the Center of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural Resource
Management, which will provide technical backstopping to monitor the
implementation of the community–based sub-catchment management plans and all
mitigations measures listed under the ESMPs in order to ensure conservation,
restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and their
services.
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): 
The reporting structure of the district (Accountant reporting to the district and SPIU
and district data in IFMIS no accessible by SPIU) may cause significant delays in
justification and consolidating financial information for withdrawal applications and
financial reporting 
Newly recruited Accountant at Kayonza District not conversant with IFAD financial
management requirements. 
SPIU staff share time with other IFAD projects, which limit the availability and
dedication they can give to KIIWP1 and 2. This is a particular issue for the M&E
officer that is doing gender at the same time. Moreover, a complex project needs
different specialists to guide appropriate implementation of different activities
Mitigations:
8/14
The newly recruited staff (Accountant at the District), will be exposed in IFAD
specific procedures at start up and during implementation. 
Roles and responsibilities of staff will be defined in the PIM 
Generate certified monthly extracts of expenditure by project component, sub-
component, and expenditure category to activity level will be done by the district
and submitted to SPIU for purposes of generating withdrawal applications. 
KIIWP2 will propose new recruitments, particularly at district level, to ensure a
sound and timely implementation of a complex project. The staff will include a
Social inclusion Specialist that will ensure the inclusion of vulnerable groups, the
focus on nutrition aspects as well as the overall social safeguards and participation
of communities and project interventions. The recruited staff will work side by side
with district permanent staff to complement existing functions.
Project Budgeting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): 
Failure to meet budget deadlines for the submission of the AWPBs and receipt of
IFAD No Objection – which could cause ineligible expenditure 
Poor budget monitoring at activity and category level arising out of failure to
customize IFMIS to facilitate posting of budgets by this requirement.
Mitigations:
KIIWP 2 will use IFMIS for accounting, budget input into the IFMIS will be a
requirement as this will is a requirement to facilitate review of trends and budget
control. 
However, as IFMIS has not been customized, should a decision be made to
implement a parallel software, the budget will be monitored within TOMPRO. 
Budgeting should involve the Project finance team, technical staff, procurement
officer and an officer responsible for M & E. This should ensure that the
expenditures categories are well aligned and the logframe is considered at
budgeting time. It should also realistically inform the procurement plan as
procurement action timelines will be clearly attended 
Implementing partners, including districts should be included in the budgeting
process. 
Budget templates to implementing partners that mirror its code/chart of accounts
reflecting components, categories and activities together with funding sources will
be developed as part of budgeting process. SPIU will also guide the implementing
partners on eligible activities.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): 
MINECOFIN requires agencies including RAB (and projects) to operate under a
single treasury account with a daily nil balance on its individual account with the
Central bank. This would commingle IFAD resources and make traceability difficult.
Delays in customization of IFMIS, presents a liquidity risk arising out of delays in
submission of the withdrawal applications. This is because data from the current
set up of IFMIS cannot support timely analysis of expenditure by category
Mitigations:
9/14
As in the case under KIIWP1, a designated account denominated in US$ held at
the Central Bank (National Bank of Rwanda) to receive funds from IFAD will be
maintained. An additional designated account to receive Spanish financing will also
be opened. An operating account denominated RWF will also be opened in the
National Bank of Rwanda bank in line with GoR policy. These accounts will be
managed by the IFAD Portfolio SPIU Coordinator, the SPIU Head of Finance and
the SPIU chief accountant with thresholds that will be defined. 
SPIU will also open a Counterpart Fund account in the Central bank managed
under the same arrangements. 
Funds to implementing partners, including Kayonza District will be on the basis of
planned activities/activity-based advances supported by MOUs. No other accounts
are anticipated to be opened under the direct management of the project.
Subsequent transfers to partners will happen only after justification of previous
advances 
The IFAD client Portal (ICP) will be implemented for KIIWP II.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): 
Lapses in internal controls and compliance may never be reported as it has not
been a requirement to provide internal audit reports to IFAD. 
Project implemented in non-compliance with IFAD procedures and GoR laws and
regulations
Mitigations:
Internal audit reports/action plans be part of the semi-annual reports submitted by
the project to IFAD 
Revise and update PIM when implementation starts to reflect implementation
realities
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): 
IFMIS, cannot satisfy IFAD’s reporting requirements as it is not set-up to address
IFAD requirements. Use of the software would require separate use of MS Excel
for data manipulation to report by category and component by financier is time
consuming and prone to errors. 
Real time reports may not be produced within IFMIS for purposes of management
decision making as the setup of the GoR IFMIS chart of accounts has not been
configured to produce real time reports with the required parameters of
components by Financier, and by category. 
The IFMIS data posted by the district cannot be accessed/viewed by SPIU within
IFMIS. This will delay data consolidation for financial reporting and withdrawal
applications 
IFMIS cannot capture information on beneficiary contribution as it is not cash
based. Adjusting for it with journal vouchers at the end of the financial year (as
payments made by financier) will also not be possible as the system will require
beneficiary code, TIN number and bank account details that are not available for
the kind of beneficiaries targeted by IFAD financed projects. 
Risk of incomplete disclosures in the financial reports 
Risk of delays in reporting due to multiple partners with different management and
reporting structures
Mitigations:
10/14
IFAD and RAB/SPIU will continue to engage with IFMIS/MINECOFIN to speed up
the process of configuring and mapping project reporting requirements so that
IFMIS is coded to address the needs of the project and should be capable of
capturing and reporting by category in addition to sub-component and financier.
This will be used for KIIWP and will be expected to continue throughout project
implementation. 
Specific guidelines will be included in the KIIWP PIM/Financial management
manual. Financial reporting: 
The semi-annual report includes financial information regarding the current year's
semester compared to the budget and its previous year's period. 
Quarterly reporting should be encouraged. This should ease access to reports and
will form part of a more comprehensive interim financial reporting as quarterly
reports will be updated to produce semi-annual reports. 
RAB will also have to ensure that appropriate levels of reporting are established to
manage possible conflict relating to internal/ traditional set of reporting set up within
RAB where existence of a parallel structure may cause internal conflict. SPIU will
report to the Director General and also provide the required reports to MINECOFIN
and IFAD. 
Should GoR significantly delay or fail to customize IFMIS to IFAD reporting
requirements, use of a parallel accounting software may be considered to mitigate
against manual accounting/use of MS Excel. 
Kayonza District will submit certified reports to SPIU on a monthly basis to facilitate
report generation and submission of withdrawal applications. 
In kind contribution will be reported by disclosure rather than recognition as there
will be no cash flowing into the project and yet the accounting will be on cash basis.
In kind contribution will be reported by disclosure rather than recognition as there
will be no cash flowing into the project and yet the accounting will be on cash basis.
Project External Audit
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Audit reports may be submitted late. 
Audit quality may be compromised as a consequence of failure to follow audit
guidelines and TOR.
Mitigations:
KIIWP2 external audits will be carried out by the Auditor General. 
SPIU will ensure that the draft financial statements are approved by the end March
and availed to the auditor well in time to facilitate early completion of the audit. 
Terms of Reference clearly specify IFAD audit requirements, including the timing
for submission of audit reports. 
The audit report together with the management letter will be submitted to IFAD no
later than 60 days from the end of the financial year.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
No risk was detected with reference to the legal and regulatory framework. Rwanda
shows a complete legal framework, which includes standard bidding documents.
The recent introduction of a public e-procurement system greatly increased
procurement monitoring and public access to procurement information. For IFAD-
funded projects, the e-procurement system is used both at SPIU and District level.
Procurement Footnote: For the full list of risks and mitigations related to both the
country level and project institutional dimensions of public procurement, kindly refer
to the KIIWP Procurement Risk Matrix, which was used to inform this section of the
IPRM.
Mitigations:
N/A
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
11/14
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
According to the country corruption perception index score of Transparency.org,
Rwanda ranks 51st in the world with a score of 53.
Mitigations:
All procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors, consultants and
service providers, shall observe the highest standard of ethics during the
procurement and execution of contracts financed under IFAD funded Projects, in
accordance with paragraph 69 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. The
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the
relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
No risk was detected with reference to the capability of the procurement unit in
public procurement. Procurement staff at SPIU and District level was found to be
competent and the quality of documents produced was judged to be adequate.
Mitigations:
N/A
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
The procurement risk assessment ascertained that procurement planning,
methods, processes and contract administration and management are generally
compliant with national procurement regulations, IFAD Project Procurement
Guidelines and good procurement practice. 
The main challenge consists in the potential delays caused by the use of open
tendering for low-value procurements, due to the SPIU following the national
procurement thresholds instead of those mandated by IFAD in LtBs/LtRs. 
Other minor shortcomings involve: 
a. the application of domestic preferences to NCBs and the lack of mandatory
references to IFAD's policies (the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and
Corruption, the IFAD policy to preventing and responding to sexual harassment,
sexual exploitation and abuse and the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the
Financing of Terrorism Policy) in the bidding documents used for NCB; 
b. The tender evaluation committee of KIIWP being suitably qualified, but not
appointed ad-hoc; and 
The lack of approval thresholds for contract amendments.
Mitigations:
In November 2020, IFAD brought the issue of low procurement thresholds to the
attention of the Rwandan Ministry of Finance and proposed an increase. IFAD will
follow up with the Ministry until positive feedback is received. 
The KIIWP Team was reminded that, according to the IFAD Project Procurement
Guidelines, domestic preferences are only allowed for ICBs and that bidding
documents shall always contain a mandatory reference to IFAD's policies. IFAD will
ensure that procurement processes fully comply with its Project Procurement
Guidelines by reviewing procurement documents on a prior and post review basis. 
IFAD can strongly encourage government through policy dialogue to nominate ad-
hoc tender evaluation committees, and it is recommended that it do so through the
COSOP consultations with the government. 
IFAD’s No-Objection will be required for all prior-review contracts where the
amendment increases the original value by more than 10 per cent or extends the
original contract duration by 25 per cent or more.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Moderate
Low
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
12/14
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
KIIWP2 will be implemented in the vicinity of the Akagera National Park which hosts
considerable biodiversity of both fauna and flora. The area is characterized by a
network of lakes hydrologically connected with the Akagera River, either directly
through surface flows or through swampy areas. The next phase of the Ndego
detailed design should make sure there is no significant harm to the Akagera
transboundary waters.
Mitigations:
The Project will conduct rapid site biodiversity survey and establish baseline on
biodiversity and ecosystem status, which will be monitored annually. The IFAD
SECAP guidelines on protection of biodiversity and will be used to guide the
anticipated mitigation measures to protect the biodiversity.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Water and soil pollution due to increased use of agro-chemicals.
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Mitigations:
Implementation of Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) and promotion of
organic fertilizer and good agricultural practices. IPMP will be done for the entire
project as part of the detailed design of each irrigation scheme, and efficient use of
agrochemicals will be included in the FFS activities in addition to a strong
emphasis on soil conservation and fertility, agroforestry and conservation
agriculture.
Cultural Heritage
N/A
Indigenous People
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
There are not Indigenous Peoples living in Project area, therefore no risk has been
detected on this issue.
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
In-migration due to potential job opportunities and spin off employment activities. In
addition, child labour in the irrigation schemes is a major issue. According to ILO,
children perform dangerous tasks in agriculture such as street vending,
construction (e.g. brick-laying) and production (e.g. applying fertilizer, carrying
heavy loads).
Mitigations:
Awareness campaign on child labour and on employment preference to members
of local communities 
Plan for population increase and consequent demand on public authorities.
Community Health and Safety
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Food security: the production of cash crops grown in preference to food crops on
irrigated schemes might exacerbate food insecurity in already poor and food
insecure households and affect community health.
13/14
Mitigations:
Food security: food crops will be promoted in parallel with cash crops; nutrition
sensitive value chains will be promoted in the frame of FFS. The project has set
aside a specific budget line for the promotion of improved and nutrient rich seed
varieties. The diversification of crops grown by the Project beneficiaries will also
improve food security.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
During the construction of irrigation infrastructures (BS and canals networks) and
post-harvest facilities, permanent land will be acquired, crops and trees be affected
and a resettlement action Plan (RAP) will be prepared and implemented.
Mitigations:
An abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and included in the
ESIA and associated costs were integrated in the cost-table. The RAP will be
implemented and all compensation measures provided prior to the construction
works or land take.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
a) Excessive use of fertilizers where unabsorbed ammonia and nitrates may
subsequently be released into the air. 
b) Tilling land releases carbon stored in soil.
Mitigations:
Under Sub-component A.3, the project will use the FFS approach as an entry point
to introduce climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices and technologies. KIIWP1
will conduct a baseline study to identify existing CSA practices and technologies in
Rwanda, and the findings from the study will be utilized in the CSA training in FFS
under KIIWP2. Some of the promoted practices will include: adoption of zero tillage
so that carbon is stored in soils, and less carbon released to the air; and
implementation of Integrated Pest Management Plan(IPMP).
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Population has suffered from extreme events (droughts) in 2016 and 2017. The risk
of extreme weather event will continue to remain.
Mitigations:
14/14
KIIWP2 will apply the watershed and catchment management approach, including
participatory preparation of catchment management plans, which will lead to
sustainable use of natural resources. KIIWP2 will also support understanding and
access of target populations to agricultural insurance products offered under
Rwanda’s National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS). The products will insure
against crop and livestock damage and losses due to climate change and other
reasons (SC.B2). The beneficiaries will be trained on the Participatory Integrated
Climate Services for Agriculture (PICSA) approach (SC.A5) which aims at
facilitating farmers to make informed decisions based on accurate, location
specific, climate and weather information; locally relevant crop, livestock and
livelihood options during the process of planning their agricultural season and other
livelihood activities. Furthermore, under the same Sub-component A5, the project
will implement ESMPs (Annex 5, Appendix 1) and introduce various mitigation
measures.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
(1) The poorest households are not fully engaged in consultation processes aimed
at defining the development of project’s activities, and water infrastructures benefit
the wealthiest categories of target groups the most; (2) Limited technical capacity,
governance and institutional capacity of beneficiaries (e.g. farmers’ organizations)
in managing irrigation schemes, growing high value crops and linking themselves
to markets.
Mitigations:
KIIWP will employ participatory processes and methods in the development of sub-
catchment plans, ensuring that the needs of all communities’ representatives are
taken into account including the poorest households. Community consultation,
including community leaders and involving the most vulnerable households, will be
undertaken at all stages of the development of project’s activities, including the
selection of siting of water infrastructure. The project will also ensure capacity
development of farmers and farmers’ organizations in areas including irrigation
management (SC.A3), climate-smart agriculture and technologies (SC.A5), and
business and marketing skills (SC.B1).
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Establishment of irrigation schemes may raise complaints among local
communities mainly due to conflict among water users, resettlement, conflict
between workers and local community, etc. In this situation, Grievance procedures
are required to ensure that Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are able to lodge
complaints or concerns, without cost, and with the assurance of a timely and
satisfactory resolution of the issue. The procedures also ensure that the
entitlements are effectively transferred to the intended beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
Stakeholders will be informed of the intention to implement the grievance
mechanism, and the procedure will be communicated at the time that the RAPs are
finalized. Grievances may arise from members of communities who are dissatisfied
with eligibility criteria use, community planning and actual implementation or
compensation. Specific procedures are detailed in the PIM.
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Institutional sustainability.  
The  KIIWP  Exit  Strategy  is  embedded  in  the  intervention  approach  through:  (i)  the 
strategic  approach  of  working  directly  with  administrative  structures  and  community 
leaders at District, sector and irrigation scheme/catchment levels; (ii) the empowerment 
of Infrastructure Management Institutions that will assume full responsibility for planning 
and implementation of watershed interventions and operation and maintenance of post-
harvest infrastructure; (iii) the strengthening of FFS, Farmer Promoters and Cooperatives, 
including  their  back  and  forward  linkages  and  access  to  markets,  financial  services  and 
agriculture  insurance.  This  institutional  framework  within  which  the  Project  will  be 
implemented  and  the  capacity  developed  will  continue  to  exist  after  its  completion  to 
benefit the population and country. A full-scale exit strategy will be developed by the SPIU 
in consultation with relevant stakeholders one to two years before the project completion. 
The strategy should detail most institutional arrangements, legal aspects, ownership and 
post-project  funding.  The  implementation  of  the  exit  strategy  will  be  monitored  by  the 
SPIU/RAB  with  IFAD  providing  supervision/implementation  support  as  necessary  in 
collaboration with IFAD country office.  
Involvement  of  local  administrative  structures.  The  administrators  at  District  and 
sector levels have already been engaged with KIIWP1 activities and their involvement is 
crucial  in  sustaining  the  infrastructure  management.  At  the  District  level,  irrigation 
technicians, and water management field facilitators will be recruited by SPIU/RAB, and 
they will work together with the District, Sector and cell level staff in order to support the 
formation and strengthening of the Infrastructure Management Institutions in KIIWP2. The 
sector administrators and technical staff will ensure that KIIWP activities are integrated 
into the respective sector annual action plans and monitor project activities against agreed 
targets.  Inclusion  of  the  project  activities  in  the  sector  annual  plans  would  also  mean 
securing the budget for sustaining the activities and ensure pathways for potential scale 
up of well-performing project activities. In addition, after irrigation schemes completion 
and fulfilling all conditions, the irrigation water users organizations (IWUOs) and water for 
livestock  water  users  organizations  (WLUOs)  would  sign  an  Infrastructure  Management 
Transfer  Agreement  (IMTA)  with  RAB  and  it  will  be  co-signed  by  Kayonza  District 
Authorities and IWUOs.  
Empowerment of Infrastructure Management Institutions. Interventions supported 
by KIIWP2 will be owned by community organizations that will be trained to operate and 
manage them. Infrastructure Management Institutions such as Sector- and District-level 
Steering Committees and Hydrographic Basin Committees will play an active role in the 
design, construction and operation and maintenance of infrastructure supported by KIIWP. 
These  institutions  will  (i)  ensure  long-term  sustainability  of  the  irrigation  schemes,  (ii) 
develop drought contingency plans for the catchment areas, and (iii) ensure inclusive and 
equitable  access  to  water  for  all  members.  In  addition  to  the  IMTA  for  large  irrigation 
schemes, each irrigation scheme, borehole and valley bottom tank will be handed over to 
the users on partial completion of the works and a handover certificate will be issued at 
full  handover.  The  handover  certificate  will  also  indicate  the  responsibilities  of  the 
government  and  the  users  during  the  operational  phase.  The  project  will  gradually 
withdraw from each intervention after the handover is done, but government agencies in 
extension,  water  resources  management  and  natural  resources  among  others,  and  the 
private sector will take over. 
Capacity building of farmer field schools (FFS) and cooperatives. Using FFS as a 
basis  for  smallholder  farmers  to  become  accustomed  to  working  together  and  sharing 
knowledge  and  information  will  build  trust  over  time  and  this  would  help  establishing 
cohesive water users organizations (WUOs). As for cooperatives, using long-term coaching 
and  mentoring  support  by  technical  and  field  staff,  as  well  as  service  providers  would 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
increase their chances of success and long-term sustainability. The list of capacity building 
at the grassroots level in order to ensure sustainability of project results is summarized in 
the table below. 
Outputs to be sustained 
Maintenance of irrigation infrastructure 
Provision of farmers’ extension services through FFS 
Operational cooperatives 
Capacity building 
Infrastructure  Management  Institutions  will  be 
established and strengthened 
Training FFS/Farmer Promoters 
Capacity building of cooperatives 
Linkages with financial services and insurances 
Participation  of  private  sector.  KIIWP  will  involve  private  sector  actors  such  as 
processors, exporters, and financial institutions operating at both local and national level. 
As part of the matching grant scheme, Category 3 Joint-venture grants are designed to 
promote and support linkages between cooperatives and off-takers to handle and process 
crop  surpluses  generated  by  irrigation  development,  for  warehouses,  handling  and 
processing facilities. This public-private-producer partnership arrangement will ensure a 
win-win structure with cooperatives being able to access funding while the private sector 
(off-taker)  can  secure  produce.  This  mutually  beneficial  business  relationships  between 
KIIWP target groups and private stakeholders will enhance the long-term sustainability of 
the project’s investments. 
Environmental sustainability and risk management.  
As  Kayonza  is  a  drought-prone  area,  the  environmental  risk  will  remain  during  the 
implementation of the exit strategy and beyond. In order to mitigate the vulnerability to 
environmental  conditions,  KIIWP2  will  use  the  watershed  and  catchment  management 
approach, including participatory preparation of catchment management plans, will lead 
to longer term environmental rejuvenation and returns on improved soil and sustainable 
access to water. The project will also support and promote understanding and access of 
project beneficiaries to agricultural insurance offered under Rwanda’s National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme. In addition, the Project will promote climate smart agriculture (CSA) 
technologies  and  these  will  increase  soil  fertility,  enhance  resilience  and  reduce  carbon 
emissions.  The  project  beneficiaries  will  also  be  trained  on  climate  risk  and  risk 
management. 
Economic sustainability.  
The  Project  will  support  enhanced  storage  and  commercial  sale  of  excess  production  to 
allow  maintenance  of  investments  and  access  to  finance,  value  addition  facilities  and 
markets  through  FFS,  Farmer  Promoters,  cooperatives  and  PPPs.  This  will  ensure  that 
farmers  can  dispose  their  surplus  production,  enhance  their  incomes  and  sustain  their 
investments in agriculture.  
Food and Nutrition Security.  
The severe food and nutrition security challenges in Eastern Province are largely due to 
frequent  droughts  and  high  dependence  on  rain-fed  agriculture.  Using  irrigation  and 
catchment protection as the entry point is a recognition of the critical importance of water 
to  sustainable  rural  livelihoods  and  food  and  nutrition  security  in  the  district.  High 
nutrition-sensitive and CSA crops and cropping systems will have been introduced, with 
known requirements and results generated during the Project lifetime. 
Women Empowerment 
Women empowerment is key to addressing household food and nutrition security. This will 
ensure targeted support to women and mapping of their long-term inclusion pathway. The 
support will be delivered together with nutrition education and participatory approaches 
to enhance their inclusion and economic empowerment.  
2 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
1/1
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies, strategies and
 National youth policies, strategies and
 National nutrition policies, strategies and
actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
actors
actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and opportunities by youth
 Key nutrition problems and underlying
causes, by group
 Key livelihood problems and
group
opportunities, by gender
 Nutritionally vulnerable beneficiaries, by
group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives (empowerment,
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
voice, workload)
empowerment
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Policy engagement on GEWE
 Youth employment included in project
outcomes and impacts
objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Women are > 40% of outreach
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index (IE.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index in
M&E budget
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one of
below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth activities
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition activities
IFAD Adaptation Finance
$4,718,000
IFAD Mitigation Finance
$0
Total IFAD Climate-focused
Finance
$4,718,000
The project includes some of the criteria that will contribute towards gender transformation. However it does not intend to be gender transformational.
Nutrition
The project design was informed by a nutrition situation analysis and pathways have been identified to reach the nutrition related objectives
Youth
The project includes a specific activities for youth engagement.
☐ No social inclusion themes
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex 13: SECAP Clearance Sheet
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
SECAP Clearance Sheet
1/2
TO:
FROM:
Donal Brown 
Associate Vice President, PMD
Nigel M. Brett 
Director OPR
DATE:
07 October 2021
SUBJECT:
Adherence to SECAP requirements for Category A projects only.
Project Title: Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Country: Rwanda
Division: ESA
Country Programme Manager: Francesco Rispoli
Project Category: A
Executive Board: 01/10/2021
Implementation Stage
1.The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (or other relevant SECAP studies) has been completed and
reviewed by the relevant national authority and IFAD
2.The Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) has been obtained by the borrower or grant recipient
3. The FPIC Implementation Plan has been developed at the design stage and reviewed by the relevant national
authorities and IFAD
Yes
N/A
N/A
4. The ESIA (or other relevant SECAP studies) has been cleared/approved by the relevant National Authorities for
disclosure on IFAD website
Yes
5.The FPIC process has been completed or the FPIC Implementation Plan has been cleared/approved by the
relevant National Authorities for disclosure
N/A
6.The ESIA and /or FPIC/FPIC Implementation Plan has been disclosed on IFAD website?
2/2
Effective disclosure date on IFAD website: 30/11/2020
Notes
No physical resettlement is foreseen therefore an ARAP has been developed
7.The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been completed and reviewed by IFAD and the relevant national
authorities
8. The review of the land acquisition and compensation process has been completed and reviewed by IFAD and
the relevant national authorities
9.The RAF has been cleared by National Authorities for disclosure on IFAD website
Effective disclosure date on IFAD website: 30/11/2020
Notes
no RAF was produced but an ARAP was produced as part of the ESIA and disclosed 
Yes
Yes
N/A
N/A
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase II
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 14 Review of Feasibility studies and ESIAs
Mission Dates:
07-18 December 2020 and 18 January-05 February 2021
Document Date:
07/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002350
5743-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 14: Review of Feasibility studies and Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessments (ESIAs) 
This annex summarizes the review of the feasibility studies (FSs) and Environmental and Social 
Impact  Assessments  (ESIAs)  that  was  undertaken  by  the  KIIWP2  design  team  that  looked  at 
technical,  financial,  economical,  and  environmental  aspects  of  the  FSs,  and  formulated 
recommendations that were used by the national team to adjust the Fs. They were also integrated 
in the design of KIIWP2. 
In order to proceed from KIIWP1 to KIIWP2, verifiable triggers had been agreed upon: 
i.  FSs  identify  irrigation  schemes  that  are  financially,  economically,  environmentally  and 
socially viable and sustainable;  
ii.  third party satisfactory review of FSs, ESIAs and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs);  
iii.  ESIAs and RAPs are disclosed at local community level, national and IFAD website for a 
minimum 120 days;  
iv.  provision of a budget and commitment by Government of Rwanda to implement the RAP 
and other ESMP activities; and  
v.  revision of the PDR and PIM to incorporate the findings of KIIWP1. 
Feasibility studies  
In order to respond to the urgent demand of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) to tackle drought-
related issues in the Eastern Province within the shortest possible time, IFAD together with GoR 
opted to implement KIIWP along two phases in order to facilitate an early project start up. One 
of  the  triggers  to  have  KIIWP-2  approved,  was  the  completion  of  the  Feasibility  Study  of  the 
Ndego and Kabare pumped irrigation system (2,010ha). The feasibility report was completed and 
shared with IFAD in October 2020 and the following, is the technical review note of Ndego and 
Kabare feasibility report and key recommendations were made to inform the upcoming detailed 
design phase of Ndego and Kabare irrigation schemes.  
Socio-Economic context 
A  big  percentage  of  the  study  area  is  still  virgin,  especially lowlands  and  hills  where  irrigation 
should be applicable. The agriculture development in Kayonza district presents a large potential 
in terms of social and economic welfare of the population”  
The  Socio-economic  study  report,  revealed  that  residents  welcome  this  irrigation  project  very 
much. They have been requesting this for many years. The residents’ biggest economic activity 
and  major  source  of  income  is  rain-fed  traditional  agriculture.  The  majority  of  the  households 
have land plots of 0.5-1ha size (37.9%) and 1-2ha (26.3%). The land conflicts are generally not 
a problem, it was reported to be affecting only 3.2% of sampled households 
Topography of the study area 
The Topographic survey was conducted to characterize the elevations and slopes of the project 
area. The potential irrigation areas in the project area are composed of flat, rolling, and milder 
slope  and  a  few  sections  undulating.  All  the  catchment  on  these  potential  areas  drains  to  the 
lakes. The slopes in the project area vary from 0-8% with an average of 5%, which is suitable for 
different types of irrigation systems. The altitude in the project areas varies between 1280 and 
1360 m.a.s.l. 
Soils and agriculture studies 
A soil survey conducted over the defined irrigation gross area of 2,500ha, included soil sampling 
at 127 sampling zones in two depths (0-30cm and 30-60cm), soil pits and infiltration tests in 12 
locations representative of the relevant soil series. Results indicated soil depths greater than 1m, 
mostly Loamy Sand and Sandy Loam soils with 55% to 90% sand content, medium to high soil 
bulk  density  (1.3  to  1.6  g/cc),  infiltration  rates  within  acceptable  range  (12-56mm/hr)  and 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
generally high hydraulic conductivity (Ks 44-149mm/hr). Soils were generally acidic (pH 4.75-
7.2), non-saline.  
The  residents  generally  practice  subsistence  agriculture  and  depend  majorly  on  rain.  The 
residents associate their level of poverty and low agricultural productivity to the low rainfall and 
drought conditions which occur regularly. Due to these unpredictable conditions, they are hesitant 
to  invest  in  costly  agricultural  inputs  and  equipment  (improved  seeds,  fertilizers,  pesticides, 
machinery, etc.). 
The irrigation systems that provide water to the farmers’ crops throughout the year would be the 
game changer. The agricultural study identified the main crops grown in the area to be Beans, 
Soybeans,  Maize,  cassava  and  Sorghum.  Based  on  these  crops  and  considering  other  market-
oriented  crops,  the  Consultant  proposed  a  cropping  calendar  and  cropping  pattern  for  the 
irrigation scheme. 
The proposed crops include Maize, Soy beans, Common beans, French bean, Onions, Tomatoes, 
Watermelon, Banana, Irish potato, Chilies (Red pepper), Green pepper (Capsicum) and Avocado. 
Land Husbandry (Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection) 
The total arable land on hillsides constitutes a vast majority of the total agricultural land in the 
country, but erosion costs the country 1.4 million tons of fertile soils per year. Without the option 
of extensification, agricultural intensification must take place in the context of a potentially fertile, 
but challenging, physical environment, making good land husbandry a strict necessity to curtail 
erosion and otherwise maintain the quality of the soil, as well as an environmental prerogative. 
All  proposed  activities  are  intended  to  improve  hillside  agricultural  management  through 
protection against soil erosion and enhancing sustained crop productivity as well as to improve 
plant cover and enhance ecosystem conservation in fragile land units in the project-affected area 
in both irrigated or rain fed areas. 
The  Land  husbandry  Study  analyzed  the  slopes  and  soils  in  the  project  area  and  made 
recommendations  of  land  husbandry  and  soil  conservation  technologies  to  improve  hillside 
agricultural  management  by  protecting  against  soil  erosion,  enhancing  sustained  crop 
productivity, improving plant cover and enhancing ecosystem conservation in fragile land units in 
the project area. 
For Ndego and Kabare sectors, the catchment covers 2,491.75ha and the command area is 2,010 
ha  split  into  three  blocks  touching  Kibare,  Ihema  and  Nasho  lakes  respectively.  The  total 
command area is used for irrigated agriculture. Land husbandry technologies are proposed to be 
implemented in both catchment and the command area. 
The proposed technologies include a drainage system, land levelling (terracing), contour buffer 
strips, contour ditches, contour bunds, agroforestry trees and shrubs, contour ploughing, silt traps 
and application of lime, mulching and compost. 
The approach is agreeable and recommended technologies are acceptable to be implemented in 
the project area of Ndego and Kabare schemes. 
Proposed technologies for Catchment Area 
The total command area catchment of Ndego and Kabare project site is 2,491.75 ha accounting 
for 55.25 % of the total project site. The major portion, 86.17 % of the command area catchment 
is  situated  in  0-6%  slope  class  while  6-16%  slope  category  cover  only  13.8%  of  the  total 
agricultural area of the catchment. 
The dominant land terrain 0-6%, the almost flat area will be treated  with appropriate physical 
and biological measures while the land on 6-16% of the slope will be treated with the anti-erosive 
trenches supported with appropriate biological technologies. 
The  proposed  technology  to  manage  the  catchment  area  is  correct  and  recommended  for 
implementation however this is a good land for irrigation development. The 2,492 ha area with 
86.17% ranging from 0 to 6% can be fully irrigated. 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
Water Resources Development 
The Hydrology and Water Resources study characterized the climatic and hydro-logical patterns 
in the area and modelled the water resources availability from the source lakes. The Ndego and 
Kabare irrigation schemesare located in the lower Akagera basin. The climate of the project area 
is dominated by two rainy seasons from March to May and from October to December (bimodal 
pattern). 
The monthly rainfall varies from 110 mm in March, 162 mm in April and declining to 10.3 mm in 
July. The annual rainfall for the command areas is 998 mm with annual dependable rainfall of 772 
mm. On average, 71% of the annual total rainfall falls during the wet seasons. 
The area is characterized by a network of lakes hydrologically connected with the Akagera River, 
either directly through surface flows or through swampy areas.  
The Akagera River is a major source of water to the area and to Lakes Nasho and Kibare. Draining 
an  estimated  surface  area  of  57,073km2  (up  to  project  area  location)  and  with  relatively  high 
rainfall in upstream basin areas (>1600 mm), the river flows have varied historically from 63.2 
m3/s to a maximum of 621.9 m3/s with a 21-year mean daily flow 231 m3/s, based on flow records 
from 1971 to 1991. Inflows in to Lake Nasho is estimated to be about 4.79 million m3 per year 
and  7,500  million  m3  for  Lake  Kibare.  The  irrigation  water  demand  was  estimated  using  FAO 
CROPWAT 8.0 as follows; Ihema, 4.6 million m3; Kibare, 3.61 million m3; Nasho, 2.63 million 
m3.  Environmental  flow  targets  are  set  using  the  Global  Environment  Flow  Calcultator.  
Furthermore,  a  water  allocation  model  was  devised  to  model  the  lake  water  availability  for 
irrigation.  Water  abstractions  by  other  water  users,  environmental  flows  and  domestic  water 
supply were also incorporated in the model. 
The results of the water allocation model show reliable source of water for irrigation development 
with high reliabilities (>80%, which is normal target for irrigation design) for both Lake Kibare 
and Lake Nasho. 
The hydrological study seems to show a direct and indirect connection between the 3 lakes and 
the Akagera River. The projected level of abstraction from the lakes indicate no significant impact  
(in terms of water resources) to the Akagera transboundary waters.  
The project will be implemented and an ecologically fragile ecosystem. The project area used to 
be  part  of  the  Akagera  National  Park  with  rich  biodiversity.  An  expected  increase  in  water 
exchange from the river into the lake will attract more sediment into the lake. There is a need to 
evaluate the long-term impact due to additional sedimentation into the lakes.  
In terms of water quality, a more turbid water is expected in the lakes especially in Kibare Lake 
with  direct  connection  with  Akagera  River.  This  change  in  water  quality  should  be  taken  into 
consideration  while  designing  the  pumping  station  as  well  as  the  irrigation  water  application 
system (sprinklers nozzles). 
Irrigation command area design and options 
The  delineation  factors  include  slopes,  proximity  to  the  water  sources,  minimal  elevation 
differences  (max  65m  was  recommended),  25%  extra  for  infield irrigation  &  drainage  system, 
road networks and land suitability issues. 
Fieldwork and studies during the delineation process indicate a larger potential irrigation area for 
future development. Three blocks were delineated with a total gross area of 2,500ha and net area 
of 2,010 ha. The topographic survey, soil study and preliminary layouts were carried out on this 
gross area.  
Five irrigation options were assessed based on irrigation system types and water supply methods. 
The first 5 options were evaluated for their technical and financial viability.  
The five options are: (i) Option 1 - Open channel conveyance for surface irrigation, (ii) Option 2 
- Piped conveyance for pressurized and open channel conveyance for surface irrigation, (iii) Option 
2B - Same as Option 2 with water supply for Ihema Block from Lake Kibare (no water pumped 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
from  Lake  Ihema)  (iv)  Option  3  -  Fully  pressurized  irrigation  system  (Center  Pivot  Technology 
and Sprinkler) and (v)  Option 3B - Same as  Option 3 with water supply for  Ihema Block  from 
Lake Kibare (no water pumped from Lake Ihema) 
The  recommended  irrigation  technology  (Option  3B  -  Fully  pressurized  irrigation  system  with 
Center Pivot Technology and Sprinkler) is agreeable as it offers tangible advantages as compared 
to  the  remaining  four  options.  The  feasibility  report  proposed  a  rationing  between  pivots  and 
sprinklers as 70% and 30 % respectively.  
Irrigation design review: While the feasibility study proposed fixed sprinklers, there is need to 
consider    movable  drag-line  sprinklers  with  2  to  3  shifts,  during  detailed  designs.  In  addition, 
farmers  will  be  assisted  to  select  the  irrigation  system  of  choice,  between  centre  pivots  and 
sprinklers. This will reduce on investment cost, operation and management costs and improve on 
profitability of the project.  
In terms of irrigation system lay-out, an integrated model is recommended. The integrated model 
will  consist  of  keeping  some  areas  between  the  irrigated  areas    free  for  other  uses.  The  other 
uses include farm houses, animal sheds, manure production area, kitchen and nutritional gardens, 
etc. this will have advantages of keeping the farmers inside their farms and reduce the cost of 
transport of manure etc towards a quick and effective ownership.  
In terms of pumping stations, the detailed design will exploit a possibility of using two clusters of 
pumps  for  lower  command  area  and  upper  command  area,  in  case  direct  pumping  is  found 
feasible. This may improve a lot in terms of power consumption. 
Scheme  management  arrangements:  The  schemes  will  be  divided  into  smaller  units  of  about 
200ha  each,  to  facilitate  management  by  WUO.  The  units  may  come  together,  on  a  voluntary 
basis, to form an apex organization for more integration for economies of scale in crop production, 
marketing  and  operation  and  management.  The  farmers  will  pay  for  full  operation  and 
maintenance costs.   
Project Costing  
The investment costs for the recommended option are about US$25,740 million for the 2,010 ha 
(US$12,806/ha).  
Economic and Financial Analysis of Irrigation Schemes (EFA) 
The investments are expected to increase water availability and shift crop production from rain-
fed to irrigated agriculture. Increase in yields are expected accordingly, especially so considering 
the increased access to water during the dry season. Similarly, cropping intensity is also expected 
to increase. Water users are expected to contribute to the investment by paying about 15 percent 
of the initial investment cost for the construction/rehabilitation work and by covering O&M layouts. 
Command areas vary according to the irrigation scheme, orography, water reservoir capacity and 
the altitude of the water catchment area.  
The table below summarizes the key profitability indicators of the irrigation schemes within the 
Ndego and Kabare area analysed in the EFA carried out during the KIIWP2 design mission. Further 
details are presented in Annex 4. 
Summary of profitability results for irrigation schemes 
Model 
Command 
area 
Financial 
Economic 
NPV 
(Rwf 
mil.) @ 11% 
IRRf 
B/C 
ratio 
NPV  (Rwf 
mil.) @ 8% 
IRRe 
B/C 
ratio 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
irrigation 
Kibare  irrigation 
system 
Ihema  irrigation 
system 
Nasho 
system 
Kanyeganyenge 
Dam 
Irrigation 
Scheme 
Gishanda  Dam 
and 
Irrigation 
Scheme 
and 
570 ha 
2,303 
15%  1.15  4,179 
18% 
1.34 
700 ha 
2,671 
16%  1.15  5,000 
18% 
1.33 
740 ha 
1,332 
13%  1.07  4,206 
16% 
1.28 
150 ha 
91 
12%  1.03  151 
9% 
1.05 
125 ha 
111 
12%  1.04  159 
10% 
1.06 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) 
In line with IFAD’s project cycle processes, a SECAP review note was prepared during early design 
in August 2018. KIIWP  investments focus on irrigation and integrated  watershed management 
and planning, including integrated activities and investments on water harvesting and storage, 
irrigation  schemes  and  the  development  of  marshland  development.  Some  of  the  Project 
interventions – especially the irrigation subprojects – will impinge on ecologically sensitive areas 
(namely the Akagera National Park and marshlands), irrigate fields that are greater than 100ha 
in  area,  and  may  necessitate  a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  agrochemicals.  Thus,  as  per 
SECAP’s screening guidelines, the Project has been accorded an overall Category A classification. 
In 2018, the exact site boundaries and/or locations of interventions were not yet determined and 
feasibility studies were not yet carried out. However, in order to respond to the urgent demand 
of  the  Government  of  Rwanda  (GoR)  to  tackle  drought-related  issues  in  the  Eastern  Province 
within the shortest possible time, IFAD  together with GoR opted to implement KIIWP along two 
phases  in  order  to  facilitate  an  early  project  start  up.  During  the  design  of  KIIWP  1,  an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework was carried out to  guide the preparation of 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and related Environmental and Social Management 
Plans for pumped irrigation in Ndego and Kabare Sectors totaling 2000 ha, with an additional 275 
ha of land to be developed for marshland irrigation in Rwinkwavu, Kabare and Kabarondo Sectors; 
and farm ponds to be constructed for rainwater irrigation in Muruma Sector, amounting to 10ha 
of  land.  It  was  also  proposed  that  in  Ndego,  Gahini,  Murundi  and  Mwiri  Sectors,  7  new  valley 
tanks will be constructed, 15 valley tanks will be rehabilitated, and 20 boreholes will be installed 
to  provide  water  for  livestock  and  domestic  use.  It  was  expected  that  the  finalization  of  these 
studies will trigger the phase II dedicated to operationalization of large irrigation infrastructure 
activities and farm business development support.   
In September 2020, the ESIA for Ndego and Kabare sectors, including 3 command areas totaling 
2,010 ha were finalized and submitted to IFAD for review. A first virtual validation workshop was 
organized  on  28  September  2020.  The  workshop  gathered  representatives  from  Ministry  of 
Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI),  Ministry  of  Environment  (MoE),  Rwanda 
Environmental Management Authority (REMA), Rwanda Water Resources Board (RWB), Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB), FONERWA, Rwanda Meteorological Agency (RMA), Kayonza District, 
Rwanda Housing Authority, World Bank’s SPIU (implementing similar projects), CIAT and IFAD. 
The  participants  provided  substantive  comments  on  how  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  report, 
especially  data  related  to:  i)  ecological  baseline    of  the  project  area    in  consideration  of  the 
characteristics of Kayonza District  and Akagera National  Park as a high biodiversity hotspot; ii) 
water resources baseline including potential wetland areas; iii) climatic conditions; iv) biophysical 
& socio-economic status (such as land  use and cover, land tenure, etc.) for all proposed sitting 
for key irrigation infrastructures for all three irrigation block ( pumping stations, balancing storage 
tanks, etc.) and; iv) the methodologies used for analyses of alternatives.  
In November 2020, a revised version of ESIA for Ndego and Kabare was submitted to IFAD for 
final review. IFAD noted that the consultant had made commendable efforts in updating the report 
and  most  of  the  key  issues  were  addressed  and  included  in  the  revised  report.  Final  minor 
comments were provided and addressed subsequently. On 07 December 2020, the final report 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
was shared with IFAD Webteam for disclosure on IFAD-SECAP disclosed documents on the below 
link:   
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/esia_rwanda_kayonza.pdf/23278175-
56ba-b0a5-8e4e-634032cf2cc5 
The  ESIA  estimated  that  the  implementation  of  KIIWP  in  Ndego  and  Kabare  sectors,  including 
Ihema, Kibare and Nasho command areas, is likely to have several positive impacts. The positive 
impacts  from  the  proposed  activities  include  employment  creation  and  poverty  reduction,  soil 
fertility improvement and hillside restoration, rural development, irrigation efficiency, improved 
access roads, among others. Potential adverse impacts include reduced water level in lakes during 
balancing  storages  (BS)  filling,  soil  fertility  loss  due  to  land  husbandry  works,  surface  water 
pollution due to agrochemicals use, influx of people in search for employment, increased spread 
of waterborne diseases, incidence of crop pest and diseases, etc.  
The  adverse  impacts  from  the  irrigation,  land  husbandry,  access  roads  and  post-harvest 
infrastructures  (PHI)  constructions  can  be  mitigated.  The  proposed  mitigation  measures  to 
minimize negative impacts are the stabilization with vegetation of land husbandry infrastructures 
immediately after their construction; backfilling and stabilization of borrow pits; establishment of 
silt trap zone along drainage canals and around balancing storages; compensation of land, crops 
and trees on BS, borrow pits, PHI sites; regulating water abstraction for irrigation and other uses; 
adoption of water saving irrigation approach by beneficiaries, capacity building of beneficiaries in 
agrochemicals  application,  awareness  campaign  on  the  prevention  of  water  borne  disease  and 
hazards related to unrestricted entry into the BS; etc.  
Given  the  nature  and  location  of  the  project,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  biodiversity  hotspot,  and 
considering the identified adverse impacts and proposed management and monitoring plans, the 
ESIA team concluded that, the project is feasible and there are no major negative environmental 
and social impacts that could result from its implementation which cannot be mitigated. 
In  terms  of  resettlement  implications,  there  is  no  physical  resettlement  expected  from  project 
implementation. However, land acquisition is required for pressure pipes, pumping station and 
water balance storages. Furthermore, loss of income is expected during land husbandry works.  
The ESIA recommends the key following mitigations measures to be mainstreamed in all projects’ 
interventions:  
 
Integrated Pest Management for all blocks 
  Compensation  for  affected  assets  (e.g.  properties  due  to  irrigation,  LH,  PHI  and  access 
roads works) 
 
Implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
  Training of workers on occupational and health measures and adherence to them 
  Planting of native trees to replace the ones lost 
 
Irrigation water quality tests ( Level of bio-chemicals) 
  Adoption of adequate measures for controlling flow of downstream usage ( reparation of 
damages canals, structures and pipes) 
  Control of spread of water borne diseases (bi-annual survey in project sites) 
  Establishment of warning signposts around Balancing Storage and public awareness 
  Control of water pollution 
  Regulation of water level/ flow 
  Capacity building of Grievance redress committees (GRCs) in every block and monitor GRM 
process 
  Mitigation of soil erosion 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
  Preparation of Environmental management and Rehabilitation Plans for quarries, borrow 
pits and working areas 
  Preparation and Implementation of employment and recruitment Policy including code of 
conduct 
  Provision for workers occupational health and safety hazards 
  First aid Kits and first aid helper will be provided at each working area 
  Training of drivers and preparation of traffic management plan 
  Sensitization on methods of HIV/AIDS prevention 
  Rapid identification survey of nesting habitats and relocation areas 
  Preparation and implementation of borrow pits management plan 
  Specific area restricted to only authorize personnel, should be allocated for fuel storage 
  Alternative water points for livestock and domestic uses and Provision of though for cattle 
in case of damages during the construction phase 
  Sensitization on the importance of wild animals protection and reporting mechanism 
  Sensitization of community on ownership, sustainability and vandalism of infrastructure 
  Control of water weeds (mechanical and manual removal of weeds) 
Due to a delayed launch of KIIWP phase I and incidence of the COVID-19 pandemic, the feasibility 
studies and ESIAs for Kanyeganyege, Gishanda, 5000 ha in the pipeline as well as hydrological 
surveys for rehabilitation and construction of valley tanks and boreholes were not finalised at the 
time of the design of KIIWP phase II. SPIU informed the mission teams that these studies will be 
finalised as follows:  
Area 
Gishanda 
Activity 
Feasibility study  
ESIA 
Kanyeganyege 
Feasibility study  
ESIA 
Pipeline for 5000 ha in 
the Eastern Province 
Feasibility study 
ESIA 
of 
Hydrological survey 
Timeline 
- Contract will be signed in May 2021 
- Final report to be submitted to the SPIU by April 
2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalised in January 2022 
- Contract will be signed by July 2021 
- Final report to be submitted by April 2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalised in April 2022 
Contract will be signed in July 2021 
- Final report to be submitted by July 2022 
- will start after getting the pre-feasibility study 
- Final report will be finalised in July 2022 
- Initiated in February 2021 
Construction 
boreholes 
Valley tanks 
Construction phase  
Construction 
10 boreholes to be finalized by August 2021 
10 valley tanks rehabilitated to be finalized by July 
2021 
Republic of Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 2 (KIIWP2) 
Project Design Report 
8 
