Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AA
Authorized Allocation
A-CAT
Agriculture Credit Assessment Tool
AfCFTA
African continental free trade area
AFR
AFS
Access to Finance Rwanda
Access to Finance Specialist
AGRA
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa
ARCAFIM
Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
A2F
Access to Finance
BDF
Business Development Fund
BDS
Business Development Service
BMO
Business Membership Organizations
BP
Business Plan
BRD
Rwanda Development Bank
CACHET
CAGR
Climate and Commodity Hedging to Enable Transformation
Compound Annual Growth Rate
CC
CDAT
Climate Change
Commercialization and De-risking for Agricultural Transformation Project
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
CEPAR
Coffee Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda
CFO
Chief Finance Officer
CFSVA
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability and Nutrition Analysis Survey
CI
Core Indicator
CoA
Chart of Accounts
COO
Chief Operation Officer
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
CPIA
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
CPO
Country Programme Officer
CRA
Climate Risk Assessment
CWS
Coffee Washing Station
DA
Designated Account
DRC
Democratic Republic of Congo
EAC
East African Community
EFA
EGF
Economic and Financial Analysis
Export Growth Fund
EICV
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey
EIT
Efficient Irrigation Technologies
EIRR
Economic Internal Rate of Return
ENRM
Environmental and Natural Resources Management
ESMS
Environmental and Social Management System
E.O.
Essential Oils
ERR
Economic Rate of Return
ESCMP
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan
ESCMF
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework
EU
European Union
FaaB
Farming as a Business
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FCD
Financial Closing Date
FERWACOTHE
Rwanda Federation of Tea Cooperatives
FFS
Farmer Field School
FGD
Focus Group Discussion
FI
FM
Financial Institution(s)
Financial Management
FMS
Financial Management Systems
FPIC
Free Prior and Informed Consent
FS
FSS
Feasibility Study
Food Systems Summit
FSSC
Food Safety System Certification
FY
Fiscal Year
GALS
Gender Action Learning System
GAP
Good Agricultural Practices
GBV
Gender-Based Violence
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEWE
Gender Equality and Women Empowerment
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GIS
Geographic Information System
GoR
Government of Rwanda
GRM
Grievance Redress Mechanism
HACCP
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point system
HCoE
Horticulture Center of Excellence
HEGF
Horticulture Export Guarantee Facility
HGSFP
Home-Grown School Feeding Programme
HH
IA
ICB
Household
Internal Audit
International Competitive Bidding
ICT4D
Information and Communications Technology for Development
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFMIS
Integrated Financial Management Information System
IFR
IGA
IMF
IPM
IPRC
Interim Financial Reporting
Income Generating Activity
International Monetary Fund
Integrated Pest Management
Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges
IPRM
Integrated Project Risk Management Framework
KIIWP
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project
KM
Knowledge Management
KWAMP
Kirehe Community based Watershed Management Project
LF
LIC
LtB
Lead Farmer
Low Income Country
Letter to Borrower
MARKUP
Market Access Upgrade Programme
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MFI
MG
Micro Finance Institution
Matching Grant
MINAFFET
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
MINAGRI
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources
MINALOC
Ministry of Local Government
MINECOFIN
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MIS
Management Information System
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
MRL
Maximum Residue Level
MT
Metric Ton
MTR
Mid Term Review
NAEB
National Agricultural Export development Board
NAP
National Agricultural Policy 
NCB
National Competitive Bidding
NCCLCD
National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisation
NO
NPL
NPV
NST
NTR
No Objection
Non-Performing Loan
Net Present Value
National Strategy for Transformation
National Tea Register
OAG
Office of the Auditor General
ORMS
Operational Results Management System
P4P
Purchase for Progress Programme
PAP
Project Affected Person
PARM
Platform for Agricultural Risk Management
PASP
Climate-resilient Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme
PBGF
Performance Based Guarantee Facility
PCD
Project Completion Date
PCI
Policy Coordination Instrument
PCN
Project Concept Note
PCR
Project Completion Review
PDT
Programme Delivery Team
PEFA
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PFI
Partner Financial Institution
PFM
Public Financial Management
PH
PIP
Post-Harvest
Productivity Improvement Plan
PMP
Productivity Management Plan
PO
PP
Producer Organization
Procurement Plan
PPP
Public Private Partnership
PRICE
Project for Rural Income through Exports
PRISM
Partnership for Resilient and Inclusive Small Livestock Markets Programme
PRSP
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PS
Permanent Secretary
PSAC
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness project
PSC
Project Steering Committee
PSFP
Private Sector Financing Programme
PSTA
Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in Rwanda
PwD
Person with Disabilities
4P
Public Private Producers Partnership
R&D
Research and Development
RAB
Rwanda Agriculture Board
RBA
Rome-based Agency
RCA
Rwanda Cooperative Agency
RCCF
Rwanda Coffee Cooperatives Federation
RDDP
Rwanda Dairy Development Project
RDHS
Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey
RFHC
Rwanda Federation of Horticulture Cooperatives
RFP
RFS
Request for Proposals
Revolving Fertilizer Scheme
RGF
Rwanda Green Fund
RHWG
Rwanda Horticulture Working Group
RPPA
Rwanda Public Procurement Authority
RSB
Rwanda Standards Board
RSFF
Rwanda Sericulture Farmers Federation
RTA
RTC
RWF
RYAF
Rwanda Tea Association
Rwanda Trading Company
Rwandan Franc
Rural Youth in Agribusiness Forum
SACCOS
Savings and Credit Cooperative Society
SBCC
Social and Behaviour Change Communication
SC
Sub-Component
SCAA
Specialty Coffee Association of America
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SDF
Skills Development Fund
SDR
Special Drawing Rights
SEA
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SECAP
Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures
SKS
Smart Kungahara System
S-Mark
Rwanda Standardization Mark
SMART
Sustainable Market Alliance and Assets Creation for Resilient Communities and Gender Transformation 
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
SNV
Netherlands Development Organization
SO
Strategic Objective
SOE
Statement of Expenditure
SP
Service Provider
SPIU
Single Project Implementation Unit
TA
Technical Assistance
TAFY
Technical Assistance Facility
TAP
Turn Around Programme
ToC
ToR
ToT
Theory of Change
Terms of Reference
Training of Trainers
TVET
TSA
Technical, Vocational and Education Training (Institutes)
Treasury Single Account
USADF
United States African Development Foundation
UK
United Kingdom
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
US$
United States Dollar
VC
VfM
WA
Value Chain
Value for Money
Withdrawal Application
WFP
World Food Programme
In line with IFAD mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender Transformative ☑ Youth Sensitive ☐ Nutrition Sensitive ☐ Persons with Disabilities ☐ Indigenous Peoples ☑
Climate Finance ☑ Adaptive Capacity
1/31
Executive Summary
I. National Context
For almost two decades, Rwanda enjoyed a strong economic growth of more than 7 per cent per annum. Although COVID-19,
combined with subsequent measures to contain the spread of the virus, deepened the country’s economic slowdown such that real
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth considerably declined to -3.4 per cent in 2020, the Rwandan economy managed to rebound
the real GDP strongly by 10.9 per cent in 2021. With this recovery trend, the International Monetary Fund (IMF[1]) initially projected a
real GDP growth to 6.4 per cent in 2022, it is now uncertain with rapidly changing global environment and spillovers related to the
Ukraine crisis. The latest available data show an unemployment rate of 19.4 per cent in August 2021, compared with 15 per cent in
2019 as a result of shutdown of major businesses during the COVID-19 related lockdown and is likely to increase the poverty rate.
The unemployment rate among youth populations aged 16 to 30 are relatively higher (25.5%) than the rest group of aged 31 and
above (14.9%). The unemployment rate remained relatively higher among females (18.2%) as compared to males (15.0%).
Agriculture is still the major economic sector, which accounts for one-third of the GDP and employs over two-thirds of the Rwandan
population[2]. It accounts for a more significant part of the foreign exchange earnings from the exports of products, including; coffee,
tea, horticulture, hides and skins, and pyrethrum. Despite its importance, the sector continues to be predominantly subsistence and
low-income agriculture that 75 per cent of the farm production is from smallholder farmers[3]. Most farmers possess small plots of less
than 0.4 hectares (ha) on average[4], which negatively affects productivity and competitiveness. Agriculture is also affected by climate
change (CC), which leads to soil degradation and vulnerabilities of the majority of farmers’ dependent on rain-fed agriculture.
Development of agriculture value chains (VCs) and transition into high-value export markets remains a big challenge. Yet, strong
opportunities exist in the coffee, tea and horticulture sectors that enjoy favourable agro-climatic conditions and an investment-friendly
environment that led to classify them as priority export VCs. To support this transition, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) has been
proactively creating an enabling environment through strengthening of agricultural extension services, promoting export through the
National Agricultural Export Development Board (NAEB) established in 2017, creation of guarantee funds for small enterprises
development, and emphasizing the role of private sector and smallholder farmer cooperatives in the development of these export-
oriented VCs.
Despite substantial growth in agricultural production, food security and nutrition remain a concern. Small plot sizes, limited land
availability, low productivity in subsistence agriculture and low farmers’ purchasing power are some of the inter-related underlying
causes of food insecurity. These factors are accentuated by erratic weather patterns including intense rains in some locations and
recurrent droughts in others. Resource poor rural households who cultivate small plots are the most food insecure[5]. According to the
latest Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis[6] the Western Province has the highest prevalence of food insecure
households (29.9%), followed by the Southern Province (20.5%), Northern Province (17.8%) and Eastern Province (16.2%). While
stunting and undernourishment have been reducing at a steady pace, overall stunting rates remain high by international comparison
(38%), and 17.8% of 6-23 months old do not meet the Minimum Acceptable Diet[7].
The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4) guides public investments in the agriculture sector for the period 2018-24
and sets out the estimated required resources, contributing to the three National Strategy for Transformation (NST) pillars of
economic, social, and governance transformation towards the aspirations of Vision 2050. Under this vision, Rwanda aspires to attain
upper middle-income country status by 2035 and high-income status by 2050 with the intention of providing high quality livelihoods
and living standards to Rwanda citizens by mid-century. Vision 2050 stresses the importance of agro-processing and technology-
intensive agriculture with a commercial focus under its Pillar III: Transformation for Prosperity. The National Agricultural Policy (NAP
2018) sets the policy framework for a productive, green, and market-led agriculture sector towards 2030. The NAP responds to the
rapid changes experienced in the sector and anticipates key trends and concerns including pressure on land, the absorption of rural
youth into the labour market and the need to raise productivity of smallholder farmers.
II. Rationale for IFAD involvement
IFAD as a trusted partner. IFAD has been a key contributor to the development of Rwandan agricultural exports in both traditional
and emerging commodities. Recently closed Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) has strengthened the capacities of a
wide range of players: smallholder farmers, enterprise-oriented cooperatives, rural SMEs, service providers, rural institutions and
government agencies. Smallholder farmers have been supported to access markets as well as progress in the value chain through
aggregation and value addition interventions at the grassroot level. PRICE has also introduced a wide range of new and innovative
practices which will be scaled up under PSAC.
Building on the rich experience and lessons learned from the implementation of the Project for Rural Income through Exports
(PRICE), PSAC intends to be a transformative project focused on selected export-driven VCs (coffee, tea and various strategic
commodities in the horticulture sector). Producing origin based, certified, and premium quality products for the export market
provides important opportunities for smallholder farmers and producers organizations to enhance their income and revenue streams.
Potential market demand and opportunities. Since 2008, increasing investments in horticulture for export have started to yield
returns for Rwanda. However, there is considerable scope to further develop the horticulture sector, as demand continues to grow for
specialty products like chili peppers, macadamia nuts, french beans, avocadoes, etc. In tea, although Rwanda has already raised its
average yields, smallholder farmers and young cooperatives still need support to achieve their full potential. The sector employs over
50,000 tea growers, mostly smallholder farmers[8] in the form of co-operatives and their sustainable partnerships with tea processing
factories are key to the growth of this sector. As for coffee, the commodity is highly strategic as it represents in itself up to 25 per cent
of Rwandan formal export earnings and it involves 355,000 growers[9]. Despite a steady increase in the exports of specialty coffee,
there is still a need to rejuvenate old plantations, enhance climate smart productivity, strengthen producers’ organizations, and ensure
that all coffee washing stations (CWS) are used at optimum capacity to deliver sustainable incomes to coffee growers.
2/31
PSAC focus will be on improving the competitiveness of the targeted VCs through (i) promoting climate smart productivity enhancing
technologies; (ii) reduction of post-harvest losses; (iii) infrastructural development; (iv) use of climate-resilient agricultural practices;
(v) backward and forward market linkages; (vi) enhanced quality control/assurance to ascertain compliance with export market
requirements; and (vii) access to financial services by using a value chain approach. This approach is also expected to enhance
women and youth leadership and advocate for smallholder sensitive policy formulations.
The creation of new marketing opportunities through export support will boost economic prosperity in the country and help to reduce
poverty, food insecurity and the burden of malnutrition. In addition, by promoting climate-resilient practices, locally adapted and
resource-efficient, the project will contribute to climate change mitigation strategies.
III. Project description
A. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
The project goal is ‘to increase incomes of the rural poor, by supporting inclusive and sustainable agri-exports Value Chains’. The
project development objective is ‘to support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-driven value chains, by increasing their
climate resilient productive capacity and market access’.
The project outcomes will be achieved through the implementation of three inter-related components: (A) Enhance smallholders’
climate smart production and productivity in selected export-driven value chains; (B) Enabling business environment along selected
export-driven value chains; and (C) Policy support and coordination. Due to the specific features of each export-driven VCs, their
respective interventions and implementation modalities across the components will be adapted to close identified gaps and ensure
optimum competitiveness.
Programme area (Geographic targeting). The project will target a total of fourteen (14) districts, with a particular emphasis on the
Western and Southern regions which has some of the most vulnerable rural population. Region wise targeted districts will be:
Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, Nyabihu and Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe, Ruhango and Nyanza in
Southern Province; Rulindo and Musanze in Northern Province and Rwamagana and Bugesera in Eastern Province. The final
selection of the districts and their respective sectors has been based on the following criteria: (i) high poverty rates and high rates of
food insecurity; (ii) comparative advantage for the development of targeted export-driven VCs, such as the existence of a traditional
production basin, the proximity of a strong market, and favourable agro-climatic conditions; and (iii) alignment and development of
strategic partnerships with other development partners in Rwanda to avoid the duplication of investments and to seek
complementarity among the proposed interventions.
Within the targeted districts the new plantations will be located on elevated areas. Currently the lower-lying plantations are already
“marginal” in terms of producing quality tea due to rising temperatures and that the rising temperatures will further reduce the quality
of tea and coffee as current growing areas will become too hot for growing the current varieties.
The planning for new plantations will take care of climate uncertainty. The climate-resilient innovation is to plan future plantations in
locations that take account of the warmer climate such as higher, cooler regions.
Target groups. The main categories of beneficiaries will be targeted based on a number of mechanisms that are sensitive to the
various needs and constraints of smallholder women and men farmers, as well as youth and specific vulnerable groups. PSAC will
include complementary interventions meant to support its target groups’ participation in commercial and inclusive VCs:(i) rural
smallholder farmers, grouped as much as possible along Producer Organizations (POs)[10], with a strong focus on women and youth;
(ii) off-takers processors/exporters, who can be cooperatives, individuals or rural SMEs. The targeting mechanisms will be based on
the Ubudehe system, as is currently done for all IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda.
The estimated main direct beneficiary group will be composed of 56,695 households (approximately 255,128 household
members[11], of which 73,704 persons receiving direct project services), giving preferential attention to Categories 2 and 3[12]
amongst whom the project will give priority to women (40%) (and among them 20% to be women-headed households) and youth[13]
(30%). Simultaneously engagement of the poorest and the most vulnerable households e.g. indigenous communities and Persons
with Disability (PwD) will be explored.
Gender equality, women and youth empowerment. PSAC will address gender disparities and the key constraints, which limit
women’s participation in the VCs by: (i) ensuring that women and men have equal access to project’s interventions including
addressing unbalanced workloads and targeting 40 per cent women as direct beneficiaries and 20 per cent women-headed
households; (ii) increasing women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level; (iii) increasing women’s financial
literacy, encouraging their economic empowerment and participation throughout the selected VCs; iv) and promoting gender
transformative outcomes through addressing discriminatory social norms and structures. Towards this, the enhanced gender action
learning system (GALS+) with a focus on FFS will be used as a complementary approach to VC development. Specific interventions
will reflect the unique roles, needs and priorities of women and youth to create employment and income generating activities (IGA)
along community-based nurseries, lead farmers and certification facilitators.
The project will also invest in both youth agripreuneurship (start-ups and business acceleration) and youth access to wage
employment; capitalize on the youth employment ecosystem created by IFAD’s agribusiness hub grant implemented by Kilimo Trust
in Rwanda; and tap into the agribusiness hubs dual training (on irrigation, horticulture, mechanization, etc) and “matching services”
(matching skilled unemployed youth with potential employers).
3/31
B. Project Components
The project outcomes will be achieved through the implementation of three inter-related components: (A) Enhance smallholders’
climate smart production and productivity in selected export-driven value chains; (B) Enabling business environment along selected
export-driven value chains; and (C) Policy support and coordination.
Component A - Investments to enhance climate smart production and productivity of selected export-driven value chains
(approx. US$  38.35 million)
Sub-component A.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity
PSAC will focus on expansion and rehabilitation of plantation areas of 8,242 ha while adopting innovative climate-resilient
technologies and practices. It includes 4,132 ha for coffee; 2,410 ha for tea; and 1,700 ha for horticulture and essential oil. Except
macadamia[14], community-based nursery raising approach will be used which will also create space for women and youth in VC
development. Prior consent from the farmers will be taken to confirm their interest in replacing / rehabilitating their coffee bushes. In
tea expansion, the aim is to reach a minimum 1,000ha consolidated cooperative tea farms serving single tea factory to strengthen co-
operative and factory business performance, and also to get an assurance from tea factories of higher pay to farmers producing green
leaf for specialty or new tea products. For horticulture, the approach of consolidated plantation of fruit trees with titles in the name of
smallholders will be used to facilitate production at scale, manage certification processes, improved access to market, and develop
necessary facilities. Under Horticulture, the project will engage in french beans and chili value chains for export.
The Revolving Fertilizer Scheme (RFS) for tea plantations started under PRICE will be scaled-up with additional investment of US$ 2
million and incorporating lessons learned based on its detailed performance review. The project will support RAB to release the GxE
clones which are adaptable to different agro-climatic zones and develop tea seedling production in proximity to project supported co-
operatives. The coffee and horticulture plantation will also be supported by providing seedlings and inputs for plantation and
maintenance support. Considering the poor survival rate of Macadamia seedlings at nursery stage, international experts’ support will
be taken to improve the seedlings’ survival rate. Simultaneously, varietal trials of essential oil plant – Patchouli will be conducted using
selected Indonesian Patchouli varieties to improve productivity.
PSAC will promote climate-resilient innovations and practices as well as energy and resources efficiency along the selected value
chains. This will be done through a combination of tailor-made capacity building and investments meant to address the main
challenges observed in the selected VCs. One of the prominent interventions include 100 per cent self-sufficiency for wood fuel in tea
factories by increasing the capacity of tea farmers to produce and sell wood fuel through creation of agroforestry zones. Other
climate-sensitive interventions are promotion of chili solar dryers, efficient irrigation technologies (EIT), soil and water testing kits for
CWS, eco-friendly coffee drying technologies, etc. It will also introduce environment friendly practices such as live mulching material
and intercrops in coffee plantation, cultivation of tomato, garlic, onion, carrot for crop rotation in horticulture as environmentally
friendly practices as well as to ensure food and nutrition security.
Sub-component A.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities and equipment at cooperative and exporters’ level
PSAC will address the key infrastructure facilities and equipment gaps that are hindering smallholder cooperatives/POs in each
export-driven VCs through different modes of financing. The critical infrastructure development to improve the efficiency of VCs and
can benefit the majority of smallholders in the VC directly or indirectly are fully supported by the project with the beneficiaries’ in-kind
contribution (e.g. land) or cash contribution for maintenance of the facilities. The fully supported interventions include – i) Procurement
of instruments and software viz. soil and water testing kit, Palintest to control the level of effluents in wastewater at CWS; electronic
weighing scale that will be used by leaf collection teams per truck to record and receipt weight of green tea leaves per farmer and
software based database of farmers records of  the quantity of leaves supplied as well as payments made by cooperatives; ii) Hangar
constructions for decentralized collection of produce; iii) Demonstration of eco-friendly dryers to improve the quality processed coffee
beans so that CWS can adopt the new technologies. iv) Avocado grading line at NAEB packhouse to manage increasing volumes
and adhere to strict export guidelines and; v) Trucks for tea co-operatives for quick collection of green tea leaves and delivery to
factories.
PSAC will support two small scale investments for climate-resilient technologies (known as CAT 1) – i) protective agriculture (e.g.
greenhouse, walk-in tunnel, shade nets, etc.), and ii) coffee drying technologies through Performance Based Grant Facility
(PBGF)[15]. PBGF involves compulsory matching grant to loan. The grant will be provided with a different benefit package for men
(50%) and women (70%) with a ceiling of US$ 5,000. Efficient irrigation technologies (EIT) initially considered under CAT 1 support,
which is envisaged to ensure irrigation for fruit plantation, will be supported through similar existing schemes under the RAB led
Small-Scale Irrigation Technologies (SSIT) program and the upcoming WB funded CDAT project.
The project will also support medium-scale investments for co-operatives (known as CAT 2) and exporters (known as CAT 3) through
various matching-grant (MG) windows[16]. These investments will include: i) Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire
certification; ii) Medium-scale protective agriculture viz. greenhouse, walk-in tunnel, shade nets etc., and iii) Proper effluent and solid
waste handling units. The grant support will be 50 per cent for cooperatives (CAT 2) and 40 per cent for exporters (CAT 3) with a
grant ceiling of US$ 30,000 and US$ 24,000, respectively.
PSAC will promote strategic investments in tea to boost value addition to increase the national revenues from tea and increase
farmers’ take-home income. It will support the undertaking of a full economic and financial analysis (EFA) and the development of
Business Plans (BPs) for the promotion of secondary processing of tea e.g. a Blending & Exporting enterprise owned by Rwanda Tea
Association (RTA) and partners. It will then widely disseminate the results of this EFA and BPs, for potential investors to come in and
invest jointly with RTA.
Component B - Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains (approx. US$ 17.94 million)will
enhance competitiveness and sustainability by improving smallholder VC actors’ access to advisory services, sustainable markets,
and financial services.
Sub-component B.1 - Capacity building of Producer Organizations
4/31
Capacity building of beneficiaries will remain a central theme to PSAC’s overall approach. Support will be provided to established
cooperatives especially which are weak as well as new cooperatives, out-growers schemes, and farmers groups. The cooperatives in
coffee and tea are matured whereas horticultural cooperatives are still at nascent stage. PSAC will partner with Cordaid (formerly
ICCO) for i) Co-operative strengthening which focuses on Governance, and financial management; ii) Crosscutting issues across all
the VCs such as business management (BDS, FaaB, market access), gender and youth in value chain. It will also develop specific
tools to assess the capacity of cooperatives and accordingly provide required support for strengthening.
The FFS approach, strengthened by proximity coaching, will be mainstreamed along all technical capacity building, starting from
seedling plantation[17] and up to post-harvest handling and processing. Each FFS will have two lead farmers of which at least one will
be a woman. Also, there will be one person trained in GALS+, who will work closely with lead farmers. PSAC will engage with all the
producers through more than 1,600 FFS (in horticulture, FFS will be combined with the “innovative training” approach developed
under PRICE, that involves directly the off-taker (exporter) for the macadamia, avocado, french beans and chili crops). FFS coaches
and lead farmers will act as an interface between the PSAC implementation team and project participants. Cordaid will develop a
FaaB module for FFS and impart training to coaches and lead farmers which will facilitate in turning subsistence farming into
sustainable farming business enterprises and increasing farmers’ capacity to understand commercial farming. It will also build their
capacity in access to the market by working on appropriate supply contracts and product quality improvement to meet export
standards.
PSAC activities will expand women’s economic empowerment through access to and control over productive and household assets,
strengthen women’s decision-making and address inequitable workloads between women and men. Use of GALS+ will be used to
tackle discriminatory social norms and to generate gender transformative changes and improved intra-household gender relations. Its
interventions will be focused on FFS and will closely work with lead farmers, proximity FFS coaches and district teams.
Besides GALS+, PSAC will focus on capacity building of women and youth through specific skills and knowledge-based trainings so
that they can play a key role in VC development. PSAC will engage with experienced agencies / Service Providers (SPs) to avail the
required services including assessing the possibility of building on the existing trainings already running in the Agribusiness Hub
grant. The specific interventions include - i) Training of selected lead farmers and operators of protective agriculture units through the
Horticulture Center of Excellence (HCoE)[18]; ii) Training of women and youth in nursery raising and grafting techniques to ensure
access to good quality seedlings locally through RAB and district teams; and iii) Cordaid will develop a cross-cutting women and youth
inclusivity approach to ensure their participation in the VCs and in accessing finance. It will identify new opportunities for women and
youth in agricultural services, develop tailored financial products and impart appropriate trainings. The efforts will help women and
youth to emerge as proximity business SPs (e.g. equipment maintenance, business planning, market linkages, filing taxes etc.) and
entrepreneurs.
PSAC will engage with local and international institutions to improve the services for smallholders and their organizations such as i) In
tea, the management and capital capacity of Ferwacothe (Union of tea co-operatives) will be enhanced in order to reduce cooperative
operations costs through development and adoption of a common services model[19] to serve all cooperatives; ii) In coffee, PSAC will
support the coffee zone policy in association with local district authorities, which will help to increase coffee cherry volume as well as
spike in performance of CWS due organized and formalized groups becoming loyal to CWS; iii) In horticulture, PSAC will also engage
with Heifer International for climate smart and resilient horticulture production (i.e. tomato, garlic, onion, carrots) focusing on the
domestic/regional market, facilitating crop rotation and improving food and nutritional security. Heifer International will work on product
diversification and access to markets. It will leverage US$ 1 million Heifer Impact Capital Fund (HIC) to provide additional farmer-
friendly financing in the form of Working Capital, Equipment Lease and Guarantees etc., and also to complement Cordaid’s efforts to
develop new financial products.
Sub-component B.2 - Backward and forward market linkages
Sub-component B.2 comprises quality control, access to finance, market promotion and facilitation of market linkages with
international buyers.
PSAC will build on the experience of IFAD Agribusiness Hub approach in Rwanda to strengthen the capacity of youth through training
and internships as internal inspectors, some of which may become certified auditors. It will provide fillip to market driven certifications
for which the support will be provided on cost sharing basis. It will also strive to get accreditation to existing agro-export testing
facilities of NAEB through technical support, calibration of equipment/instruments and upgrading the observed gaps for compliance.
In order to facilitate the targeted value chain stakeholders’ access to financial services, PSAC with its partner Cordaid will: (i) support
Participating Financial Institutions (PFI) quality and outreach of rural financial services by improving knowledge about project VCs,
developing innovative agri-finance products for entrepreneurs / exporters and smallholders e.g. equipment leasing, asset financing,
and potentially by establishment of agent networks in PSAC target areas; (ii) build the capacity of the target groups to access financial
services by developing and rolling out the FFS module for financial literacy involving selected FIs.; (iii) facilitate the PFIs to access
resources from private and public sector wholesale financiers for on-lending to PSAC targeted VCs. In overall, the access to finance
strategy will be aligned with PSAC VC interventions including matching grants and the introduction of best production practices, to
ensure sustainable long term development impact.
PSAC, through its business development services, will overall ensure that the smallholder farmers groups / cooperatives are actively
engaged with the exporters through mutually benefiting supply contracts. Backward linkages with input suppliers (esp. seeds,
fertilizers, packaging materials) will also be facilitated to ensure timely and affordable delivery of key inputs.
5/31
Strategies need to be developed to promote the existing brands (Rwanda coffee brand, Rwanda Tea brand, and Rwanda Fresh brand
in fruits and vegetables) that display the uniqueness of the Rwandan produce. In Coffee, it involves implementation of appellation
findings, enhancing production of traceable certified coffees, participation in the National, Regional and International coffee cupping
events and competitions, using e-marketing forum, etc. In tea, the national tea market strategy will be developed to exploit inherent
qualities and cultural attributes of the Rwandan tea. Simultaneously, an online tea trading platform will be operationalized which will
help producers to reach new market outlets as well as facilitate brand promotion on a global scale. In horticulture, that is a more
nascent sector, PSAC will support exporters - to improve understanding of the international markets and quality control through
trainings, to participate in international horticultural promotional events and to hire market agents/facilitators, posted in a few key
diplomatic missions (e.g. Europe, Middle east Asia, Central Africa) to facilitate in-country market intelligence and trade procedures in
partnership with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MINAFFET). PSAC will support the HEGF piloted under
PRICE and hosted by BRD with targeted technical assistance for increased uptake of the facility, and provide additional support to
extend guarantees.
PSAC in partnership with Cordaid, Mobile network operators (MNOs) and FinTech will promote digitization of financial services such
as enabling mobile payments through farmer mobile phones linked to their SACCO accounts for tea farmers, digitize core operations
and services of the SACCOs using core banking software, digitize farmers’ profiles and supply contract details in FIs to improve
access to finance, reduce costs (of transaction and travel) and improve efficiency of operation of SACCOs and MFIs for financing
VCs.
PSAC will leverage the special initiative under development launched by IFAD Private Sector Advisory and Investment Unit
(CACHET: Climate and Commodity Hedging to Enable Transformation) to build price risk management capacities of local
cooperatives, especially in the target VCs.
Component C - Policy support and coordination (approx. US$ 6.60 million)
Sub-component C.1 - Enabling policy environment
PSAC will influence policies and practices mainly through i) evidence based advocacy to share the best practices on financial services
and intercropping of banana and essential oil plants in coffee; ii) research and analysis to overcome bottlenecks in access to
packaging material, increasing air-freight capacity and maintaining affordable rates, and supply contact-based business models; iii) 
supporting existing and new VC stakeholder platforms such as horticulture exporters’ working groups, coffee roundtables to address
the gaps in value chain development and providing inputs to policy formulation; and iv) working closely with MIGEPROF to identify
possible entry points for engagement in-country policy frameworks related to gender equality in the agricultural sector (e.g. support in
GBV mitigation, ensuring new agro-export policies are gender responsive based on lessons learned from PSAC and other projects).
Sub-component C.2 – Specific support to VC platforms
In coffee, PSAC will support Coffee Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR), a business membership organization
for public-private dialogue to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the coffee VC.
In tea, there are three main areas of support: i) consolidation of the implementation framework of three platforms - National tea
register, National tea brand and E-commerce, developed under PRICE but still incomplete. Support will be provided to NAEB to
consolidate implementation activities including the National Tea Code of Practice and Awards where producers and buyers would
participate as a means of building trust in the brand (supply side activities), and quality of services (buyer side activities); ii) define and
formalize the commercial relations between tea factories and cooperatives, broaden tea cooperative membership rules, define tea
planting zones (putting limit on catchment radius between tea farms and factories) and develop profile of an ideal tea farmer to ensure
minimum  economic tea production per farmer; and iii) development of a strategic roadmap to increase the levels of value addition
and boost earnings of cooperatives and factories by NAEB.
In Horticulture, district level VC platforms will be formed to identify ground level problems, solutions and develop local leadership in
VC involving women and youth. These platforms will be initially convened by the District Director of Agriculture and facilitate the
process in such a way that a natural structure for the platform emerges over a period of time.
PSAC will also provide internship opportunities for youth to learn about value chains, follow-up with farmers, quality control aspects
for international markets, role of financial institutions etc. while engaging value chain actors.
IV. Project costs and financing
The total cost of PSAC has been estimated at US$ 62.89 million. IFAD will contribute US$ 29.98 million (equivalent to EUR 28.89
million). The contribution of beneficiaries and the private sector (from Component A) is estimated at US$ 5.67 million[20]. The
contribution of implementing partners (Cordaid and Heifer International) is so far estimated at US$ 1.91 million. The Government
contribution is estimated at US$ 5.41 million (equivalent to EUR 5.22 million)[21]. There remains a financing gap of US$ 19.92 million
which is to be potentially financed by the Government of Spain (GoS).
Project benefits. The beneficiaries are expected to experience increase in income as a direct result of the: (i) increased volume and
value of targeted commodities exported from Rwanda; (ii) increased value of targeted commodities exported from Rwanda; (iii)
increased access to advisory services, market and financial services which facilitated smallholder’s inclusion in sustainable export
driven VCs; (iv) increased employment opportunities either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; (v)
improved institutional and policy environment for export driven VCs selected under PSAC.
Investment in PSAC was found to be economically viable with expected to generate a positive  ENPV of RwF 27.8 billion (US$ 27.01
million) resulting into an EIRR of 19 per cent. Therefore, based on such results, the project should be undertaken. A sensitive analysis
was also carried out on the effects of changes in costs and expected benefits on expected viability of the project, and based on the
results, it is observed that PSAC costs should not increase beyond 110 per cent. Any increase in costs above 110 per cent will
require additional benefits to be included into the project. At the same time, expected PSAC benefits should not reduce by more than
57 per cent in order to ensure that the project continues to be economically viable
6/31
PSAC has potential to positively contribute to export volumes by increasing the volumes and value of targeted VC crops exported.
The US$ 62.89 million investment in order to achieve the desired financial and economic benefits will be fully recovered through
export earnings.
V. Exit strategy, environmental, social and climate risk classification
Exit strategy and Sustainability. The Project’s Exit Strategy is embedded in: i) the strategic approach of working directly with the
Government’s agriculture export board (project VCs are part of its current strategic plan) along with administrative structures at district
and sector levels which can continue to provide extension services; ii) building capacity of each category of VC stakeholders so that
they can gain knowledge, access to resources and interconnect to develop a strong chain while promoting gender equality and youth
engagement; iii) improving the competitiveness of export-driven value chains while creating power in markets for smallholders in
terms of enhanced productivity and quality, aggregation of smallholder production at scale, strong market linkages development,
development of infrastructure and services as well as creation of enabling policy environment; and iv) developing detailed exit plan
during the mid-term of the project and leaving a window of one to two years for consolidation of activities and beginning of a “gradual
exit” process which can be completed by the end of the 6th.
Environment and social classification. The environment and social category for PSAC is substantial due to the potential risks
associated with impacts on biodiversity, labour, and working conditions. The potential adverse impacts are predictable, will be
localized, mostly reversible and can be managed with appropriate measures. The activities will take place in non-sensitive areas and
infrastructure being developed will be small scale.
Climate risk classification. The climate risk classification for PSAC is moderate. The main climate change risks facing the
smallholders in the PSAC target areas include rising temperatures and rainfall variability with more intense rainfall in some areas,
shorter rain seasons and potential droughts in some locations. A detailed climate risk analysis (CRA) was done during the design and
this will be conducted during the implementation together with the rest of the SECAP risk management instruments.
VI. Implementation of organizational framework
The PSAC implementation arrangements are meant to ensure optimal use of human resources and smooth coordination between
MINAGRI’s institutions[22]. In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) under
MINAGRI will be established for PSAC. The Lead Implementation Agency will be NAEB, under the responsibility of its Chief Executive
Officer (CEO). The district authorities along with district and sector agriculture staff under the authority of MINALOC will play a key
role to ensure smooth implementation (including provision of extension services), monitoring and coordination of PSAC interventions
at field level.
The project acknowledges the key role of the district authorities and will allocate necessary resources to ensure smooth
implementation, monitoring and coordination of PSAC interventions. Bringing in the district and sector agriculture staff under the
authority of Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) will be particularly important to ensure continuous and sustainable extension
services that will further protect the project’s investments. The project will also be engaged into a specific partnership by signing a
global MOU between NAEB and identified partners (Heifer International and Cordaid) who will be a co-financier but also a key
implementing partner. A detailed AWPB reflecting activities to be implemented by them and related costs (including co-financing) will
be developed every fiscal year.
Financial management arrangements. On the basis of the other IFAD managed projects by GoR and in line with project
implementation and management framework. The existing financial management staff at NAEB, SPIU, and District are in place which
would contribute to guarantee quick start-up of project activities.
Procurement arrangements. A Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) which included a risk assessment of both the country level and the
project institutional dimensions of public procurement was undertaken. The PRM returned a low inherent risk. A procurement plan for
the first 18 months has been prepared. A Procurement Officer will be recruited to support the procurement functions under the PSAC
project and will be reporting to the Sr. Procurement Officer at the SPIU. For better coordination, the Procurement Officer will be
stationed at NAEB offices in order to coordinate with the rest of the project team. 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  The district level NAEB coordinators will work jointly with the District authorities to ensure
activities are implemented as per work plan and specifications. The Project M&E Specialist will provide the necessary guidance and
oversight role to ensure the data capture forms are duly filled and data points disaggregated as per LF requirements. The forms will
be filled by the SPs/contractors (including district level agronomists and other extension agents) directly interfacing with the
beneficiaries at the district level.
The M&E Specialist will ensure adequate monitoring systems are used to address potential overlap of beneficiaries with other similar
development projects in the respective target areas. Similar to monitoring arrangements in the PRICE project, NAEB will assign
dedicated technical staff to monitor activities to ensure they are implemented as per recommended specifications. The Project M&E
Specialist will commission bi-annual Data Quality Assurance (DQAs) missions and coordinate the implementation of targeted studies,
including: baseline, annual outcome surveys, survey for annual survival rate estimation and reasons of new plantation, Mid-Term and
End Term surveys to assess progress on key outcome and impact level indicators.
PSAC will also collect qualitative information through annual qualitative surveys on specific issues, case studies and Focus Group
Discussions, as required. The information will be collected by the project coordinators and SPs as per the guidance of the M&E
Specialist. The qualitative evidence will generate insights on the behaviour change and assess whether interventions are happening
and delivering changes as envisioned in the project’s theory of change.
Knowledge management (KM). KM will be coordinated by KM Specialist at NAEB. KM will serve as a basis for scaling up of
successes, provide the analytical basis to resolve challenges, and help to adapt activities to changing social and economic
circumstances in the target areas and value chains. A KM action plan will be prepared to (i) identify knowledge gaps and prioritization
of knowledge products to be developed; (ii) ease the scaling up of best practices in the different sectors and interventions or
repackaging of innovative approaches developed elsewhere; (iii) disseminate know-how based on available communication tools
(newsletter, brochures, websites, radio, knowledge gained through FFS trainings etc).
7/31
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Political Context. Rwanda continued to enjoy political stability and general security, low levels of corruption with liberal legal
frameworks in place. The Presidential election will take place in 2024 and a significant political and social unrest remains unlikely
in the foreseeable future. Rwanda has adopted the National Decentralization Policy[23] which promotes good governance,
reduction of poverty as well as efficient, effective, and accountable service delivery.
Socio-economic context. For almost two decades, Rwanda enjoyed a strong economic growth of more than 7 per cent per
annum. However, COVID-19 combined with subsequent measures to contain the spread of the virus, deepened the country’s
economic slowdown such that real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth considerably declined to -3.4 per cent in 2020.
Although the outlook remains highly uncertain, the International Monetary Fund[24] (IMF) projected a rebound in real GDP growth
to 6.4 per cent in 2022, albeit below potential. The latest available data show an unemployment rate of 19.4 per cent in August
2021, compared with 15 per cent in 2019[25]. The increased unemployment rate is due to the shutdown of major businesses
during the COVID-19 related lockdown and is likely to increase the poverty rate. The unemployment rate among youth
populations aged 16 to 30 are relatively higher (25.5%) than those aged 31 and above (14.9%). The unemployment rate
remained relatively higher among females (18.2%) as compared to males (15.0%).
Rwanda’s debt remains sustainable with a moderate risk of debt distress[26]. The IMF’s Policy Coordination Instrument (PCI)[27]
continues to support the authorities’ efforts in the macroeconomic and structural reform agenda and ongoing economic recovery,
while also ensuring policies are in place to reduce debt vulnerabilities and maintain macroeconomic and financial stability[28].
A strong focus on home-grown policies and initiatives has contributed to significant improvements in access to services and
human development indicators. Measured by the national poverty line, poverty declined from 77 per cent in 2001 to 55 per cent
in 2017[29], while life expectancy at birth improved from 29 in the mid-1990s to 69 in 2022. The official inequality measure, the
Gini index, declined from 52.0 in 2005 to 43.7 in 2016 (most recently measured)[30]. The incidence of poverty continues to be
higher in rural areas (32.1%) than in urban areas (13.4%).
Food security and nutrition. Despite substantial growth in agricultural production, food security and nutrition remain a concern.
Small plot sizes, limited land availability, low productivity in subsistence agriculture and low farmers’ purchasing power are some
of the inter-related underlying causes of food insecurity. These factors are accentuated by erratic weather patterns including
intense rains in some locations and recurrent droughts in others. Resource poor rural households (HH) who cultivate small plots
are the most food insecure[31]. According to the latest Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis[32], 16.8 per
cent of Rwandan household are food-insecure, with the highest prevalence in the Western Province (29.9%), followed by the
Southern Province (20.5%), Northern Province (17.8%) and Eastern Province (16.2%). While stunting and undernourishment
have been reducing at a steady pace, overall stunting rates remain high by international comparison (38%), and 17.8 per cent of
6-23 months old do not meet the Minimum Acceptable Diet[33].
Agricultural and rural development context. The agriculture sector accounts for one-third of GDP and employs over two-thirds
of the Rwandan population (70%)[34]. Despite its importance, the sector continues to be predominantly subsistence and low-
income agriculture. Most farmers possess small plots of less than 0.4 ha on average[35], which negatively affects productivity and
competitiveness. Agriculture is also affected by climate change (CC), which leads to soil degradation and vulnerabilities of the
majority of farmers’ dependent on rain-fed agriculture.
Development of agriculture value chains (VCs) and transition into high-value export markets remains a big challenge. Yet, strong
opportunities exist in the coffee, tea and horticulture sectors (see Box 1), which enjoy favourable agro-climatic conditions and an
investment-friendly environment that resulted in them being classified as priority export VCs. To support this transition, the
Government of Rwanda (GoR) has been proactively: (i) creating an enabling environment through strengthening of agricultural
extension services; (ii) promoting export, through the National Agricultural Export Development Board (NAEB); (iii) establishing
guarantee funds for small enterprises development; and (iv) emphasizing the role of  the private sector and smallholder farmer
cooperatives in the development of these export-oriented VCs.
Box 1. Export opportunities in selected Value Chains
8/31
Coffee: Coffee is highly strategic as it represents up to 25 per cent of Rwandan formal export earnings and it involves over 355,000
growers. Rwanda exports over 95 per cent of national coffee production. Despite a steady increase in the exports of specialty coffee,
there is still a need to rehabilitate old plantations, enhance climate smart productivity, strengthen producers’ organizations, and
ensure that all coffee washing stations (CWS) are used at optimum capacity to deliver sustainable incomes to coffee growers. The
global consumption trend of coffee indicates an upward trajectory. It creates a great opportunity for the specialty class of Rwanda’s
coffee due to its consistent quality. However, it is yet to achieve its full potential as a competitive specialty grade product, which is
differentiated and strategically placed in international markets, due to lower volume of production. This is evident from the fact that
highest coffee production was 38.34 MT in 1992/93 and to the level of 20 to 23 MT during the last decade. The National Strategy for
Transformation (NST 1) has targeted fully washed coffee at 80 per cent of total production by 2024 with increase in productivity to
4kg per tree (MINAGRI, 2018) to reach to the level of 1992/93 coffee season production. The synergetic effect will lead to sizable
increase in income of smallholder coffee producers which is the core rationale for support through PSAC.
Tea: In tea, although Rwanda has already raised its average yields, smallholder farmers and young cooperatives still need support
to achieve their full potential. It is worth noting that the tea sector employs over 50,000 tea growers, mostly smallholder farmers. As
demonstrated in the recently closed PRICE, sustainable partnerships between cooperatives and tea processing factories are key to
the growth of this sector, and this requires continuous cooperative capacity building to ensure sustained productivity gains. Some of
the key challenges that limit the growth of Rwanda’s tea sector and impact on poverty levels are: i) deficit in fertilizer access and
application; ii) low value addition; iii) Low productivity of small-scale tea plantations; and iv) higher deductions in farmers’ incomes
and gaps in policy frameworks.
Horticulture: Horticulture crop VCs selected for PSAC are based on the list of priority crops identified by NAEB and its further
assessment from the perspective of PSAC target group – smallholders, women and youth. The macadamia, avocado, french beans,
chili and essential oils show strong potential in developing smallholder-exporter led VC development, opportunities to engage
women and youth based on consistent and growing export demand. Markets already tested or experienced by Rwandan exporters
and provide good margins for smallholders over domestic and regional markets. In order to reduce some of the market risks as well
as support food security and nutrition, four more crops grown in the region – onion, garlic, carrot and tomato are also considered as
complementary crops in partnership with Heifer International. They have good local and regional market demand, can be cultivated
as intercrops in orchards as well as useful for crop rotation to french beans and chilies. Additionally, a fruit crop mango is selected
as an import substitute.
8.
9.
Like for other countries, the Ukraine crisis has an impact on the economy of Rwanda. The World Food Programme (WFP)
report[36] shows that: (i) the average monthly price of the local food basket has increased by 16 per cent from January to May
2022; (ii) increase in inflation rate by 10.3 per cent as against 1.3 per cent in May 2021; and (iii) sharp reduction in fertilizer
imports which may affect crop production as well as the price hike in fertilizers. As a mitigation measure, GoR has taken policy
decisions such as continued fertilizer subsidies, promoting food substitution, strengthening extension services, and increasing the
area under wheat production.
Relevant national strategies, policies and/or programmes. The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4)
guides public investments in the agriculture sector for the period 2018-24 and sets out the estimated required resources,
contributing to the three National Strategy for Transformation (NST 1) pillars of economic, social, and governance transformation
towards the aspirations of Vision 2050. Under this vision, Rwanda aspires to attain upper middle-income country status by 2035
and high-income status by 2050, with the intention of providing high quality livelihoods and living standards to Rwanda citizens by
mid-century. Vision 2050 stresses the importance of agro-processing and technology-intensive agriculture with a commercial
focus under its Pillar III: Transformation for Prosperity. The National Agricultural Policy (NAP) 2018 sets the policy framework for
a productive, green, and market-led agriculture sector towards 2030. The NAP responds to the rapid changes experienced in the
sector and anticipates key trends and concerns including pressure on land, the absorption of rural youth into the labour market
and the need to raise productivity of smallholder farmers. Other government policies and strategies relevant for PSAC include the
National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development (NCCLCD), the National Policy on Promotion of
Cooperatives, Irrigation Master Plan, Post-Harvest Sector Strategy, and National ICT4Ag Strategy.
10.
Since 2000, the GoR has opted for the decentralization policy as an alternative solution for poverty reduction, through the
improvement of the quality of governance and community mobilization, as defined in the first Vision 2020. Successful
implementation of the decentralization policy still remains on the agenda to promote service delivery and national development.
Ubudehe, a wealth-ranking system, was initiated by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) in conjunction
with the Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) in the context of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), purposely to
enhance the decentralization process rooted in Rwanda and to contribute to poverty reduction as well as to promote community
cohesion and reconciliation.
11.
In addition, through the Food Systems Summit (FSS) convened by the United Nations (UN) in February 2021, Rwanda identified
priority national pathways that cut across the five FSS action tracks[37]. Key food systems opportunities include improving diet
quality and nutrition security, ensuring livelihoods become more equitable, strengthening environmental resilience, boosting
agricultural productivity to reach potential, investing in infrastructure capacity to minimize food loss and improving access to
finance and investments across the food system.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment. In the 2019/2020 agricultural year the total population living in agricultural HH
was estimated to be 10.5 million, of whom 47.5 per cent of HH members were males and 52.5 per cent were females[38]. An
estimated 92 per cent of women are involved in agriculture and about 28 per cent of rural HHs of Rwanda are headed by
women[39]. According to the Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index Study from 2020, the largest contributor to women’s
disempowerment in Rwanda is workloads[40]. Access to credit, decisions on credit, and difficulty speaking publicly are also
important contributors to disempowerment. In addition, women often have less control over agricultural assets, inputs, produce
and capacity building opportunities as compared to men. Women also have relatively low inclusion in formal financial services
and face greater impacts of climate change due to their limited access to resources and opportunities and restricted autonomy to
make decisions about their own lives. Many of these constrains are rooted in discriminatory social norms, practices and attitudes,
which continue to limit women’s full participation in the agricultural sector[41].
9/31
Youth inclusion. In Rwanda, youth are considered as people aged 16 – 30 years of age[42]. Working age youth in Rwanda are
77 per cent of the rural population. Yet, the involvement of youth in agriculture is low, only a quarter of farmers (26.6%) are
between 16 and 30 years old[43]. Attracting qualified youth will be critical for ensuring wage employment, entrepreneurship (start-
ups and business acceleration), accelerate adoption of new technologies and drive the Rwandan agri-export products to more
added value.
Vulnerable households. Socially vulnerable groups include HH with older people aged above 65 years, persons with disabilities
(PwD) and the indigenous community. Older persons represent 4.9 per cent of the total resident population of Rwanda and some
of the targeted plantations and fields belong to the elderly members of the communities. The HH with elderly people are
particularly vulnerable in the absence of assistance from Government. In addition, the poverty level of a household with PwD is
1.7 per cent above the national average and 76.6 per cent of such HH are either poor or vulnerable to falling into poverty[44].
Despite impressive economic growth, the progress in reducing the level of stunting in smallholder rural children continues to be a
serious concern. The country faces the triple burden of malnutrition (undernutrition, micronutrient deficiencies and
overweight/obesity). Making VCs more nutrition-sensitive can help improve the quality of the foods that are available, affordable
and acceptable. The introduction of improved processing and packaging of horticulture produce will help in addressing the
access, acceptability and nutritional quality of what the consumer eats. A substantial part of VC actors (producers, processors,
retailors and etc.) lack knowledge on the nutritional value of produce, importance of quality and safety of different products,
including choosing products that are safe and nutritious, at the same time environmentally sustainable and eco-friendly, including
proper food preparation and waste management.
Climate change (CC) mitigation and variability. The productivity of smallholders in the tea, coffee and horticulture VCs is
adversely affected by CC and variability. Increasing temperatures, rainfall variability and events such as droughts reduce yields
and have negative effects on volumes, costs and quality of produce. These climatic trends as well as excessive rains also result
in pests and diseases incidences and in some cases, aggressive weed growth. CC and variability adaptation measures will be
integrated in the PSAC design to ensure the resilience of the target beneficiaries. PSAC will implement “multiple-benefit”
approaches, which will typically build climate resilience alongside other benefits, contributing to poverty reduction, enhancement
of biodiversity, increased agricultural productivity and lowering of greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector. The
planning for new plantations will take care of climate uncertainty and be more resilient to rising temperatures, and the increased
risk of flooding and landslides. The rising temperatures risk to affect the quality of tea and coffee as current growing areas will
become too hot for growing the current varieties. It will be strategic to plan future plantations in locations that take account of the
warmer climate such as higher, cooler regions. This will be buttressed by the following practices include: i) capacity building in
timing of husbandry activities such as pruning and fertilizer application; ii) when to plant, which varieties to plant and which inputs
to use; iii) adjustment of spraying programs and wider use of improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones; iv) Institution of
Agroforestry, v) intercropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops; vi) construction of erosion control structures; and vii)
composting and mulching among others.
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☒ Gender transformational ☐ Nutrition sensitive
☒ Youth sensitive
☒ Climate focused
Situation
analysis
☒ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☒ Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
☒ Use(pro-WEAI)[45]
assessment for M&E baseline
☐ National nutrition policies,
strategies and actors
☒ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☐ Key nutrition problems and
underlying causes, by group
☒ Main youth groups
☐ Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☒ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
☒ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
☒ Gender transformative
pathways
☒ Policy engagement on
GEWE[46]
10/31
☐ Nutrition pathways
☐ Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☒ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic empowerment
☒ Youth inclusion in project
objectives/activities
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
gender
☒ Women are >40% of
outreach beneficiaries
☒ Pro-WEAI indicator
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
gender, youth, indigenous
peoples
☐ Women reporting improved
diets AND/OR Persons
reporting improved nutrition
knowledge
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
age
☒ Staff with gender TORs
☒ Funds for gender activities
☐ Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
☒ Staff with youth TORs
☒ Funds for Pro-WEIA
surveys in M&E budget
☐ Funds for nutrition activities
☒ Funds for youth activities
Based on the initial
estimates PSAC has
24.1% climate finance (all
of which is adaptation
finance). The actual
amount of climate finance
is being calculated.
Theory
of
change
Logfram
e
indicator
s
Human
and
financial
resource
s
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
17.
18.
19.
IFAD remains a trusted partner for the GoR, having successfully supported different development projects over 40 years,
including exports of both traditional and emerging commodities. PSAC builds on IFAD’s global and extensive experience in
promoting pro-poor agricultural VCs.
Building on the rich experience and lessons learned gained from the implementation of the Project for Rural Income through
Exports (PRICE), PSAC intends to be a transformative project focused on selected export-driven VCs (coffee, tea and various
strategic commodities in the horticulture sector). Producing origin-based, certified, and premium quality products for export
market provides important opportunities for smallholder farmers and producers organizations to enhance their income and
revenue streams. PRICE introduced a wide range of new and innovative practices, which will be scaled up under PSAC.
The rationale for PSAC to support the identified export commodities is based on (i) the Government’s will to keep the momentum
created by PRICE in the coffee, tea, and horticulture sectors to further increase their competitiveness; (ii) the proved capacity of
the NAEB, the implementing agency,  to successfully implement PSAC interventions across different VCs through its Traditional
Commodities Division (for tea and coffee), Emerging Commodities Division (for horticulture), Quality Assurance and Regulatory
Division and Export Services Division[47]; and (iii) the opportunity to effectively improve the livelihoods of smallholder farmers, by
closing outstanding gaps that have been identified in each value chains, as further detailed below:
The coffee commodity is highly strategic as it represents in itself up to 25 per cent of Rwandan formal export earnings and it
involves over 355,000 growers[48]. Despite a steady increase in the exports of specialty coffee, there is still a need to
rehabilitate old plantations[49], enhance climate smart productivity, strengthen producers’ organizations, and ensure that all
CWS are used at optimum capacity to be competitive and to deliver sustainable incomes to coffee growers.
In tea, although Rwanda has already raised its average yields, smallholder farmers and young cooperatives still need support
to achieve their full potential. It is worth noting that the tea sector employs over 50,000 tea growers, mostly smallholder
farmers[50]. As demonstrated in the recently closed PRICE Project, sustainable partnerships between cooperatives and tea
processing factories are key to the growth of this sector, and this requires continuous cooperative capacity building (esp. for
new tea cooperatives) to ensure sustained productivity gains.
As for horticulture which is a more nascent sector, increasing investments since 2008 have started to yield returns for
Rwanda. However, there is considerable scope to further develop this sector on the export market, as demand continues to
grow for specialty products like chili peppers, macadamia nuts, french beans, avocadoes, essential oils, etc., for which
Rwanda has appropriate agro-climate conditions and processing infrastructure that are not yet used at full capacity.
20.
Leveraging other development partners’ initiatives, PSAC will facilitate beneficiaries’ access to tailored financial services, which is
critical for sustainable agriculture VC development in Rwanda which is still underdeveloped.
21.
PSAC implementation will provide opportunity for evidence-based advocacy which can influence existing policies and practices
as well as the scaling-up of investments in the target VCs. Some of the potential areas are VC financing, engagement of women
and youth in VCs, application of climate smart practices/technologies, Revolving Fertilizer Scheme (RFS), supply contracts with
the private sector, etc.
B. Lessons learned
11/31
22.
The PSAC design was informed by lessons from IFAD’s experience in Rwanda and other countries in the region. Particular
attention has been put on the following lessons:
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
Geographic concentration and focus on a manageable number of VCs. Lessons learned from the PRICE project showed
how challenging it can be to address several export commodities[51] in nation-wide projects. PSAC will operate in a limited
number of districts and will strive to limit itself to coffee, tea and horticulture. And within the horticulture sector, PSAC will focus
only on those presenting the best prospects for improved competitiveness. PSAC will also prioritize interventions, aiming to
contribute in resolving key bottlenecks, which can be realistically implemented within the project’s timeline and available budget.
In tea VC, cooperatives, which have already benefited from both Smallholder Cash and Export Crops Development Project
(PDCRE) and PRICE projects, will only be considered for consolidation activities, especially gap filling in tea plantations,
enhanced access to the Revolving Fertilizer Scheme and financial linkages.
Better results can be achieved when adopting a community-led approach to produce seedlings. Experience from PRICE
showed that community-led approaches also increase beneficiaries’ ownership, improves the availability of seedlings at their own
local level, and provides additional IGAs. PSAC will use this approach in a systematic manner, with a specific focus on women
and youth for seedlings production.
Fruit tree survival rates need to be optimized and monitored. PRICE[52] has clearly shown that: (i) when fruit trees are
distributed for free, ownership is very low; a minimal fee or at least in-kind contribution should be sought from beneficiaries to
increase ownership; (ii) seedling distribution needs to be accompanied by proper follow-up, especially in the first two years and in
drought-prone areas. PSAC will adopt these two recommendations, and a comprehensive proximity coaching programme will be
established to ensure optimal survival rates.
Necessary capacity building of cooperatives. Whilst several cooperatives were either formed or rehabilitated, and supported
under PRICE, some continued to face organizational and governance issues[53], so further tailored capacity building is required.
This will be delivered in PSAC by partners and/or experienced SPs that demonstrated a solid experience and tangible results in
this type of interventions. In tea value chain, these partners include processing factories that have access to higher management
capacity and capital.
Mainstreaming business approach to target VCs. PSAC adopts an inclusive agricultural VC approach that, beyond
productivity and production, invests in linking smallholder producers to more profitable export markets, and building their
capacities to graduate from (semi-)subsistence farming to (semi-)commercial status, practicing farming as a business (FaaB).
This will also entail an enhanced access to financial services via multiple instruments - guarantee facility, insurance services,
development of innovative financial products and tools suitable for the smallholders and agribusiness SMEs, and matching grants
based on the proven facilities already developed in Rwanda portfolio[54].
Matching Grants (MGs), when thoroughly designed and managed, remain an effective tool to support smallholder
investments. To support scalable VC investments, it is key to develop partnerships with FIs and adapt solutions to VC economic
needs. Performance-based grant facilities (PBGFs) that tie the grant to a loan proved successful in PRICE as it raised the
appetite of the Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) to lend to smallholder farmers for specific on-farm investments. The PBGF
model also ensures beneficiaries’ ownership since they first engage into a loan that they will have to serve in full before receiving
the grant. The grant portion can also be adjusted to reach out to specific target groups, who are often neglected by financial
institutions (e.g. youth, women). Setting a low cap (ceiling) in MG facilities helps to reach out to more smallholders, avoid elite
capture and promote access to financial services. This proved to be very effective in PRICE as it triggered a large number of
applications, the majority coming from smallholder farmers who accessed loans through SACCOS[55] .
Ensuring effective VC financing approaches. IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE)’s corporate level evaluation
(CLE) on Pro-Poor VC development[56] recommends collaborate with organizations and impact investors, with a proven record
in this area. For pro-poor VC development, the CLE recommends to develop the capacity of project management teams through
partnerships with specialized partners and service providers.
Adequate implementation capacity for successful project implementation. The Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU)
has demonstrated capacity to implement complex and challenging projects. NAEB has also gained relevant expertise and
capacity to lead the implementation of large projects and programme. Implementation capacity support will be provided right from
the onset of the project to support implementing partners and Government staff in fine-tuning the project’s poverty
targeting/gender equality strategy, implementation mechanisms and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) tools. PSAC will have its
own dedicated staff for M&E, Gender and social inclusion, and Knowledge Management (KM). Experienced SPs and strategic
partners with proved solid experience have already committed to support project implementation (e.g. Cordaid, Heifer
International).
31.
Rural youth wage employment can be promoted through integrated ecosystems that train and match youth with
employers. The IFAD-supported Agribusiness Hub grant in Rwanda has established a model whereby rural unemployed youth
can successfully access wage employment opportunities through a pathway of skills building and matching services. The
existence of a supportive ecosystem created by that grant is available to PASC to tap into in order to enable young women and
men to access existing and emerging jobs as well as start or upgrade existing micro and small enterprises for the coffee, tea and
horticulture VCs.
12/31
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
32.
PSAC focus will be on improving the competitiveness of the targeted VCs, through promoting: (i) gender sensitive and climate
smart productivity enhancing technologies; (ii) reduction of post-harvest losses; (iii) inclusive infrastructural facilities and
equipment support; (iv) use of climate-resilient agricultural practices; (v) backward and forward market linkages; (vi) enhanced
quality control/assurance to ascertain compliance with export market requirements; and (vii) equitable access to financial
services by using a VC approach. This approach is also expected to contribute to women’s empowerment, through enhancing
their social, physical, and human capital. This in turn can improve women’s status within their households, communities and local
institutions and provides avenues for engaging men and challenging inequitable gender norms. The targeted activities are also
expected enhance youth employment, entrepreneurship and leadership and advocate for smallholder sensitive policy
formulations.
33.
The creation of new marketing opportunities through export support will boost economic prosperity in the country and help to
reduce poverty, food insecurity and the burden of malnutrition. By promoting traditional horticulture commodities that are climate-
resilient, locally adapted and resource-efficient, the project will contribute to climate change mitigation strategies. These value-
added high-quality nutritious horticulture products will be embedded in sustainable value chains by creating efficient linkages
between producers, processors, traders, retailers and consumers.
34.
The project goal  of the PSAC is: “to increase incomes of the rural poor, by supporting inclusive and sustainable agri-exports
VCs”.
35.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the PSAC is: “to support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-driven VCs,
by increasing their climate resilient productive capacity and market access”.
36.
37.
38.
Target groups and outreach. The main categories of beneficiaries will be targeted based on a number of mechanisms that are
sensitive to the various needs and constraints of smallholder women and men farmers, as well as youth and specific vulnerable
groups. PSAC will include complementary interventions meant to support its target groups’ participation in commercial and
inclusive VCs: (i) rural smallholder farmers, grouped as much as possible along Producer Organizations (POs)[57]; (ii) off-takers
processors/exporters, who can be cooperatives, individuals or rural SMEs sourcing their products from smallholder farmers.
PSAC will mostly focus on existing actors with proven track record in inclusive VC development; yet new producers/off-takers will
also be given an opportunity to benefit from project support, especially in the more nascent horticulture sector. The targeting
mechanism will be based on the Ubudehe system[58], as is currently done for all IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda[59].
The revised estimation after concept note indicates that the main direct beneficiary group will be composed of 56,695 households
(approximately 255,128 household members[60], of which 73,704 persons receiving direct project services). The project will also
give priority to women (40% and 20% of women-headed households) and youth aged 16-30 (30%). It is important to note that the
women and youth target populations are not homogenous groups in need of a one particular intervention with male farmers as a
proxy. Instead, intersecting vulnerabilities of both women and men (young and old) need to be captured and addressed. Possible
graduation pathways for the poorest (Ubudehe 1) and the most vulnerable households such as those with PWD and indigenous
community will be explored and appropriate quota to be set during baseline.
Direct and self-targeting. PSAC will use a variety of targeting mechanisms to implement the project in pro-poor manner that is
sensitive to the various needs and constraints of smallholder women and men farmers, as well as youth and specific vulnerable
groups. PSAC will specifically target small-scale farmers who are subsistence and vulnerable poor, have limited access to
resources, less than 0.5ha of land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support (Ubudehe category
2[61]) as well as market-oriented producers who have on average 0.5 ha or more, and have moved beyond subsistence farming,
or are owners of small and medium-scale enterprises. In order to reach the poorest (Ubudehe 1), PSAC will look into addressing
their barriers to participation in VCs and adapting the project to their smaller land size and asset bases. These targeting
approaches are elaborated in detail in the draft Project Implementation Manual (Annex 8). Specific products such as small-scale
investments for climate-resilient technologies and activities are developed with different benefits for the intended target groups.
Individual youth seeking to access existing and emerging wage employment opportunities will be provided with individual support
to establish or strengthen micro and small enterprises in target VCs. To avoid elite capture and to foster inclusive participation,
PSAC will involve Umudugudu committees in the beneficiary selection whenever appropriate. Individual farmers will also be
considered on a case-by-case basis according to their role in the target VCs and the services they can offer to the community.
39.
PSAC will use different instruments for VC financing to support VC players especially smallholders and vulnerable
beneficiaries[62] which include: a) Horticulture Export Guarantee Fund which directly supports exporters to reduce cash flow
problems thereby expected to benefit smallholders to get timely payment for their produce. Some exporters have also shown
interest in providing inputs to smallholders based on their supply contracts; b) Performance based grant facility with more
favourable conditions for women and youth; c) Develop tailored financial products by improving understanding of PFIs about
PSAC VCs enabling more smallholders can get access to credit. This will help risk averse PFIs to promote new financial products
and increase their lending to IFAD target group; d) PSAC will also develop leasing products for agriculture equipment to reduce
the issues of collateral and investment risks in partnership with Cordaid. This instrument is particularly relevant for youth and
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
women who have limited collaterals and track record with financial institutions.
Geographical targeting. The project will target a total of 14 districts[63] out of 30 districts across Rwanda, with a particular
emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, which include some of the most vulnerable rural population. In addition,
Kayonza district will be targeted solely for the purpose of conducting trials on new improved essential oils varieties, given the farm
facility that is already in place to conduct such trials. The district wise crop specific details are presented in Annex 13.
13/31
The final selection of the districts and their respective sectors has been based on the following criteria: (i) high poverty rates and
high rates of food insecurity; (ii) comparative advantage for the development of targeted export-driven VCs, such as the existence
of a traditional production basin, the proximity of a strong market, and favourable agro-climatic conditions; and (iii) alignment and
development of strategic partnerships with other development partners in Rwanda to avoid the duplication of investments and to
seek complementarity among the proposed interventions.
Within the targeted districts the new plantations will be located on elevated areas. Currently the lower-lying plantations are
already “marginal” in terms of producing quality tea due to rising temperatures and that the rising temperatures will further reduce
the quality of tea and coffee as current growing areas will become too hot for growing the current varieties.
Empowering measures. PSAC will adopt empowering measures to encourage targeted HH to participate actively in the
planning, implementation, and decision-making processes of the project initiatives by: i) utilizing gender-sensitive and
participatory appraisal methodologies in the planning, implementation and monitoring of project interventions to ensure that the
differential experiences and intersecting vulnerabilities of both women and men (young and old) are captured; ii) setting up a
formal stakeholder feedback mechanism; (iii) using minimum participation quotas to ensure women (at least 40% and 20% of
women-headed households) and youth (at least 30%) participation; and (iv) using quotas to ensure minimum levels of women's
representation in consultation and decision-making processes related to the project.[64]
Enabling measures. PSAC will adopt enabling measures to help create and sustain a policy and operational environment
favourable to poverty targeting, gender equality, women’s and youth’s empowerment. This will include: (i) discussing targeting
and gender issues at start-up workshop; (ii) building the capacity of PSAC project management and service providers; (iii)
building the capacity of those involved in the community social mobilization and other service providers through trainings, and
integrating GEWE considerations into this training; and iv) including targeting and social inclusion in the ToRs of the PSAC
project management team. A dedicated officer in NAEB will be responsible for implementation of the project’s targeting and
social inclusion strategy, which will address all targeting, youth and GEWE considerations. 
Gender equality and women’s empowerment. PSAC recognizes that women are key to agricultural transformation, but various
obstacles and economic constraints limit their development and contribution to their households and communities as earlier
detailed under section 1.A.b. PSAC will address gender disparities and the key constraints, which limit women’s participation in
the selected VCs and expand women’s economic empowerment by: (i) ensuring that women and men have equal access to
project’s interventions including addressing unbalanced workloads and targeting 40 per cent women as direct beneficiaries and
20 per cent women-headed households; (ii) increasing women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level
and improving their representation and leadership in local institutions; (iii) increasing women’s financial literacy and encouraging
their economic empowerment and participation throughout the selected VCs; iv) and promoting gender transformative outcomes
through addressing discriminatory social norms and structures. Rwandan Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF)
will be involved to identify possible entry points for engagement in-country policy frameworks related to gender equality in the
agricultural sector.
Furthermore, enhanced GALS will be used to empower beneficiaries (male and female) to set themselves realistic livelihood and
life objectives to work towards considering common barriers and risks as well as opportunities that otherwise are not usually
considered including gender inequalities that hinder household progression. The methodology tackles discriminatory social
norms to generate gender transformative changes and improved intra-household gender relations. GALS+ will also be used to
address livelihood challenges related to nutrition, climate adaptation and youth inclusion. Lastly, promoting an inclusive policy
environment in the coffee, tea and horticulture sector will aim to tackle structural gender inequality on an institutional level.
In addition to targeting women as beneficiaries in their own right and addressing intra-household gender inequalities, the project
will use gender-sensitive and participatory appraisal methodologies in the planning, implementation and monitoring of project
interventions to ensure that entry and performance barriers as well as the differential experiences and intersecting vulnerabilities
of both women and men are captured and addressed.
Youth targeting. The project will ensure that at least 30 per cent of the beneficiaries are youth and it will adopt youth-sensitive
programming approach that focuses on enhancing access to productive assets, skills and basic services. Key areas include: i)
developing youth entrepreneurs and supporting existing youth enterprises; ii) fostering access for young people to wage
employment opportunities; iii) targeting youth groups to engage in specific opportunities suited for them across target VCs; iv)
ensuring that youth voices are heard and considered in all relevant spaces across the project cycle. The project will capitalize on
the youth employment ecosystem, created by IFAD’s agribusiness hub grant in Rwanda, by engaging with the stakeholders
involved in that programme to upgrade youth skills to meet the development of the coffee, tea and horticulture VCs. PASC will tap
into the agribusiness hubs dual training, “matching services” (matching skilled unemployed youth with potential employers), and
entrepreneurship supportive interventions. 
49.
The project will utilize existing labour market assessments and undertake new ones if necessary to understand how both young
men and women can access job opportunities and tailor their skills to meet the gaps within labour markets. During the project
start-up, the specific challenges of the different age sub-groups[65] will be further analysed. This is particularly relevant since: (i)
the project is targeting young people aged 16-18 are a particularly vulnerable age group that will require specific attention and
complemented activities for their full socio-economic empowerment; (ii) the project target group includes youth up to 30 years old,
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
with therefore higher level of heterogeneity. Further assessment of youth socio-economic traits to take into duly consideration of
their heterogeneity and ensure that equal attention is provided to younger youth (16-18 / 19-24) and older youth (25-30) will be
conducted design skill enhancement and financial packages that are tailored to the socio-economic profiles, challenges, and
aspirations of the different age sub-groups within the youth project cohort.
14/31
Wage and individual self employment opportunities will be facilitated through the establishment of linkages with an ongoing IFAD
Agribusiness hub grant led by Kilimo Trust and participating partner organizations, including the Rural Youth in Agribusiness
Forum (RYAF), a network of Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges (IPRCs) and Technical, Vocational Education and
Training Institutes (TVETs), the Business Development Fund (BDF). The partnership will enable PSAC to access the
matchmaking and entrepreneurship support facilities established by the Agribusiness Hub grant.
New partnerships will be explored with Rwanda’s Skills Development Fund (SDF) and FONERWA Rwanda Green Fund (RGF).
Potential entry points for rural youth groups may include community-based nurseries, organized groups of pluckers and
certification trainers. Finally, the project intends to hire young women and men graduates for the positions of NAEB focal persons
in each district.
Vulnerable households targeting. PSAC will develop specific interventions to support elderly in the rehabilitation processes of
plantations, for instance by mobilizing youth groups in the process of uprooting coffee trees and replanting new ones. While it
would be difficult for such an export-oriented project to have a specific focus on PwDs, PSAC will however strive to work with
PwDs who have the potential to take advantage of improved access to assets and opportunities for agricultural production and
IGAs[66].
Further caution will be taken to ensure that social risks associated with the various target groups are mitigated. The
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) matrix identifies potential social risks such as GBV, child labour,
elite capture and provides mitigation actions that the project will follow.
Nutrition pathways. PSAC will mainstream three specific nutrition related approaches into the value chain activities. The first
approach builds on increased income to be associated with nutrition education and Social and Behaviour Change
Communication (SBCC) activities. The second approach relates to women’s empowerment in ways that improve nutrition. This
consists of different interrelated elements, such as women's use of income for food and non-food expenditures, the ability of
women to care for themselves and their families, and women's energy expenditure. Lastly, PSAC will establish linkages between
horticulture cooperatives and WFP HGSF programme. Partnership with WFP is expected to address nutrition enhancement in
project target districts and catchment areas, but also to create stable markets, boost local agriculture, impact rural transformation
and strengthen local food systems. 
D. Components/outcomes and activities
55.
The project outcomes will be achieved through the implementation of three inter-related components: (A) Enhance smallholders’
climate smart production and productivity in selected export-driven value chains; (B) Enabling business environment along
selected export-driven value chains; and (C) Policy support and coordination. Due to the specific features of each export-driven
VC, their respective interventions and implementation modalities across the components will be adapted to close identified gaps
(see Annex 12 – VC analysis) and ensure optimum competitiveness.
Component A - Investments to enhance climate smart production and productivity of selected export-driven value chains
56.
This component will support the intensification and improve the competitiveness of the production levels of the selected export-
driven VCs through targeted investments along two sets of interventions as detailed below:
Sub-component A.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity
57.
58.
59.
This subcomponent (SC) will focus on expansion and rehabilitation of plantation areas, supported by the development and
adoption of innovative climate-resilient technologies and practices. The targets are 4,132 ha for coffee[67]; 2,410 ha[68] for tea
and 1,700 ha for horticulture[69]. These interventions will entail the use of community-based nurseries for the production of
seedlings, building on the lessons learned from PRICE project that demonstrated better effectiveness, ownership and value for
money using this approach, as well as a clear impact in terms of income generation and empowerment of the core project target
group. PSAC will target women and youth for community-based nurseries with a specific strategy[70] to create their foot-print in
the VC and enable them to engage in a profitable IGA. In terms of varieties, improved coffee varieties and tested GxE tea clones,
developed under PRICE, will be used, whereas in horticulture, grafted seedlings of the most demanded varieties will be
promoted.
Development and adoption of innovative climate-resilient technologies and practices: The project will promote climate-resilient
innovations and practices as well as energy and resources efficiency along the selected VCs. This will be done through a
combination of tailor-made capacity building and investments to support addressing the main challenges in the selected VCs.
In coffee, a study will be undertaken at project inception to determine the most cost-effective strategies in coffee processing and
coffee production. The project will also support the introduction of the coffee drying parabolic structures, which has been
successfully developed in Kenya, to address the challenges of increasing wet periods at harvest time that are considerably
affecting the quality of the coffee processed in cooperative-owned CWS. In addition, PSAC will catalyze high-level adoption of
new production practices and technologies, by conducting an ambitious training program, combined with proximity extension
services, targeting up to 50 per cent of active coffee growers in targeted zones (see also Component B). Furthermore, PSAC will
introduce the use of both live mulching and other mulching materials, shade trees, and coffee intercrops with other crops as
environment-friendly practices.
60.
61.
62.
63.
In tea, PSAC will aim at fast track-tracking the goal of 100 per cent self-sufficiency for wood fuel in factories. Whenever feasible,
the tea cooperatives will be supported to practice agroforestry along contours and boundaries on tea farms, using suitable tree
varieties to mitigate CC effects. PSAC will support farmers to establish 2,042 ha of agroforestry[71] through cooperatives and its
members, which have adequate land to plant recommended trees, without interfering with tea productivity or the risk of
introducing diseases like armillaria root rot.  
15/31
In horticulture, the project will use a community-based approach for the production of avocado and mango seedlings. The project
will also invest in capacity building of the nursery operators through intensive, practical training and close follow-up. Rwanda
Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) trainers will be involved and will work jointly with the district
authorities to source healthy rootstock. The approach of consolidated plantation and cluster based plantation[72] of fruit trees
with titles in the name of smallholders will be used to facilitate production at scale, manage certification process, improved
access to market, and develop necessary infrastructure.
Engagement of youth and women in tree crops will be supported with the establishment of new farms, as established tree crop
farms tend to be owned by men who are beyond the youth age threshold. The project will encourage their access to land through
community-based sensitization and, where communal / state land is available, requiring that small adequate plots be attributed to
these groups. Women-headed households with proved lack of male labour power will be supported in clearing their plots.
Access of adequate fertilizers for tea cooperatives: In year 2020/21, 8,000 MT of fertilizers were targeted for application but the
target was surpassed and 11,895 MT were applied in plantations. It is noteworthy that the Revolving Fertilizer Scheme (RFS)
started by PRICE has continued to operate satisfactorily, according to NAEB. Productivity achievement was 6.86 MT/ha against
a target of 7 MT/ha by end of PRICE. NAEB with FERWACOTHE (Union of tea cooperatives) shall conduct a performance
review of RFS within the implementation parameters set out in the concept paper and share the report to enable IFAD and GoR
to pick up lessons and plan for scaling up the scheme under PSAC. If the review is confirmed favourable, PSAC will invest US$ 2
million to scale up the RFS to new cooperatives, with the objective of supporting young and new cooperatives to achieve higher
yields that are closer to the national productivity average[73]. The RFS will also serve as an incentive to new farmers, who will
now produce substantial quantities of green leaf for sale to factories by year 3, which will provide them with new monthly income.
Sub-component A.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities and equipment at cooperative and exporters’ level
64.
65.
66.
PSAC will address the key infrastructure and equipment gaps that are hindering smallholder cooperatives/POs in each export-
driven VC[74]. The rehabilitation of 323 km of feeder roads in tea production areas, considered in initial concept note but
assessed as beyond the financial capacity of the project, will be replaced by the support for the acquisition of trucks to fast-track
delivery of fresh tea leaves, making sure co-operatives develop and implement effective operating and maintenance plans. The
investment in an Avocado grading line at NAEB packhouse and software system for green tea leaves’ collection as well as
payment records will be supported by the project. Acquisition of Complete Soil and Water Testing Kit (Palintest), which are key to
control the effluent wastes and fertilization levels in the coffee VC.
PSAC will also strive to address some of the recurrent constraints observed in specific crops, including for chili, which is already
enjoying a steady demand, but is affected by quality problems at both fresh and dry stages. This will be done through three
identified technologies – Chili solar dryers and protective agriculture (i.e. greenhouses, shade nets, walk-in tunnels) to meet the
export quality requirements and efficient irrigation technologies (EIT) to overcome the challenge of recurrent drought periods and
to ensure high survival rates in fruit tree plantations. However, PSAC will not directly invest in chili solar dryers and EIT since
these investments are addressed by the upcoming World Bank (WB) Project “Commercialization and de-risking for Agricultural
Transformation” (CDAT) investing US$ 12.61 million to the horticulture sector. NAEB and the district authorities will however
strive to keep track of how its specific beneficiaries’ demand for solar dryers and EIT are being addressed. PSAC will also benefit
from the CDAT support to RAB to continue its applied research to release improved chili varieties adapted to Rwandan context
and demanded by the market.
Two types of small-scale climate-resilient investments (e.g. units of protective agriculture[75] and eco-friendly coffee drying
technologies) will be supported by a PBGF along the same model as the one piloted under PRICE, and further developed under
the Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed management Project Phase II (KIIWP2). This model will involve the compulsory
matching of the grant to a loan, as earlier mentioned under lesson learned section. More favourable conditions will be made for
women and youth in order to alleviate the usual barriers they are facing when they seek loans, and thus increase their inclusion.
The detailed implementation modalities of the different grant windows are provided in Annex 8 – PIM.
67.
Other investments will include: (i) Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification; (ii) Medium-scale protective
agriculture; (iii) Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities.
68.
Additional strategic investments in tea have been proposed by NAEB to boost value addition to increase the national revenues
from tea and increase farmers’ take-home income. Specifically, PSAC will support the undertaking of a full economic and financial
analysis (EFA) and the development of Business Plans (BPs) for the promotion of secondary processing of tea. PSAC will then
widely disseminate the results of this EFA and BPs, for potential investors to come in and invest jointly with RTA. This is in line
with the GoR privatization agenda where Rwanda Development Board (RDB) entered into agreements with new tea factory
owners indicating that they would be required to pursue value addition. To date, the level of in-country value addition to Rwanda
tea is limited and has barely impacted the average price of Rwanda tea. The investment in value addition or blending for export
will help the country to introduce an additional sales channel which will contribute to bridging the gap between top earning
cooperatives/factories and the lowest earning ones as a result of premiums earned and selling costs that will be avoided by
making use of the online platforms and development of new customer relationships.
69.
All investments foreseen under Component A will be made in compliance with the procurement rules set in the IFAD
Procurement Handbook. All investments involving a grant will be supported under component B for business planning and
linkage to financing, in addition to the overall capacity building support to be provided for improved cooperative governance and
enhanced technical and business skills. The aspects of ownership and management have been considered for major
interventions related to the improvement of rural infrastructure and equipment. It has been done through: a) provision of matching
grants after piloting and demonstration of new technologies (such as coffee drying units) so that community groups can own
such units; b) maintenance fees from cooperative members for using the facility; c) upfront contribution from tea cooperative
members towards maintenance of vehicles.
16/31
Component B - Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains
70.
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted VCs by improving smallholder value chain
actors’ access to advisory services, sustainable markets and financial services.
Sub-component B.1 - Capacity building of Producer Organizations (POs)
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
The cooperative movement in Rwanda has been a strong entry point for farmers’ inclusion and empowerment, and it will remain
central to PSAC overall approach. The smallholders engaged in coffee and tea VCs are already organized in POs but there is a
variation in their operational and management capacities. POs engaged in coffee are all linked to coffee washing stations (CWS)
some of these are owned by farmers’ cooperatives whereas others by private sector players. POs active in the tea VC are
associated with tea factories. As compared to tea and coffee, POs in the horticulture VC are at the nascent stage. PSAC will
promote partnership between exporters/public entities with POs through supply contracts.
In the target districts, support will be provided to both established cooperatives, especially the ones that have been identified as
weak in previous assessments made under PRICE, and new cooperatives, out-grower schemes, and farmer groups that will be
formed to accompany the expansion of certain crops as foreseen under component A. Issues to be addressed will focus on: (i)
governance, decision-making process and management; (ii) price-risk management and hedging in well-developed cooperatives
intending to engage directly in the export business; (iii) deductions and take-home income for farmer members; (iv) planning,
infrastructure development, operations and reporting; (v) membership policies; (vi) internal control processes; (vii) group
dynamics, gender equality and youth engagement; (viii) climate change adaptation approaches; (ix) environmental and natural
resources management; (x) optimal fertiliser application/use of organic fertiliser; (xi) waste management; (xii) pesticides and pest
management; (xiii) collaborative policies within a VC; (xiv) economies of scale/common services strategies; (xv) business
planning & implementation plans.
Support will be provided directly by partners and/or experienced SPs that have demonstrated a solid experience and tangible
results in this type of interventions. Cordaid (formerly ICCO) will contribute financially and technically along this range of
interventions. Other SPs will be recruited on a competitive basis. Cordaid will leverage on its previous STARS project to spur the
development of an entrepreneurial farming mind-set among PSAC beneficiaries. In particular, it will assist farmers to acquire a
better understanding of market demand and gross margin calculations to assess crop profitability, plan their production
accordingly and prepare their grant applications. A FaaB training module will be developed by Cordaid and incorporated in the
FFS curriculum so that FFS members can acquire these skills. The frontline staff in target districts, as well as FFS Facilitators
will be systematically involved in the FaaB training to ensure a spill-over effect and sustainability beyond the project’s life.
Furthermore, during the project implementation, PSAC will leverage the special initiative launched by IFAD’s Private Sector
Advisory and Investment Unit (CACHET: Climate and Commodity Hedging to Enable Transformation) to build price risk
management capacities of local cooperatives, especially in the target VCs.
The FFS approach, strengthened by proximity coaching, will be mainstreamed along all technical capacity building, starting from
seedling plantation and up to post-harvest handling and processing. PSAC will make use of the Lead Farmers and Training of
Trainers (ToT) agents formed under PRICE. New FFS will be organized across all selected export-driven VCs engaging with all
the producers through more than 1,600 FFS (1,300 in coffee, 108 in tea and 225 in horticulture VC).
In the horticulture sector, this will be combined with the “innovative training” approach developed under PRICE, that involves
directly the off-taker (exporter) for the macadamia, French beans and chili crops. As for the other crops foreseen for the
domestic/regional market (e.g. tomato, garlic, onion, carrots), PSAC will enter into a partnership agreement with Heifer
International along three key interventions: (i) climate smart and resilient horticulture production; ii) capacity building for
smallholder farmers[76]; and iii) product diversification and access to markets[77] . The engagement with Heifer will ensure
participation of poor households who may be left out of the project, facilitate crop rotation, reduce risks of price fluctuations (of
export crops) on poor HH and enhance the capacity of participants to move from subsistence agriculture to commercial
agriculture.
The project will also engage with the Horticulture Center of Excellence (HCoE), especially to transfer protective agriculture
technologies, avail services such as scions for grafting and seedlings when there is a gap in seedling production and training to
selected lead farmers in green house management as per arising needs.
In coffee, Technoserve (TNS) is already working with NAEB and BK Techouse to include an extra module of the Smart
Kungahara System (SKS) for management of farmer data and extension/advisory services to farmers from farm to CWS. The
project shall collaborate with TNS to reach out to more as they are working with only few cooperatives in five out of the six
districts of PSAC. In addition, PSAC will support the coffee zone policy initiated by the Government, as one of the strategies that
is intended to help increase cherry volume and spike increased performance by dedicating a specific CWS to a specific zone.
The move intends to also have organized and formalized groups that make up a zone and which shall be loyal to CWS to which
they supply their cherry. It is to be noted that NAEB has already mapped out all the zones and produced lists of farmers per zone,
allocated them to CWS. The approach in PSAC to use local district authorities can come a long way in the enforcement of the
zoning policy.
79.
80.
In tea, PRICE had targeted to implement a cooperatives turnaround plan in the tea value chain with the objective of increasing the
efficiency of operations and overall business performance of tea cooperatives. Reducing costs will subsequently increase the
take-home income of farmers. The management and capital capacity of Ferwacothe will be enhanced in order to reduce
cooperative operations costs through development and adoption of a common services model to serve all cooperatives. This will
be guided by an expert/SP who has experience in designing and delivering common services required by producer organizations
within the tea value chain at a national scale. The services will be offered for a cumulative period of 12 months spread out within
the period of the project or as reviewed during the MTR.
17/31
Quality control and market-driven certification: Outreach to high-end export markets often requires intensive quality assurance,
quality control and specific certifications. PSAC support will revolve around three pillars: (i) closing the remaining equipment
gaps[78] that hamper the accreditation of certain testing services at the NAEB laboratory; (ii) creating a national pool of various
voluntary standards certified lead trainers and, whenever possible, their graduation as certified auditors to ensure availability of
these key human resources in-country; and (iii) supporting on cost-sharing basis the certification process at both cooperative and
private sector level, as long as these certifications are assessed as providing real value addition and being sustainable after the
withdrawal of project support. PSAC shall also support training of local coffee quality specialist from CWS downstream on the
coffee value chain targeting mainly the youth to become coffee processing specialists, barristers, coffee grading quality
specialists. More Q-graders shall be trained[79].
Sub-component B.2 – Backward and forward market linkages
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
A major milestone has been achieved under PRICE with the development of the Rwanda coffee brand, Rwanda Tea brand, and
Rwanda Fresh brand in fruits and vegetables. Besides the usual showcasing of the various brands at the international markets,
through trade fairs and exhibitions, which the project will continue to support, there is need to look into strategies to further
promote these brands that display the uniqueness of the Rwandan produce.
In the coffee VC, this will involve the implementation of appellation findings, enhancing production of traceable certified;
participation in the National, Regional and International coffee events and competitions; implementation of the E-Marketing Forum
based on findings previously supported by PRICE.
In tea, PSAC will consider the development and dissemination of an implementation plan for the existing online tea trading
platform and support its initial operationalization and stabilization. Financial products will also developed to support the platform
stakeholders. It will also be crucial to develop/improve the national tea marketing strategy in order to fully exploit inherent
qualities and cultural attributes of the Rwandan tea ecosystem to promote and showcase Rwandan teas on the international
scene as a much sought-after ingredient in popular global tea brands. Collaboration with RDB in developing this strategy will be
important.
In horticulture, which is a more nascent sector, most of the new exporters that have appeared in the past three years or so are
not well acquainted with the market dynamics, and many have been affected by unsettled bills. To support in addressing this
problem, PSAC’s support will be threefold: (i) improve the exporters’ understanding of the international business environment,
quality controls and clients’ requirements, through dedicated training sessions; (ii) participate in international horticultural
promotional events; and (iii) hire market agents/facilitators who will be posted in a few key diplomatic missions (e.g., UK, Belgium
for EU, Dubai for Middle East, DRC for Central Africa) to facilitate in-country market intelligence and trade procedures. This
innovative way to support Rwandan exports will be done in partnership with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation (MINAFFET).
The project, through its business development services, spearheaded by Cordaid, will in overall ensure that the smallholder
farmers cooperatives are actively engaged with the exporters, through mutually benefiting supply contracts. Backward linkages
with input suppliers will also be facilitated to ensure timely and affordable delivery of key inputs. As an illustrative example, in tea,
the Sorwathe tea factory is providing farmers with loans to develop organic tea farms under Hillside Organic Tea (HOT)
cooperative. A grace period of 6 years has been factored in the loan while over 350 ha have already been developed under this
model. PSAC will strive to study the success factors behind this model of access to farm inputs through supply contracts and to
explore its potential for scaling up through financial institutions.
Enhanced access to financial services. To facilitate the targeted VC stakeholders’ access to financial services, PSAC will: (i)
support the quality and outreach of rural financial services by financial institutions and (ii) build the capacity of the target groups to
access financial services. These interventions will be aligned with the above-described BDS Package and MGs, so to ensure
bankability of the BPs and to facilitate beneficiary’s contributions to MG investments. The overall PSAC access to finance strategy
is to enable commercial long-term financing to support the growth of project’s best practices in the VC, to ensure sustainable
long-term development impact.
Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) will be selected using pre-agreed criteria, which include but not limited to: (i) FI strategy to
increase agri-finance; (ii) FI capacity and willingness to finance export agriculture value chain stakeholders; (iii) FI overall financial
standing and institutional capacity to service PSAC clients; and (iv) FI appetite to adopt innovative financial products and tools
suitable for the smallholder and agribusiness SME sectors[80].
To strengthen the target groups’ financial literacy skills, PSAC, together with Cordaid, will develop an FFS module for financial
literacy for smallholder households. The activity will include: (i) a preliminary assessment of average farmer financial knowledge
in the target areas, assess mechanisms/channels of delivering financial literacy modules disaggregated by age and gender; (ii)
collaboration with targeted financial institutions to deliver financial literacy modules that will be linked to farmers accessing and
uptaking various financial products such as savings for inputs, value chain loan products, agriculture insurance, farmer payments;
(iv) training on simple business development skills such as record keeping, financial management, product marketing; (v) training
on green financing opportunities; and (vi) training on borrowing modalities, interest rates, collateral requirements, bank
89.
90.
91.
92.
transactions, payments, and use of mobile and digital banking. More advanced and targeted financial literacy trainings will be
provided to agribusinesses.
18/31
In parallel, considering the risk averse nature of PFIs about agriculture sector, it is essential to improve their knowledge about the
project value chains and sharing available financing mechanisms. PSAC in partnership with Cordaid will work with the PFIs to
develop and strengthen their innovative and client-oriented agri-finance products for MSMEs and smallholders in the identified
export VCs, including equipment leasing and asset financing. Digitalization of financial services for smallholders and cooperatives
in order to reduce transaction costs, increase efficiency and sustainable access to finance will be promoted. PFIs will also
receive institutional capacity building to strengthen their local agri-finance capacities. Particular attention will be given to Green
Finance lending products. Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) will be strengthened for all PFIs. The project
will also facilitate young entrepreneurs’ access to financial products through partnership with the Business Development Fund
(BDF) as part of the existing agribusiness hub ecosystem.
PSAC will facilitate the PFIs to access resources from private and public sector wholesale financiers for on-lending to PSAC
targeted VCs. The main target for mobilizing this private financing is the IFAD Private Sector Financing Programme’s (PSFP)
upcoming Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM), which is currently under design and foreseen to also
target Rwanda. Other anticipated sources of financing may include the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD), ABC Fund,
Rabobank, including Green Finance dedicated financial resources by these institutions.
PFIs financing horticulture sector agro-export companies will also be supported by the existing Horticulture Export Guarantee
Facility (HEGF) of US$ 500,000 hosted by the BRD, which has been formulated and piloted under the PRICE project with initial
results, which are not yet in large scale. During the first half of project duration, PSAC will support the HEGF with targeted
technical assistance for increased uptake and outreach of the Facility. The intervention will involve an institutional capacity needs
assessment to deliver on the HEGF, high quality technical assistance to implement the identified required improvements, and
design of specific targets coupled with a monitoring and evaluation framework to ensure that intended results are achieved. At
MTR, with the condition that improvements were successfully completed, the project can increase the HEGF resources by an
additional amount of up to US$ 500,000.
Through the package of rural finance support interventions, PSAC target is to facilitate commercial investments from the PFIs
into the project VCs. The overall objective of the project’s de-risking interventions especially the tailored technical advisory
services, matching grants and the strengthened HEGF, is to mobilize investment finance available to the targeted sectors. The
facilitated investments by PFIs will be targeted to enable the US$ 3 million of private sector co-financing of the Matching Grants,
as well as an expected additional amount of US$ 2.5 million targeting the VC stakeholders. In overall the project is expected to
contribute to expansion of financing of the coffee, tea and horticulture sectors, with expected 120 per cent, 100 per cent and 80
per cent growth by end of the project, respectively.
Component C - Policy support and coordination
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
Coordination in PSAC is addressed under the below section ‘4.Implementation’. PSAC will play critical role by providing support
to develop high quality briefs to inform policy processes. Considering the existing level of investment, policy briefs and evidence-
based results through projects. PSAC will inform MINAGRI’s budget allocation process for agriculture export commodities. It will
closely work with other development projects/agencies to advocate on policy issues for the development of selected VCs. Some
of the immediately identified issues are access to packaging material, increasing air-freight capacity and supply contact-based
business models.
In the coffee VC, PSAC will support Coffee Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR)[81] to improve the
efficiency and competitiveness of the coffee VC. The project will also support Coffee roundtables to assess the gaps in the VC
and provide inputs for policy formulation.
In the tea VC, PSAC will focus on: i) consolidation of the implementation framework of three platforms - National tea register,
National tea brand and E-commerce, developed under PRICE but still incomplete. Support will be provided to NAEB to
consolidate implementation activities including the National Tea Code of Practice and Awards where producers and buyers 
would participate as a means of building trust in the brand (supply side activities), and quality of services (buyer side activities); ii)
define and formalize the commercial relations between tea factories and cooperatives, broaden tea cooperative membership
rules, define tea planting zones (putting limit on catchment radius between tea farms and factories) and develop profile of an
ideal tea farmer to ensure minimum  economic tea production per farmer, and iii) development of a strategic roadmap to increase
the levels of value addition and boost earnings of cooperatives and factories by NAEB.
Horticulture district level VC platforms will be formed to identify ground level problems, policy-related issues and solutions, while
developing local leadership in VC involving women and youth. These platforms will be initially convened by the District Director of
Agriculture and will facilitate the process in such a way that a natural structure for the platform emerges over a period of time.
Additionally, project will also support horticulture exporters’ working groups to deliberate on issues affecting the VC development
and identification of solutions.
PSAC will also contribute to promoting an enabling rural finance environment. The GoR, through Access to Finance Rwanda
(AFR) is currently developing a new Rwanda Agriculture Finance Strategy, not yet released at the time of design. To ensure an
enabling agriculture finance environment, especially for export agriculture, PSAC in collaboration with Cordaid and AFR will
support the establishment of a platform to coordinate the implementation of the final strategy, guaranteeing wider stakeholder
engagement.
98.
The policy interventions are aimed at improving competitiveness of the selected VCs with focus on regional and international
markets. The improved competitiveness will lead to scaling up. The platforms such as CEPAR, district level VC platforms will play
a critical role in promoting scaling up as they regularly assess existing bottlenecks in supply/demand, also highlighting policy
issues affecting VCs. The process of scaling-up activities will be led by NAEB through its coffee, tea, horticulture and emerging
commodities departments. It can also facilitate the promotion of innovations such as CACHET to build price risk management
capacities of local cooperatives, especially in the targeted VCs.
19/31
99.
It is to be noted that being a Gender Transformative project, PSAC will support policy processes related to Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in the target value chains. The project will work closely with MIGEPROF to identify possible
entry points for engagement in country policy frameworks related to gender equality in the agricultural sector (e.g. support in
GBV mitigation, ensuring new agro-export policies are gender responsive based on lessons learned from PSAC and other
projects).
E. Theory of Change
100.
PSAC Theory of Change (ToC) is based on the assumption that poor smallholder farmers are able to equitably increase their
productive capacity, their resilience to economic, environmental and climate-related risks and their access to markets through
their direct inclusion in export-driven value chains in 14 districts of Rwanda. PSAC will support smallholder organized in groups
by equipping them to enhance their knowledge, skills and practices to participate at different levels of the coffee, tea, and
horticulture value chains. PSAC will address the needs of its target group through a comprehensive support package that
includes technical and financial literacy skills development packages, as well as linkages to markets and financial services. PSAC
has 24.1 per cent of climate (adaptation) finance which is integrated with VC intervention measures to enhance beneficiaries’
resilience and contribute to poverty reduction through agricultural productivity improvement.
101.
Youth unemployment in agriculture is mostly related to lack of access to productive assets and natural resources, goods and
services; lack of knowledge and technical and business skills; a negative perception of agriculture among youth and non-
conducive environment for youth involvement in agriculture and agribusinesses. Key pathways for youth engagement and
empowerment include: fostering access to wage employment opportunities in targeted VCs, orienting youth about VC approach
(e.g. internship opportunities) and creating space for youth leadership development in the targeted VCs, orienting youth about
value chain approach (through internship opportunities) and creating space for youth leadership development in the targeted
VCs, providing grant and credit support with more favourable conditions for youth and financial products tailored to their needs.
As the project is expected to contribute to the broader development of the target value chains, it will tap into the ecosystem
created by the Agribusiness Hub grant in the country to provide support to individual youth to access wage and self-employment.
This will be done through a partnership with Kilimo Trust and its partners.
102.
Promoting gender transformative change requires a focus on a broader set of factors with direct or indirect influence on women’s
opportunities to engage in and benefit from value chains addressing root causes of gender inequality. Five different pathways for
women’s empowerment and gender transformative outcomes are part of PSAC’s TOC. Firstly, the project will create economic
opportunities (e.g. community-based nurseries), expand plantation areas dedicated specifically to women and improve women’s
access to finance. These interventions will improve women’s access to and control over productive assets, inputs, produce,
financing and capacity building opportunities. Secondly, PSAC enhance women’s professional confidence through trainings,
create spaces for collective action and strengthen their role in business management of POs which is expected to also improve
women’s positioning and bargaining power within the selected value chains and to enhance their representation, voice in
decision-making and leadership in producer organizations. Thirdly the introduction of gender sensitive and climate smart
productivity enhancing technologies will address women’s time poverty and increase their participation in productive activities.
Fourthly, the enhanced Gender Action Learning System (GALS+) will be implemented to tackle discriminatory social norms and
to generate gender transformative changes and improved intra-household gender relations. GALS+ will also be used to address
livelihood challenges related to nutrition, climate adaptation and youth inclusion. Lastly, promoting an inclusive policy
environment in the coffee, tea and horticulture sector will aim to tackle structural gender inequality on an institutional level. The
visual presentation of the ToC is in Annex 2.
103.
Building on evidences from past IFAD projects in the country, PSAC will organize beneficiaries into groups and provide them the
support they require to produce and market their goods efficiently, effectively and sustainably within the VCs. Through
Component A, the production support will involve expanding planting areas, and improving access to seeds, fertiliser, climate-
resilient technologies; plus, key infrastructure for processing and transport. To capitalize on this enhanced production and
productivity, through Component B the project will organise producers into groups and strengthen the group’s capacity to market
their goods, access financial services, form business linkages, and support their members. This marketing support to the groups
will be strengthened further by improving branding, and training on export markets, and access to digital marketing platforms. It is
expected that the two components will form a virtuous cycle, whereby productive smallholders channel their goods through well-
functioning producer groups, helping the group to grow, thus continually increasing demand for producers’ goods, as well as their
access to capital and services to re-invest in production and marketing. Cutting across the production and marketing activities,
Component C through policy support will aim to facilitate a more conducive environment for smallholders and their groups, as
well as the wider VCs targeted by the project, in particular in terms of access to services, including financial services.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
104.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and national priorities. PSAC will be aligned to the SDGs related to
the agriculture sector, especially: SDG 1 (no poverty); SDG 2 (zero hunger); SDG 5 (gender equality); SDG 8 (decent work and
economic growth) and SDG 13 (climate action). The SDGs are fully owned by the GoR and integrated in national strategic
frameworks, notably ‘NST 2017-2024’ and ‘Vision 2050’. PSAC will contribute to Rwanda’s achievement of several SDGs as it is
fully aligned with Rwanda’s PSTA 4 and Vision 2050 under the Pillar III: Transformation for Prosperity through supporting agro-
processing and technology-intensive agriculture with a commercial focus. PSAC is also aligned with the NAP 2018, the National
Policy on Promotion of Cooperatives, the Post-Harvest Sector Strategy, and the National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-
Carbon Development. PSAC is expected to respond directly to the implementation of GoR’s decentralization strategy by closely
coordinating with NAEB and the Local Government Authorities in each target districts.
105.
Alignment with IFAD policies and priorities. PSAC is well-aligned with the Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
(COSOP) 2019-24with its overall objective being to support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-driven value chains by
increasing their climate resilient productive capacity and market access. PSAC contributes to SO1: to sustainably increase
agricultural productivity in priority food and export value chains; and SO2: to improve post-harvest processes and strengthen
market linkages. PSAC also strongly reflects IFAD’s key mainstreaming areas with a strong focus on gender, youth, nutrition,
environment and climate change.
20/31
106.
PSAC will address gender disparities and the key constraints by: (i) ensuring that women and men have equal access to project’s
interventions including addressing unbalanced workloads and targeting 40 per cent women as direct beneficiaries; (ii) increasing
women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level and improving their representation and leadership in
local institutions; (iii) increasing women’s financial literacy and encouraging their economic empowerment and participation
throughout the selected value chains iv) and promoting gender transformative outcomes through addressing discriminatory social
norms and structures. PSAC is also expected to enhance youth employment, entrepreneurship, leadership, and advocate for
smallholder sensitive policy formulations.
107.
Harmonization and Partnerships. Partnerships are envisaged during implementation with relevant Government specialized
agencies notably: (i) MINALOC, (ii) RAB, (iii) MINAFFET, (iv) MIGEPROF, (v) BRD, (vi) BDF, (vii) Rwanda Environment
Management Authority (REMA), (viii) Rwanda Standards Board (RSB), (ix) Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), and (x) HCoE.
As earlier indicated, the project will also be engaged into specific partnerships with Cordaid and Heifer International as key
implementing partners. Government of Spain (GoS) expressed interest to co-financing the project, thus the government
proceeded with the formal request to the GoS.
108.
Government’s efforts to address children’s hunger during the school day and to expand access to educational opportunities to
disadvantaged children are supported mainly by the WFP Home-Grown School Feeding Programme (HGSFP). In this context,
the WFP will be a key partner of PSAC in order to link horticulture cooperatives with the HGSFP.
109.
PSAC has already established several strategic partnerships which will maximize the opportunities for knowledge sharing and
south-south triangular cooperation. One of the implementing partners, Cordaid, for example, is the recipient of a SSTC grant
covering Rwanda and Kenya on access to financial services and market linkages. Heifer International has operations in several
African countries as well as in Asia and LAC, as well as through the network established by Kilimo Trust in East Africa. The
linkages with the CACHET project will allow PSAC cooperatives to learn from other countries’ experiences in price risk
management. In addition, best practices and south-south learning from the first phase of the Joint Programme on Accelerating
Progress towards the Economic Empowerment of Rural Women (JP RWEE) will be adopted.
110.
Synergies will be sought with other ongoing or upcoming programmes such as the just-launched USAID KWA project, the CDAT
funded by WB and the ‘Smart Food Value Chain Management Project (SFVCM)’ funded by KOICA planned to be rolled out in
2022-2026.PSAC will have the opportunity to tap into this wide range of expertise and knowledge, leveraging South-South
knowledge exchanges through learning events and peer-to-peer exchanges. Potential partnerships and synergies with similar
programmes are summarized in the Table below.
Table 2. Potential partners and complementarities with PSAC
Agency / Project
Potential Areas of Collaboration
Heifer International –
co-financier & service
provider, KM
Cordaid –
co-financier & service
provider, KM
Climate Smart and resilient horticulture production, Capacity building for smallholder farmers,
Product diversification and access to markets, To mobilize funds (approx. US$ 1 million) through
impact capital facility in the form of working capital, equipment lease and guarantees
(i)     A Farming as a Business (FaaB) training module to be incorporated in FFS curriculum,
including financial literacy for smallholder HH across all three sectors
(ii)    Support PFIs to develop and strengthen innovative client-oriented agri-finance products for
MSMEs and smallholders, also to access existing credit lines for on-lending to PSAC targeted VCs
WFP – RBA Partnership /
overall collaboration at district
level, KM
Establish linkage between horticulture cooperatives and WFP HGSF programme. Partnership with
WFP is expected to address nutrition enhancement in project target districts and catchment areas,
but also to create stable markets, boost local agriculture, impact rural transformation and strengthen
local food systems
WBG – synergies  with CDAT
Knowledge sharing and synergies in the horticulture sector (e.g. chili solar dryers, cold storage RAB
research, Small Scale Irrigation Technologies (SSTC),  will be directly supported by the CDAT
programme)
KOICA – synergies 
withSFVCM
Knowledge sharing and synergies in the chili, onion and garlic VCs across two common districts of
Bugesera and Rulindo, that will be directly supported by the SFVCM project (drying facilities and
practices, development of master plan for these horticulture exports)
21/31
USAID – synergies  withKWA
Knowledge sharing and synergies on: (i) coffee sector pricing mechanisms; (ii) strengthening tea and
coffee stakeholder platforms; (iii) strengthening of the horticulture sector working group
ENABEL – synergies  with
upcoming project
Knowledge sharing and synergies in the support to horticulture crops for the domestic and regional
market
CACHET – access to credit
lines
Building price risk management capacities of local cooperatives to support 11 coffee Smallholder
Producer Organizations (SPOs)
Kilimo Trust
Partner in the agribusiness hub grant in Rwanda, linking smallholder farmers to consumer driven
markets (national and export), employment creation for youth and women, promotion and adoption
of regenerative and other sustainable production practices.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
a. Project costs[82]
111.
The total cost of PSAC has been estimated at US$ 62.89 million. IFAD will contribute US$ 29.98 million (equivalent to EUR 28.89
million). The contribution of beneficiaries and the private sector is estimated at US$ 5.67 million[83]. The contribution of
implementing partners (Cordaid and Heifer International) is currently estimated at US$ 1.91 million. The Government contribution
is estimated at US$ 5.41 million (equivalent to EUR 5.22 million) [84]. There remains a financing gap of US$ 19.92 million, which
is expected to be potentially financed by the Government of Spain (GoS), but could be filled by funding from IFAD13 in the
unlikely event this funding does not materialise. As per the multilateral development banks’ methodologies for tracking climate
change adaptation and mitigation finance, the total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as
US$ 7,220,000.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
112.
The Table below presents the financiers of the Project by component.
113.
The Table below presents the project financing per year by component.
c. Disbursement
114.
IFAD is committed to adopt existing Financial Management (FM) country systems, to the extent possible, for implementing its
funded programmes. The fiduciary risk of the Treasury-country system is low. The opening of any Government bank account
requires the approval of MINECOFIN. These are consolidated (zero-balanced at day end) into the Treasury Single Account
(TSA), held at National Bank of Rwanda. TSA allow GoR to ascertain in real time the total cash position at end of business day. It
is mandatory that donor funded project bank accounts are included into the TSA mechanism. For PSAC, there will be one
Designated Account (DA) opened in USD at National Bank of Rwanda (NBR) as well as one Project operational Account (PA)
opened in RWF to receive the resources from the DA (see Annex 14: Financial Management sector for a fund flow chart). There
will be also 1 PA opened in RWF for receiving the contributions from GoR.
22/31
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
115.
The beneficiaries are expected to experience increase in income as a direct result of the: (i) increased volume of targeted
commodities exported from Rwanda; (ii) increased value of targeted commodities exported from Rwanda; (iii) increased access
to advisory services, market and financial services which facilitated smallholders inclusion in sustainable export driven VCs; (iv)
increased employment opportunities either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; (v) improved
institutional and policy environment for export driven VCs selected under PSAC.
116.
Potential market and price effects. PSAC investments are expected to increase the volume of products exported per year.
Production under PSAC is expected to increase export volumes for all value chain crops that will be supported, with percentages
ranging from 21 per cent to 112 per cent. The increased productivity is expected to translate into increased foreign exchange
earnings from export.
117.
Financial analysis. The production models developed in this analysis are based on the fact that PSAC will primarily support
beneficiaries to produce for the export market. Production considered therefore is only that which relates to export-oriented
project promoted value chains, as well as benefits from project investment in attendant facilities. It is assumed that each
participating smallholder will allocate only up to 50 per cent of the household land holding to project promoted value chains, and
the remaining 50 per cent will be allocated to other crops to ensure food production for the family. Returns from non-export crops
has therefore not been included in this analysis. Given the average land holding of 0.4 hectares per household, it is therefore
assumed that each household will allocate 0.2 hectares to export-oriented production.
118.
Economic analysis. An economic analysis was carried out in order to assess the economic viability of the project investments,
the economic rate of return and determine how sensitive the project is to foreseen risks (sensitivity). The project is expected to
generate a positive ENPV of RwF27.8 billion with an EIRR of 19 per cent. The project is therefore economically viable and should
be undertaken.
119.
Economic viability and sensitive analysis. Sensitivity analysis was also carried out on the effects of changes in costs and
expected benefits on expected viability of the project. The results were as shown below. 
120.
Based on the results above, PSAC costs not included in the farm model conversion models can increase by up to 110 per cent
while the project still remains viable. PSAC benefits should not reduce by more than 57 per cent in order to ensure that the
project is still economically viable.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
121.
Exit Strategy and Sustainability The project’s exit strategy is embedded in the project’s design and its strategic approach of:
Working directly with the NAEB in charge of PSAC target VCs, as well as with agricultural structures at district and sector
levels to guarantee the long-term sustainability of proximity services. NAEB’s strategic partnership with other donor agencies
(WB, USAID, WFP, KOICA etc.) will enhance coordination and help to develop synergies among all interventions benefiting
PSAC participants during project implementation and after its completion.
Identifying critical areas to be addressed in the target VCs at the project inception stage. In the market chain, PSAC will build
capacity of all players involved in the target VCs strengthening POs, rural MSMEs and exporters so that they continuously
access knowledge, resources and markets. It will promote gender equality and youth engagement in terms of their
participation and representation as leaders in the VC through proper targeting mechanism and effective application of GALS+
23/31
in FFS.
Improving the competitiveness of export-driven value chains while creating sustainable market opportunities for smallholders.
PSAC will  work on enhancing productivity, production at scale, quality and strong market linkages development. This will be
achieved through empowered investments in Pos, apex organizations, etc. supported by enhanced access to infrastructure
and equipment, tailor-made financial services and enabling policy environment. The project interventions will strengthen and
stabilize market forces using appropriate mitigation measures and climate-smart technologies.
Focusing on completing major project activities in the 4th and 5th year of implementation. It will leave a window for
consolidation of activities and start a “gradual exit” process which can be completed by the end of the 6th year. This window
shall ensure that there is sufficient technical and managerial capacity as well motivation of the project beneficiaries,
government institutions and stakeholders to sustain PSAC investments after the project is over. In order to facilitate the
process, PSAC will develop its exit plan during the mid-term review.
122.
As a result, PSAC will leave behind empowered VC players, efficient and effective institutions (at local and national level),
mainstreamed project interventions with government entities and markets as well as a more enabling policy environment for
smallholder producers engaged in the respective VCs. The details of PSAC’s exit and sustainability strategy considering five
dimensions is detailed in Annex 10.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
123.
PSAC’s overall inherent risk level is ‘Moderate’. A detailed integrated project risk management framework (IPRM) is provided in
Annex 9. However, following four subfactors show substantial levels for which mitigation measures are planned in the project.
Table 3 PSAC IPRM with ‘Substantial’ risk areas
Technical design / soundness -
‘Substantial’
It is due to internal factors such as mortality of seedlings, poor access to finance, high cost
of packaging etc. which will be mitigated through better monitoring of seedlings, training of
producers, capacity building of FIs and producers, policy advocacy on packaging material.
Simultaneously, external issues such as international price fluctuations, currency
fluctuation, cost of fertilizer etc. will be mitigated through CACHET to minimize impact of
price fluctuation and promotion of GAP, organic production for reducing use of fertilizers.
Thus, the expected risk will reduce to ‘Moderate’ level.
institutional capacity and
management(M&E) - ‘Substantial’
It is based on experience of implementation of PRICE where the focus on qualitative
information gathering was limited and SPIU had a high load of managing multiple projects.
PSAC has used these learnings by engaging NAEB to manage M&E and planning for
qualitative information collection through annual surveys, organizing learning events etc.
which may lead to reducing the risk level to ‘Moderate’.
Stakeholders - ‘Substantial’
It Is due to some weak POs, limited experience of exporters (especially for horticulture)
and possible poor response from PFIs for VC financing. PSAC has planned a key
partnership with partner agency Cordaid who has experience in capacity building of
producer organizations and strengthening capacities of PFIs. These interventions will
reduce the risk to ‘Moderate’ level.
124.
FM risk is assessed to be substantial at design. This is mainly due to the operational challenges posed by the organizational set
up and for the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) limitations that have not been fully overcome, yet.
The risk profile is expected to change to ‘Moderate’, even in the short term, if the indicated mitigating measures will be timely
complied with. 
I. Environment and Social category
125.
Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures[86] (SECAP). Applying IFAD’s SECAP, the environment and
social categorisation and the climate risk classification of the PSAC is substantial. This categorisation and classification are in
cognisance of the activities of the PSAC that focus on productivity and the enabling environment for the tea, coffee and
horticulture VCs. The activities to improve production may have some adverse effects on the environmental and natural
resources such as soil erosion; increased demand for water resources at particular times; diffuse pollution from increased use of
agro-chemicals; point source pollution from increased effluent discharges from processing plants and washing stations; and
organic waste from processing of all the value chains. However, these effects are expected to be localised with minimal adverse
impacts that can be managed with appropriate actions. Given the nature of the Environment and Social risks, various thematic
studies are developed at design stage, notably Environment, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF), Grievance
Redress Mechanism, Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), Labour Management Plan (LMP), Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP), and Environment, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP). Through a dedicated Environmental Specialist,
PSAC will ensure that the developed SECAP risk management instruments are implemented and that mitigation measures are
instituted. ESCMP will be further updated during project start-up to include screening and assessment, meaningful consultation
leading to consent, confidentiality, restricted and continued access, and legally protected cultural heritage areas once the project
sites(sectors) are confirmed. The mitigation measures will include installation of erosion control measures, institution of climate
smart agriculture, Agroforestry, planting of shade trees, proper solid and effluent waste handling, among others. In addition to the
risk management in the smallholder areas being targeted, any FIs will require adequate Environmental and Social Management
Systems (ESMS) that also address any potential adverse impacts from activities that will be financed.
24/31
J. Climate Risk classification
126.
The climate risk classification for PSAC is moderate. The main climate change risks facing the smallholders in the PSAC target
areas include rising temperatures and rainfall variability with more intense rainfall in some areas, shorter rain seasons and
potential droughts in some locations. The increases in temperature (1.7–2.1⁰C) in the rainy season months will increase crop
water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water from agricultural soils; reduced rainfall is also predicted during these
months. Given the potential adverse impacts of climate change on the PSAC VCs, a detailed climate risk analysis (CRA) will be
undertaken together with the rest of the SECAP risk management instruments during the inception stage. The risk analysis will
include specific recommendation for climate change adaptation options to be included in PSAC. The adaptation measures will be
costed and included in the project budget.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
127.
The PSAC implementation arrangements are meant to ensure optimal use of human resources and smooth coordination
between MINAGRI’s institutions[87].
128.
NAEB. The Lead Implementation Agency will be NAEB, under the responsibility of its Chief Executive Officer (CEO)[88]. NAEB
will host the following key positions, that will be recruited on a competitive basis: 1 Project Operation Manager; 3 VC Specialists
(coffee, tea, horticulture); 1 Access to Finance (A2F) Specialist; 1 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist; 1 Gender and
Social Inclusion Specialist; 1 Environmental Specialist; 1 Knowledge Management (KM) & Communication Specialist; 1
Administrative Assistant; 2 Accountants (reporting to Financial Manager of SPIU for IFAD-funded projects); 1 Procurement
Officer (reporting to Sr. Procurement Officer of SPIU for IFAD-funded projects); 3 drivers (one for each value chain). In addition,
one NAEB Focal Person (young graduates, men and women) will be posted in each target district to ensure smooth coordination
at field level.
129.
SPIU for IFAD-funded projects. Under the overall supervision of the SPIU Coordinator, the SPIU will retain the core functions of
financial management, procurement and Management Information System (MIS), as it has a long-standing experience with
IFAD.
130.
District Authorities. In addition, the project acknowledges the key role of the district authorities and will allocate necessary
resources to ensure smooth implementation, monitoring and coordination of PSAC interventions at field level[89]. Bringing in the
district and sector agriculture staff under the authority of MINALOC will be particularly important to ensure continuous and
sustainable extension services that will further protect the project’s investments.
131.
Project Steering Committee (PSC). In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, a PSC will be established for
PSAC. The Committee will be made up of representatives of MINAGRI and other relevant ministries, as well as representatives of
the target District Councils, members representing the POs and local institutions from the public and private sectors participating
in the Project. The Committee is due to meet at least twice yearly, once to review the draft Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
and again at mid-year to review the implementation progress. It will be responsible for the technical oversight of the
implementation of the AWPB.
132.
Several partnerships are envisaged during implementation, as enunciated in the above Section F, with relevant government and
international institutions. The project will be engaged into specific partnerships with Cordaid and Heifer International as co-
financiers, but also as key implementing partners. A global MoU will be signed between MINAGRI and each partner, while a
detailed annual AWPB reflecting activities to be implemented by them, and related cost (including own co-financing) will be
developed every fiscal year. With regard to WFP, based on the past experience between the Kirehe Watershed Management
Project (KWAMP, 2009-2016) and the Purchase for Progress Programme (P4P) that allowed farmers to sell large quantities of
maize and beans, PSAC will establish a similar MoU with WFP in its 14 target districts.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
133.
Public Financial Management (PFM). According to latest PEFA [91] assessment, conducted in 2017, most aspect of the PFM
system are functioning at a satisfactory level. The PFM system is able to produce credible national budget (including external
donor support) with contained composition variances (PI-2) and transparent (PI-4) comprehensive (PI-5) documentation
available to public. Guidance to budget preparation is good (PI-17). Cash forecasting, Treasury Single Account (TSA)
consolidation and IFMIS integrated accounting secure reliable predictability of fund allocation to government entities (PI21) for
budget execution. Financial integrity is secured through the IFMIS (PI-27), however accuracy and timeliness of reporting requires
improvements (PI-28). Other areas of improvement are in capturing/recording of public assets and in the independence of
Auditor General (PI-30).
25/31
Rwanda is a LIC country. According to the WB-IMF DSA of January 2022, Rwanda’s risk of external and overall debt distress
remains moderate with limited space to absorb shocks. Under the replenishment cycle IFAD 12, an IFAD Loan of US$ 29.98
million will be made available to Rwanda for PSAC. Rwanda is eligible to borrow PBAS resources for 80 per cent on Super Highly
Concessional terms and for 20 per cent on Highly Concessional terms. Super Highly concessional terms loans have a maturity
period of fifty (50) years, including a grace period of ten (10) years starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.
Highly concessional terms loans have a maturity period of forty (40) years, including a grace period of ten (10) years starting
from the date of approval by the Executive Board. The amortization of the Super Highly Concessional terms loan will be of 2.5 per
cent from years 11 to 50. The amortization of the highly concessional terms loan will be as follows: (i) 2 per cent from years 11 to
20; and (ii) 4 per cent from years 21 to 40. The applicable service charge will be determined at the time of approval, based on the
currency of the loan (US$, EUR, SDR).
PSAC is expected to use same financial management (FM) arrangements adopted by current IFAD’s funded portfolio of projects,
which is fully aligned to FM country systems.
The budget planning process is generated by PSAC Operational Team with the contribution of the SPIU in its coordination and
evaluation role. PSAC draft budget, as part of MINAGRI budget, is presented in the national envelope to Parliament on April.
Therefore, it is crucial that final revisions are immediately agreed for submission to IFAD no later than mid-May (at least, 1 month
and a half earlier than the end of the fiscal year). During the fiscal year, any further revisions of the overall budget envelope will
happen on December and will require GoR approval. The new AWPB will be prepared with a minimum quarterly phasing (i) to
sharply monitor any duplication of activities with the closing AWPB, and (ii) to prepare an adequate liquidity plan, by quarters, to
support on time and in full the implementation of the project.
Considering current MINAGRI organizational structure, it is proposed that the borrower (MINOCOFIN) will authorise the lead
project agency (NAEB) to open designated accounts (DA) and project operational bank accounts (PA) for PSAC which will be
managed by the SPIU of IFAD’s funded portfolio of projects, under the aegis of MINAGRI.
MINAGRI will nominate the persons entitled to operate PSAC bank accounts, as well as those entitled to withdraw resources from
the IFAD financing through the submission of withdrawal applications (WA) in the IFAD Client Portal (ICP). MINECOFIN will grant
all necessary credential to operate into the IFMIS for recording accounting entries and process payments.
There will be one DA opened in US$ at National Bank of Rwanda (NBR) as well as one PA opened in RWF to receive the
resources from the DA (see Annex 14 for a flow of fund).Transactions will be authorised by the SPIU-Head of Finance & Fiduciary
Aspects, the SPIU-Coordinator and NAEB-CFO as ultimate approver. NAEB-CFO may delegate the authority to approve
transactions to the SPIU-Coordinator within defined ceiling amounts.
134.
Reporting – Counterpart funds. Counterpart-funding is mainly made of in-kind contributions (IKC) and tax exemptions. The
lack
of counterpart funding observed on other projects is more constitutive of a lack of valuation and inclusion in the financial reporting
than a lack of contributions. Two recent events are triggering a new action plan at Rwanda portfolio level in order to ensure
adequate inclusion of IKC in the financial reporting: the confirmed feasibility for capturing IKC data through the M&E module of the
IFMIS (quantities and values) and the confirmation by the Auditor General of the required criteria for the recording of IKC in the
face of Financial Statements. PSAC should benefit of the related practice implemented by other projects. A first set of guidance
is included in the PIM and will be further improved following other project’s lessons learned.
135.
The Internal Audit office, under the aegis of MINAGRI, currently assigned to audit the portfolio of IFAD funded projects, will liaise
with the SPIU to perform the internal audit to PSAC. The internal auditor, in its independent role, will report to the Project
Steering Committee (PSC) of IFAD’s funded portfolio. The PSC is chaired by PS MINAGRI, co-chaired by NAEB-Deputy CEO
and RAB-Deputy Director General.
External Audit. PSAC will follow the example of the ongoing projects that are all being audited by the Office of the Auditor
General as mandated under the government act/law. IFAD’s review on the quality of the OAG reports for existing projects
indicate highly satisfactory performance ratings, with positive comments given for the level of detail of the audits and use of
acceptable standards (INTOSAI).
The SPIU financial management coordination provided to PSAC includes (i) contribution to budget planning, preparation and
monitoring, (ii) budget execution and treasury management, (iii) financial reporting to Government and IFAD, (iv) IFMIS
implementation and customization, (v) coordination of internal/external audit, (vi) compliance with IFAD’s processes and
procedures and (vii) securing FM operational continuity relating the opening and the closing of projects.
Considering PSAC organizational set up and the overall expansion of the IFAD funded portfolio in Rwanda, it is envisaged that
two accountants funded by PSAC be hired at NAEB with a functional reporting line to the SPIU-Head of Finance and Fiduciary
Aspects.
136.
Governance. Rwanda inherent country risk is low. According to 2019 CPIA[90] rating, Rwanda is a medium-to-high policy
performer (score 4.0) and ranks first (over the last 3 years) out of 40 sub-Saharan countries, with scores above cluster average
(3.1) on all dimensions. Improvements recorded in: Policies and Institutions for Environmental Sustainability (score 4.5), in
Business Regulatory Environment (score 4.5) and ranked second in Public Sector Management and Institutions. Lowest score is
recorded in Transparency Accountability and Corruption in the Public Sector (score 3.5) although well above cluster average
(2.7). In 2021, the TI Corruption Perception Index for Rwanda scored 53 (deteriorating vs PY 54) which places the country in
52nd position out of 180 countries (and 3rd out of African countries).
26/31
137.
Procurement. A Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM), which included a risk assessment of both the country level and the project
institutional dimensions of public procurement was undertaken. The PRM indicates a low inherent risk rating of 2.83, and,
assuming that the recommended risk mitigating actions are undertaken by the Borrower/IFAD and that their expected benefits
are fully realized, the overall net risk rating is also low (2.96).
138.
Procurement Risk Management outcome demonstrates Rwanda’s efforts in ensuring sound procurement management systems.
At the country level some of the risks related to lack of public access to procurement information that were previously identified
by 2016 Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability assessment have been addressed through the use of the e-
procurement system. The e-procurement system has also improved document management systems. The procurement risk
assessment ascertained the soundness of both the Rwandan public procurement framework and the implementing agency.
Consequently, the following institutional arrangements will be in place:
139.
As provided in the IFAD Procurement guidelines[92] paragraph 42, procurement of goods, works and services for IFAD-financed
projects shall be carried out according to the Borrower’s/Recipient’s procurement regulations to the extent that they are
consistent with these Guidelines. The law governing Public Procurement in Rwandan is Law no. 62/2018 of 25/08/2018[93] and
the Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020, establishing regulations on public procurement[94]. A Standard Manual for
Public Procurement (Public Procurement User Guide) is in place for use by procurement entities. These documents will therefore
guide the procurement activities under the PSAC project. 
140.
A procurement Plan will be prepared for the first eighteen (18) months of the project this will be followed by successive twelve
(12) month plans synchronized with the AWPB during implementation. The Procurement Plan will be established using the IFAD
Procurement Plan template. IFAD will provide a no objection to the procurement plan and once the NO objection is provided it
shall serve as the basis for project implementation.
141.
Coordination and central procurement capacities will be focused in the Procurement Unit of the existing SPIU, which is headed
by a Senior Procurement Officer. A Procurement Officer will be recruited to support the procurement functions under the PSAC
project and will be reporting to the Sr. Procurement Officer at the SPIU. For better coordination, the Procurement Officer will be
stationed at NAEB offices in order to coordinate with the rest of the project team.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
142.
Planning. Monitoring of PSAC activities and reporting of results will involve proper coordination between the Project M&E
Specialist and technical team at NAEB and the various implementing partners at national and district level. The capacity of the
Project M&E Specialist at NAEB will be further enhanced right from the onset of the project (FY1) through a dedicated IFAD
training to alignment of the Project M&E system with IFAD requirements.
143.
The Project M&E Specialist at NAEB will coordinate monitoring and evaluation processes and reporting. The Project M&E
Specialist will contribute to the preparation of the project’s consolidated AWPBs, based on the respective AWPBs from the
districts and other implementing partners. The AWPBs will factor in key activities, timelines and expected outputs for effective
results projections and planning of the monitoring visits.
144.
Monitoring. The district level NAEB coordinators will work jointly with the District authorities to ensure activities are implemented
as per work plan and specifications. The Project M&E Specialist will provide the necessary guidance and oversight role to ensure
the data capture forms are duly filled and data points disaggregated as per LF requirements. Additionally, PSAC will collect
qualitative information[95] through case qualitative surveys, case studies, and Focus Grup Discussion, as required. The M&E
forms will be filled by the SPs /contractors (including district level agronomists and other extension agents) directly interfacing
with the beneficiaries at the district level. The M&E Specialist will ensure adequate monitoring systems are used to address
potential overlap of beneficiaries with other similar development projects in the respective target areas. Similar to monitoring
arrangements in the PRICE project, NAEB will assign dedicated technical staff to monitor activities to ensure they are
implemented as per recommended specifications. The Project M&E Specialist will commission bi-annual Data Quality Assurance
(DQAs)[96] missions and coordinate the implementation of targeted studies, including: baseline, annual outcome surveys, Mid-
Term and End Term surveys to assess progress on key outcome and impact level indicators. With the three surveys being fully
compliant with the IFAD COI Guidelines.
145.
Knowledge management. KM will be coordinated by KM Specialist at NAEB. KM will serve as a basis for scaling up of
successes, provide the analytical basis to resolve challenges, and help to adapt activities to changing social and economic
circumstances in the target areas and value chains. A KM action plan will be prepared to (i) identify knowledge gaps and
prioritization of knowledge products to be developed; (ii) ease the scaling up of best practices in the different sectors and
interventions or repackaging of innovative approaches developed elsewhere; (iii) disseminate knowhow based on available
communication tools (newsletter, brochures, websites, radio, knowledge gained through FFS trainings etc.). NAEB team will
equally benefit from other IFAD learning events within the country and region. KM will be used as a key tool in supporting policy
dialogue. MIS will also be part of KM. The learning from MIS around what works and what doesn’t is crucial for KM and
simultaneously the KM also helps to understand the veracity of MIS data as a broad indicator. PSAC will develop its KM and
communication plan in the beginning of the project as depicted in PIM – Annex 8 Section III 2.2.
27/31
146.
Reporting. District level project coordinators will produce monthly reports along a harmonized reporting system to ease data
analysis. All data will be disaggregated by gender and by age. Among women data, further disaggregation will be made to
capture separately the Women-Headed Households (WHHs). The filled data forms will be consolidated at the district level, and
entries will be made on a monthly basis for consolidation into the NAEB M&E system. On a quarterly basis, data from the NAEB
M&E system will be shared with the Head of the Management Information System (MIS) at SPIU to be uploaded in the central
MIS system hosted at MINAGRI. The team will explore the use of mobile based data capture systems with GIS capabilities to
allow geo-referencing of all interventions. Under the overall guidance of NAEB CEO and Chief Operation Officer (COO), the
NAEB Project M&E Specialist, in close coordination with the Project Operations Manager, will lead the preparation of
consolidated 6-monthly and annual progress reports for submission to GoR & IFAD.
b. Innovation and scaling up
147.
The innovative features of PSAC, when compared to predecessor project PRICE, lie first on its integrated approach on a limited
number of districts that will enhance synergies between the various VC interventions. A strong focus will be put on the
methodologies used to include the women and youth along specific activities that can fill the VC gaps. The role of the districts will
be central, as an extended arm of NAEB at field level.
148.
In addition, the stronger emphasis put on access to financial services is expected to help the country move progressively out of
the grant systems that is commonly used by IFAD and other development agencies, towards more sustainable VC financing
mechanisms that will remain beyond project completion. Another key innovation in PSAC will be the use of MINAFFET trade
missions in strategic locations to facilitate in-country market intelligence and trade procedures. The introduction of agroforestry
belts around tea plantations will also be an innovative means to cope with erosion and climate change effects, and at the same
time meet fuelwood needs and provide additional income opportunities. The HEGF piloted under PRICE project will be fine-tuned
and scaled up to meet the needs of horticulture exporters, including youth start-ups. PSAC will also further operationalize the
coffee and tea platforms initiated under PRICE, and it is expected to scale up the RFS as a mean to boost the tea farmers’
access to key fertilizers inputs.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
149.
The main modalities for gathering information on smallholders’ priorities and needs will be the district and community
consultations. Meetings will be organised, through the Local Government Authorities in each target district and the local
traditional leadership and notices about meetings will be posted in public places encouraging participation of youth, women,
men, and PwD. Meetings will be organised at venues and times that allow women and PwD to participate.
150.
At each meeting the project objectives and principles of participation will be explained in local languages and feedback obtained
from the communities including their expectations from their participation in the project. Separate breakaway sessions will be
organised for women and youth in order to allow them to participate freely. The consultations will be minuted and records kept
both at community and project levels. Subsequently, the monitoring of project services delivery will be conducted through
quarterly reports from the concerned district.
151.
A minimum of two dialogues will be organised in each participating community to inform the stakeholders about the project,
discuss the priority infrastructure and select specific investments based on an agreed criterion. Records of the dialogues will be
kept at District and project level. The feedback and reports from the community meetings will be utilised by the District and
project level teams to review the progress being made in PSAC-supported activities. The feedback will inform the bi-annual
reviews and project implementation planning process at the District and central levels and enable the adaptive management and
decision making by the teams.
b. Grievance redress.
152.
PSAC grievance redress processes will build on the existing structures at District, and National level. Under Component A, any
grievances will be registered and resolved through the APG committee. Any grievances that will arise from the implementation of
the project will first be handled at community level through the existing community structures. If the grievance cannot be
addressed it will be escalated to the District level where the DA and his/her structures will try to resolve the issue that is related to
the project activities. Any grievances that cannot be resolved at this level will be reported to the Project National level, i.e., NEAB.
Beyond the District Councils, grievances will be addressed through Provincial Councils.
153.
The project teams, at the District and National levels, will provide information on the grievance redress mechanism available and
messages regarding the zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) as well as the policy on preventing fraud and
corruption. At the community level the consultation processes will provide information on the zero tolerance, prevention, and
reporting of any incidence. The information on the policies will be made available through all PSAC contracts and on project
documents such as leaflets and matching grants proposal templates.
N. Implementation plans
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
28/31
Implementation readiness and start up plans
154.
Project implementation is planned to start in the second quarter of 2023. The draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM), first
AWPB, and first 18-month Procurement Plan (PP) aim to ensure the PSAC implementation starts as scheduled, without
unnecessary delays during the first project year. A national start-up workshop will be organized with all project stakeholders and
implementing partners at all institutional levels to reinforce the implementation modalities of the project. An early implementation
support mission will be mobilized within the first three months of the project effectiveness to cover any gaps in the PIM and
project design.
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plan
155.
Supervision and implementation support will be organised jointly by IFAD and GoR. Supervision will be a continuous process
including joint missions, as well as continuous desk review to ensure that implementation is on track. The composition of
supervision and implementation support missions will largely be determined by the prevailing circumstances. Implementation
support will be provided through the in-country IFAD office, the Regional Hub in Nairobi, and Technical Assistance (TA) to be
mobilized especially on VC development, M&E and Procurement.
156.
A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be undertaken midway through project implementation; it will evaluate whether the project is on
course to achieve its goal. The MTR will be informed by a COI-compliant Mid Term Outcome Survey and will be a key reflection
moment to assess implementation performance and recommend adjustments, as may be required. The recommendations will
take into consideration the likelihood of achieving the project's targets during the remaining implementation period and may
modify these targets and budget allocation, if considered necessary.
157.
At the end of implementation, IFAD will, jointly with the GoR, undertake the Project Completion Review (PCR), in order to report
on the results achieved. As part of completion, a Beneficiary Impact Assessment will be undertaken and findings inform the PCR.
The purposes of the PCR process are to promote accountability, reflect on performance and elicit lessons learned to inform
future programme/project design and to define an appropriate post-project strategy. This will be supported by a COI-compliant
completion survey.
Footnotes
[1] https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/RWA#countrydata
[2] https://rdb.rw/investment-opportunities/agriculture/
[3] Ibid.
[4] As per Agricultural household Survey 2020 report, the national average land size per household is 0.4 ha; and 77.2% of
agricultural households operate on a farm size of less than 0.5 ha.
[5]Almost 60% of food insecure households are vulnerable and 30% are extremely vulnerable - Comprehensive Food Security and
Vulnerability and Nutrition Analysis Survey CFSVA (2018).
[6] National Institute of Statistics, MINAGRI, World Food Programme (WFP), 2018
[7] National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2020
[8] https://www.thewoodfoundation.org.uk/mulindi-additional-information/
[9] Agri Logic, 2018: https://www.cbi.eu/sites/default/files/cbi_vca_rwanda_coffee.pdf
[10] This includes cooperatives, smallholder farmers grouped along out-grower schemes, informal associations, community-based
nurseries, Farmer Field School (FFS) groups, etc. Individual farmers may also be considered on a case-by-case basis according to
their role in the target VCs and the services they can offer to the community.
[11] Current ratio is 1 household has average 4.5 members
[12] As per Rwanda’s classification, Ubudehe Category 2, Subsistence and vulnerable poor, have limited access to resources and
less than 0.5 ha of land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support – UbudeheCategory 3,Market-oriented
producers are less vulnerable and go beyond subsistence farming. These farmers have on average 0.5 ha or more, are engaged in a
more entrepreneurial logic.
[13] Aged 16-30
[14] Private sector companies engaged in macadamia value chain and experienced in macadamia seedlings production will be
engaged to supply of macadamia seedlings for PSAC participants.
[15] PBGF is the model piloted under PRICE and further developed under the Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed
management Project (KIIWP2).
29/31
[16] These medium-sized grant windows will include cooperative-led grants (PASP model) and joint-venture grants (PASP model).
They will not be necessarily tied to a loan.
[17] The PRICE experience has shown that it is necessary to ensure very close monitoring of newly planted seedlings, esp. in
horticulture. Timely irrigation in the first two years after plantation is particularly important to reduce mortality rates.
[18] HCoE shares the technical know-how about modern technologies related to irrigation, green houses and high yielding fruits and
vegetable seedlings. It is established through collaboration between MINAGRI and the MASHAV, Israel’s Agency for International
Development cooperation
[19] Common services model: The common services include -leaves collection, scheduling of transportation, fertilizer distribution etc.
A common service expert (CSE) will work through Ferwacothe to support co-operatives. Each co-operative will have a common
service champion to facilitate the services and also share the records with co-operative, CSE and Ferwacothe.
[20] Calculated only based on cash contributions to the various grant windows - does not include in-kind contributions (e.g. for
tea/coffee hangars)
[21] Government contribution would include foregone taxes, in-kind valuation of Government facilities and District contributions in the
form of staff participation and office allocation
[22] See also PSAC organigram in Annex 8 (PIM)
[23] Assessment of the impact of Decentralization Policy Implementation (2001-2017), Report. Ministry of Local Government - GoR
[24]https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/RWA#countrydata
[25] https://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/trends-labour-market-performance-indicator-rwanda-august-2021
[26] IMF Country Report No. 22/7: 2021 Article IV Consultation and fifth review under the policy coordination instrument—press
release; and statement by the executive director for Rwanda
[27] The PCI is a non-financing tool, which enables Member countries of the IMF to signal commitment to reforms and catalyse
financing from other sources.
[28] IMF Country Report No. 22/7: 2021 Article IV Consultation and fifth review under the policy coordination instrument—press
release; and statement by the executive director for Rwanda
[29] https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/rwanda/overview#1
[30] https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?locations=RW
[31] Almost 60% of food insecure households are vulnerable and 30% are extremely vulnerable - Comprehensive Food Security and
Vulnerability and Nutrition Analysis Survey CFSVA (2018).
[32] National Institute of Statistics, MINAGRI, World Food Programme (WFP), 2018
[33] National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2020
[34] https://rdb.rw/investment-opportunities/agriculture/
[35] As per Agricultural household Survey 2020 report, the national average land size per household is 0.4 ha; and 77.2% of
agricultural households operate on a farm size of less than 0.5 ha.
[36] Implications of the Conflict in Ukraine on Food Access and Availability in the East Africa Region - Update #3, June 2022, WFP
report
[37] ACTION TRACK 1: Ensuring Access to Safe & Nutritious Foods for All ACTION TRACK 2: Shift to Sustainable Consumption
Patterns ACTION TRACK 3: Boost Nature-Positive Production - Sustainable Food Production Systems ACTION TRACK 4: Advance
Equitable Livelihood ACTION TRACK 5: Build Vulnerabilities Shocks & Stress. Source: https://summitdialogues.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/UN-Food-Systems-Summit-2021_NATIONAL-DIALOGUES-REPORT_04-Feb-2022.pdf
[38] Agricultural households survey, 2020
[39] Ibid.
[40] Women’s Empowerment Agriculture Index Study (WEAI), 2020, Baseline report, DFID
[41] Gender and Youth Mainstreaming Strategy Final Report, MINAGRI 2019
[42] Republic of Rwanda, 2015, National Youth Policy; Towards a HAPPi Generation
https://www.nyc.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/template_new/documents/National_Youth_Policy.pdf
[43] Ibid.
[44] Socio-economic characteristics of persons with disabilities
[45] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
[46] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
30/31
[47] NAEB is precisely the Government authority that is in charge of developing and implementing policies and strategies for
expanding exports of agricultural products meeting international market requirements - See https://naeb.gov.rw/index.php?id=27
[48] Agri Logic, 2018: https://www.cbi.eu/sites/default/files/cbi_vca_rwanda_coffee.pdf
[49] The Government of Rwanda estimates that about 70 million coffee seedlings are aged above 55 years
[50] https://www.thewoodfoundation.org.uk/mulindi-additional-information/
[51] In addition to tea, coffee and horticulture, PRICE was also involved in the sericulture sector. Besides, there was no restriction on
the type of horticulture crops in PRICE, bringing the project to tackle about 20 different annual and perennial crops, whose dynamics
were very different. In PSAC, this number will be reduced to key 6 key export VCs (macadamia, avocado, mango, French beans, chili
and essential oils), to be complemented by 4 “traditional crops” that are necessary for crop rotation and intercropping and present a
high potential on the domestic and regional market.
[52] The average survival rate of fruit trees distributed under PRICE project stands at 52.6% (302,790 survived trees vs. 575,631
distributed trees). Source: “Horticulture fruits mapping on behalf of NAEB/PRICE project”; Centre d’Appui à l’Auto Promotion (CAP
Ltd); December 2020
[53] The Final PRICE Impact Assessment Survey showed that 20% respondents from coffee, tea and horticulture VCs feel that their
committees are not strong enough to ensure quality of operations. Source; PRICE Project Completion Report; July 2021. Besides,
the PDR mission could establish that both the coffee and the horticulture federations are still rather empty shells that cannot sustain by
themselves nor fulfil their role as spokesmen of the cooperative movements in their respective sector. In tea, the federation
“Ferwacothe” is somehow stronger, but it still needs support to enable it to deliver more appropriate services to its member
cooperatives.
[54] These include the cooperative-led and private-led grant models introduced in the Climate-resilient Post Harvest and Agribusiness
Project (PASP) and the PRICE Performance-Based Guarantee Facility (PBGF)
[55] In total 88 SACCOS were engaged with PRICE PBGF, representing 83% of the total 106 partner financial institutions (PFIs), the
rest being equally shared between 9 commercial banks and 9 micro-finance institutions (MFIs). Source; PRICE Project Completion
Report; July 2021.
[56] https://ioe.ifad.org/en/w/corporate-level-evaluation-on-ifad-s-support-to-innovations-for-inclusive-and-sustainable-smallholder-
agricultu-1?p_l_back_url=%2Fen%2Fcorporate-level-evaluations
[57] This includes cooperatives, smallholder farmers, grouped along out-grower schemes, informal associations, community-based
nurseries, Farmer Field School (FFS) groups, etc. Individual farmers may also be considered on a case-by-case basis, according to
their role in the target VCs and the services they can offer to the community.
[58] Ubudehe is a wealth-ranking system which classifies Rwandans under four socio-economic wealth categories
[59] For example, the PRICE completion mission rated targeting as satisfactory and highlighted the vital role of the Ubudehe system
in ensuring engagement and participation of poor and vulnerable households
[60] Current ratio is 1 household has average 4.5 members
[61] As per Rwanda’s classification, Ubudehe Category 2, Subsistence and vulnerable poor, have limited access to resources and
less than 0.5 ha of land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support – UbudeheCategory 3,Market-oriented
producers are less vulnerable and go beyond subsistence farming. These farmers have on average 0.5 ha or more, are engaged in a
more entrepreneurial logic.
[62] Additionally, PSAC will provide seedlings and inputs for plantation and first year maintenance to ensure proper establishment of
plantation and reduce the risk of smallholders while developing their long-term asset base.
[63] Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, Nyabihu and Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe, Ruhango and Nyanza
in Southern Province; Rulindo and Musanze in Northern Province and Rwamagana and Bugesera in Eastern Province.
[64] In the FFS approach for instance, PSAC will promote gender equality with two Lead Farmers in each group (1 woman, 1 man).
[65] level of education, past work experiences, collaterals, members of producers groups/cooperatives, etc
[66] The project will build on the just released GESI Assessment and Strategy that informed integration of GESI perspectives into the
USAID-funded “Kungahara Wagura Amasoko” interventions and will help to ensure that women, youth, and persons with disabilities
have equal opportunities and are empowered to participate in export of high-value agricultural products”
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z8HC.pdf
[67] The 4,132 ha of coffee are composed of 3,050 ha for replacement of the old coffee trees and 1,082 ha shall be secured for
rehabilitation. From 3,050 ha that shall be replaced, 200 ha shall be dedicated to women and youth, specifically those who have been
apportioned a piece of family land by husbands and parents respectively or women headed households. Consent shall be sought
from the farmers with interest in having some of their coffee bushes being replaced or rehabilitated.
[68] The 2,410 ha pf tea composed of 1,790 for expansion and 620ha of infilling.
[69] 500 ha for macadamia, 800 ha for avocado, 200 ha for mango and 200 ha for essential oils
[70] Community based nursery raising involves a two-pronged approach – building skills of selected local youth in grafting technique
and promoting women’s groups for decentralized nursery raising. They will further receive project support for nursery raising as a
business. The project support in the initial years will help youth and women groups to acquire the required expertise, which will allow
them to produce seedlings for own use, selling locally as well as to other projects and private sector players, thus developing micro-
enterprises of women’s groups and grafting technicians as service providers. The representatives of seedling producers will be part of
the district level VC platforms.  
[71]Development of agroforestry on about 2,000ha is an indicative figure to fulfil the requirement of wood fuel for tea factory. It
involves plantation on bunds / borders of the farm plots, cooperative owned/received piece of land, which can help to generate
additional income for co-operative, as well as some small plots developed by individual farmers.
[72]Horticulture land issues will be dealt in following manner:  a) GoR has been developing pockets of land through marsh land
development and watershed development initiatives to increase the area under agriculture production in which titles are offered to the
communities. PSAC design mission visited two plots ready to be offered to the community for plantation purpose.  b) Smallholders
living in a cluster will also undertake Horticulture plantation on part of their own plans. This will avoid scattered plantation and facilitate
aggregation of produce, supply of inputs etc. The horticulture plantation on consolidated land will be carried out after a Free Prior and
Informed Consent (FPIC) of producers. FPIC will be obtained from the representative institutions of local communities. The process
for FPIC involving local government structure is detailed in Annex 5 – SECAP review note
31/31
[73] If the RFS review does not confirm the value of PSAC further investment in the scheme, the funds will be reallocated to other
investments in the tea value chain, e.g., on-farm road rehabilitation in strategic locations
[74] It is to be noted that medium-sized cold storage facilities at horticulture cooperative or exporter’s level, initially contemplated at
concept note stage, will not be funded under PSAC since they are to be covered by the upcoming WB CDAT project.
[75] E.g., greenhouses, shade nets, walk-in tunnels
[76] Using Heifer International’s Value Based Holistic Community Development (VBHCD) model that helps strengthen relationships
between community members, this component will be designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains expected to be
realized through investments made under component A
[77] Heifer International launched recently the Heifer Impact Capital to provide affordable finance options to the farmers and
cooperatives it works with. These impact investments provide working capital and financing to purchase or lease equipment, enabling
farmers to scale their businesses and increase their profits.
[78] Initial investments have been made by PRICE and the EU and NAEB has specific Quality Division in charge of the lab to use and
manage the equipment.
[79] Technoserve project has been training young people drawn from Agri technical schools, higher learning institutions, some staff
from NAEB, and has developed a training manual already approved by NAEB and now being translated into Kinyarwanda. There are
two levels of certification - Level 1 & 2. PSAC can leverage on this and work with TNS in CWS under the project.
[80] The design has identified potential PFIs for PSAC, which may include: (i) local SACCOs in project target areas, (ii) Microfinance
Institutions Duterimbere, RIM, Umutanguha, Goshen, Copedu, and (iii) Equity Bank, KCB Bank, Bank of Kigali, Ecobank Rwanda,
Urwego Bank and Unguka Microfinance Bank.
[81] A business membership organization for private-public dialogue
[82]Details presented in Annex 3.
[83] Calculated only based on cash contributions to the various grant windows - does not include in-kind contributions
[84] Government contribution would include foregone taxes, in-kind valuation of Government facilities and District contributions in the
form of staff participation and office allocation
[85]Details presented in Annex 8. PIM
[86] See also full SECAP note in Annex 5
[87] See also PSAC organigram in Annex 8 (PIM)
[88] NAEB is mandated to  develop and implement policies and strategies for expanding exports of agricultural products meeting
international market requirements. NAEB has the appropriate structure to implement PSAC interventions through its Traditional
Commodities Division (for tea and coffee), Emerging Commodities Division (for horticulture), Quality Assurance and Regulatory
Division and Export Services Division. NAEB has also gained relevant expertise and capacity to lead the implementation of large
projects and programmes, including the 9-year IFAD-funded PRICE project.
[89] One of the ley lessons learned in PRICE is that agricultural extension services are difficult to mobilize when they are not placed
under the mandate of the Ministry that is implementing IFAD projects. In Rwanda the district and sector agronomists are not employed
by MINAGRI: all of them are put on the payroll of the district authorities, who depend on the MINALOC.
[90]Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) - 2020 World Bank
[91]Rwanda 2017 | Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
[92]Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/project-procurement-guidelines
[93] Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/index.php
[94] Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/index.php
[95] The qualitative evidence will generate insights on the behaviour change and assess whether interventions are happening and
delivering changes as envisioned in the project’s theory of change.
[96] DQA plan will be developed at project start-up   along with KM and communication plan.
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Logical Framework
1/12
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
Total Project Outreach
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Project Reports
Annually
NAEB M&E
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons receiving
services
Male
Female
Young
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21840
44222
14560
29482
10920
22111
36400
73704
60
40
30
60
40
30
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Project Reports
Annually
NAEB M&E
Household members
0 126000 255128
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Project Reports
Annually
NAEB M&E
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
Corresponding number of households reached
Women-Headed Households -
Percentage (%)
Non Women-Headed Households
0
0
0
0
0
5600
11339
22400
45356
28000
56695
20
80
20
80
Project Reports
Annually
NAEB M&E
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project Goal 
To increase incomes of the rural poor, by supporting inclusive
agri-exports’ value chains’
NAEB M&E
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
Increased income for participating households
Project Reports
Women-Headed households that
report an increase in income as a
result of PSAC assistance
Non Women-Headed households that
report an increase in income as a
result of PSAC assistance
Women-Headed households that
report an increase in income as a
result of PSAC assistance
Non Women-Headed households that
report an increase in income as a
result of PSAC assistance
Total number of HH that report an
increase in income as a result of PSAC
assistance - Number
0
30
80
0
6720
36284
0
1680
9071
0
30
80
0
8400
45356
Increased income
will be used on
household
improvements and
that stable political,
macro-economic
environment is
maintained in the
country. Continued
government support
to improve returns
to farmers in export
value chains. Food
security and
incomes increase
through a combined
effect of increased
crop production and
improved market
access
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
To support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-
driven value chains, by increasing their climate-resilient
productive capacity and market access
COI Household
survey
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
NAEB M&E
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
Males
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
50
37800 127563
40
40
15120
51025
60
60
22680
76538
NAEB M&E
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
HHs reporting increase in income by 30% above baseline as a result
of PSAC assistance
COI Household
survey
Total number of HHs reporting
increase in income by at least 30%
above baseline - Number
Number WHHs reporting increase in
income 30% above baseline - Number
% of total HH reporting increase in
income 30% above baseline -
percentage %
Number of Non WHHs reporting
increase in income 30% above
baseline - Number
% WHHs reporting increase in income
30% above baseline - percentage %
% Non WHHs reporting increase in
income 30% above baseline -
percentage %
0
5600
34017
0
0
1120
6803
20
60
0
4480
27213
0
0
20
80
20
80
Increased value of agriculture-related financing accessed as a result
of PSAC assistance
Project surveys,
NAEB statistics
Annually
Increased value of coffee-related
financing
0
50
120
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist,
Access to Finance
Specialist
Robust gender
targeting strategy
and action plan
developed Capacity
building
interventions ensure
strong governance
and give voice to
women and youth
PFI will consider
the proposed PSAC
support relevant to
their business
model, and show
interest in value
chain financing to
the concerned
stakeholders of the
project. Community-
based approach is
widely used to raise
seedlings under
PSAC project
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/12
Name
Increased value of tea-related
financing
Increased value of horticulture-related
financing
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
0
50
100
50
80
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
COI Household
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons with new
jobs/employment opportunities
0
0
0
0
1800
4275
1200
2850
1000
2138
3000
7125
NAEB M&E
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 1. Smallholders’ climate-smart production and
productivity in selected export-driven value chains have
increased
Increased value of targeted commodities exported from Rwanda
Increased tea exports value -
Percentage (%)
Increased coffee exports value -
Percentage (%)
Increased horticulture exports value -
Percentage (%)
0
0
0
40
80
50
100
50
80
Increased volume of targeted commodities exported from Rwanda
Increased tea exports volume
Increased coffee exports volume
Increased horticulture exports volume
0
0
0
50
50
50
100
100
100
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Total number of household members
Households
Women-headed households
Households
0
0
0
0
60000 123600
50
60
12000
24800
13000
27000
Project M&E
system
Annually
NAEB M&E
Project M&E
system
Annually
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
COI Household
survey
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
NAEB M&E
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable
and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Project surveys,
NAEB statistics
Annually
Total number of household members
Households
Women-headed households
Households
0
0
0
0
67500 135000
50
80
6000
12000
15000
30000
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
Adoption of value
addition and post
harvest loss
reduction
technologies
promoted by the
project. Sustainable
market linkages
established between
smallholder
producers and
exporters. No sharp
drop in international
market prices
Farmers adopt
recommended good
agricultural
practices and
climate events.
Stakeholders
develop capacity to
manage and show
interest to invest in
new climate resilient
technologies. No
extreme weather
and climate events.
Stakeholders
develop capacity to
manage and show
interest to invest in
new climate resilient
technologies.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.1 The development and adoption of innovative
climate-resilient technologies and practices are supported for
expansion, rehabilitation and rejuvenation of plantation areas
Rejuvenated coffee plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Rejuvenated coffee plantations in
strategic area (target density 2500
trees/ha)
0
600
1082
Rehabilitated coffee plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Rehabilitated coffee plantations in
strategic area (target density 2500
trees/ha)
0
1000
3050
Expansion of tea plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Newly planted tea in strategic areas
(target density 14,000 bushes/ha)
0
1000
1790
Infilling in tea plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Tea infilling in strategic areas (target
density 14,000 bushes/ha)
0
150
620
Expansion of macadamia plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Newly planted macadamia in strategic
areas (target density 204 trees/ha)
0
200
500
Expansion of avocado/mango plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Newly planted avocado/mango in
strategic areas (target density 300
trees/ha)
0
500
1000
Expansion of essential oils plantations
Project Surveys Annually
Newly planted essential oils in strategic
areas (target density (28,000
bushes/ha)
0
100
200
No extreme weather
and climate events;
Project receives
appropriate
technical expertise
for Macadamia
seedlings
production for which
it may have to
depend on external
resource persons.
Mortality of plants
checked through
strong coordination
among various
interventions viz.
nursery raising,
transportation and
aftercare of
plantation. Selected
community
members / groups
develop required
skills and
knowledge in
grafting and nursery
raising.
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
Total number of persons trained by the
project
0
50000 120000
Project M&E
system
Annually
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.2. Innovative climate-resilient technologies are
developed and promoted
Total number of attendances to training
sessions
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
Young people trained in crop
Total persons trained in crop
0
0
0
0
0
50000 120000
30000
72000
20000
48000
15000
36000
50000 120000
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and
climate-related risks
Total size of groups
Groups supported
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
0
0
28347
56695
140
300
17008
34017
11339
22678
8504
17008
Cooperatives/Private companies invest in climate-resilient
technologies
Coffee investments – Total Value
(USD)
Tea investments – Total Value (USD)
Horticulture investments – Total Value
(USD)
0
0
0
421
2001
712
800
814
2280
Project M&E
system, NAEB
statistics
Annually
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist
No extreme weather
and climate events.
Stakeholders
develop capacity to
manage and show
interest to invest in
new climate resilient
technologies.
Project M&E
system, NAEB
statistics
Annually
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
8/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 2. Stakeholders’ access to advisory services,
market and financial services has improved to facilitate their
inclusion in sustainable export-driven value chains
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
Total number of household members
Households
Women-headed households
Households
0
0
0
0
12000
30000
15
30
4000
12000
2667
6667
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons with new
jobs/employment opportunities
0
0
0
0
1800
4275
1200
2850
1000
2138
3000
7125
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Household members
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0
88200 178590
3920
7937
70
70
19600
39686
COI Household
survey
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
NAEB M&E
Project surveys,
SP reports
Annually
NAEB M&E, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
Exporters’ interest
and willingness to
source their
products from
smallholder POs.
Commitment of POs
to supply exporters
on regular basis.
Financial products
and services
developed under
PSAC respond to
smallholder farmers
and exporters
needs
COI Household
survey
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
NAEB M&E, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making of
local authorities and project-supported service providers
COI Household
survey
Household members
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0
63000 127564
2800
5670
50
50
14000
28348
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
NAEB M&E, Gender
Specialist, Targeting and
Social Inclusion Specialist
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private entities
Number of POs
0
140
300
Project M&E
system, SP
reports
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC Specialists
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
9/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC Specialists
NAEB M&E
Baseline,
Mid Term,
Completion
Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private entities
POs’ contracts in coffee - Number
POs’ contracts in tea - Number
POs’ contracts in horticulture - Number
0
0
0
50
50
40
120
100
80
Project M&E
system, SP
reports
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to markets,
processing and storage facilities
COI Household
survey
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Size of households
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to processing facilities
Size of households
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to storage facilities
Size of households
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Households reporting improved
physical access to processing facilities
Households reporting improved
physical access to storage facilities
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50
80
67500 135000
6000
12000
50
80
67500 135000
6000
12000
50
80
67500 135000
6000
12000
15000
40000
15000
40000
15000
40000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
10/12
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.1. Rural infrastructure facilities and equipment are
constructed/provided
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or
rehabilitated
Total number of facilities
0
70
202
Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated
Coffee facilities
constructed/rehabilitated - Number
Tea facilities constructed/rehabilitated -
Number
Horticulture facilities
constructed/rehabilitated - Number
0
0
0
20
20
30
67
64
71
Output 
Output 2.2. Producers organizations’ and FIs' technical and
business management capacities are strengthened
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development services
Rural enterprises
0
170
350
Number of Rural enterprises accessing business development
services
Rural enterprises in coffee - Number
Rural enterprises in tea - Number
Rural enterprises in horticulture -
Number
0
0
0
80
50
40
170
100
80
Project M&E
system,
contractors
reports
Project M&E
system,
contractors
reports
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Procurement
Specialist
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Procurement
Specialist
Project M&E
system, SP
reports
Project M&E
system, SP
reports
Annually
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist
Strengthened capacity of financial institutions to implement
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Number of participating FIs use of an
ESMS
0
1
Output 
Output 2.3. Market linkages are established and strengthened
Market-driven certifications obtained/renewed and sustained among
farmer organizations and exporters
Project M&E
system, SP
reports
Annually
NAEB M&E, Access to
Finance Specialist
Project M&E
systems
Annually
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, NAEB Quality
Assurance Division ecialist
4
1
Market-driven certifications in tea -
Number
Market-driven certifications in coffee –
Number
0
0
1
3
10
Strong producers
organizations and
their linkages with
markets or private
sector companies
formed. Cost of
accessing finance
remains affordable
for small producers
and other value
chain stakeholders
No extremely
negative price
fluctuation in the
market
Producers and
producers
organizations show
interest in
developing their
technical and
business skills. A
set of policies,
procedures, tools
and updated ESMS
through BRD is
available to the PFIs
PSAC beneficiaries
willing to engage in
certification
process. Distinctive
market advantage
in acquiring specific
certifications.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.4 A range of diversified financial products is timely
accessible to stakeholders of selected value chains
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project M&E
system, SP
reports, PFI
reports
Annualy
NAEB M&E, VC
Specialists, Gender
Specialist, Access to
Finance Specialist
11/12
Name
Market-driven certifications in
horticulture – Number
Total market-driven certifications -
Number
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
0
3
7
10
21
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Total number of accesses to financial
services
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Young people in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing financial
services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing financial
services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Total persons accessing financial
services - savings
Total persons accessing financial
services - credit
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18500
93000
5500
20000
5000
15000
3000
18000
6000
35000
4000
20000
3500
15000
8500
38000
10000
55000
Outcome 
Outcome 3. Institutional and policy environment of selected
export-driven VCs is improved
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment
Number
0
1
3
Annually
NAEB/SPIU
Project reports,
Policy briefs,
guidelines,
evidence-based
research
Output 
Output 3.1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number of knowledge products developed in terms of policy briefs,
guidelines, evidence-based research - Number
Project reports,
KM products
Annually
NAEB/SPIU
PFI will consider
the proposed PSAC
support relevant to
their business
model, and show
interest in value
chain financing to
the concerned
stakeholders of the
project. Financial
products and
services developed
under PSAC
respond to
smallholder farmers
and exporters
needs.
Positive response
from the
Government in
policy formulation.
Positive response
from the
Government in
policy formulation.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
12/12
Name
Number of knowledge products
developed in terms of policy briefs,
guidelines, evidence-based research -
Number
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
2
4
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 3.2. Functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported
Number of national and district platforms for targeted VCs supported
- Number
Number of national and district
platforms for targeted VCs supported -
Number
0
17
17
Positive response
from the
Government in
policy formulation.
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 3: Project cost and financing 
A.  Main assumptions for Cost Estimation 
Introduction.  The  annex  describes  the  assumptions  underlying  the  derivation  of  the 
1. 
project costs, presents the summary and detailed cost tables and the financing plan. 
2. 
Project Period. The project will be financed over a six-year period. 
3. 
Inflation. In 2021, headline inflation decelerated to 0.8 per cent on average from 7.7 per 
cent  recorded  in  2020.  The  deceleration  in  headline  inflation  was  reflected  in  all  its  main 
components.  Food  inflation  dropped  to  -1.0  per  cent  from  12.1  per  cent,  core  inflation  slowed 
down to 2.1 per cent from 5.6 per cent, while energy inflation eased 1.8 per cent from 7.8 per 
cent. It is projected that inflation will gradually increase annually by 1 per cent at project start 
up to 6.7 per cent by project completion.  
4. 
In particular, a drop was recorded in food inflation and it was mostly reflected in vegetables’ 
inflation that eased to -10.6 per cent in 2021 from 21.5 per cent in 2020. Vegetables' prices in 
2021 evolved below the 2020 price levels and even below the typical patterns of the historical 
prices (2015-2020). The decelerations observed in vegetables inflation in 2021 were mostly on 
the back of the good performance of agricultural production, coupled with the base effect.   
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate was fixed at 1 US$ = 1,030 RWF as per average market 
5. 
forex rate during 2021-2022. Project costs are presented in both RWF and US$ currency.  
Physical  and  price  contingencies.  Both  types  of  contingencies  have  been  taken  into 
6. 
account and included in the costing of the project. The gradual annual inflation rate increases of 
1 per cent at project start projected to increase to 6.7 per cent by project completion, has been 
used to set physical and price contingencies for all activity costs at 1 per cent.   
Taxes and Duties. Duties and taxes were provided for. Government will contribute US$ 
7. 
5.4 to cover all duties and taxes amounting to 8.6 per cent of the total project funding.  
8. 
Expenditure Accounts. The Project expenditure accounts will be the following:  
Training, Workshops and Meetings 
I.  Goods, Services and Inputs 
II. 
III.  Grants and Subsidies 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII.  Operating costs 
Civil Works 
Policy Statement & Strategy 
Technical Assistance & Consultancies 
Salaries and Allowances 
B.  Total cost and Financing 
9. 
The  total  combined  PSAC  investment  and  incremental  recurrent  costs,  including  physical 
and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 62.89 million (FRW 64.7 billion). In this total cost, 
IFAD  is  expected  to  contribute  resources  amounting  to  US$  29.98  million  (47.7%),  The 
Government of Rwanda – US$ 5.4 million (or 8.6%), Private sector – US$ 4.3 million (or 6.8%), 
beneficiary contribution – US$ 1.3 million (or 2.2%), Heifer – US$ 1.2 million (or 1.9%), Coraid 
– US$ 0.7 million (or 1.1%), and The Government of Spain (potential financing gap) – US$ 19.9 
million (or 31.7%). The detailed cost tables and additional summary tables are presented below. 
The investment per component is as follows:  
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
-  Component A - Investment to enhance climate smart production and productivity of 
selected export - driven value chain accounts for US$ 38.35 million, representing approx.  
61  per  cent  of  total  project  costs.  This  component  represents  the  core  investments  of  the 
project that is mainly geared towards investing in export crops.  
-  Component B - Enabling business environment along selected export - driven value 
chains  accounts  for  US$  17.94  million  representing  approx.  28.5  per  cent  of  total  project 
costs. 
-  Component C - Project management and Policy support for US$ 6.6 million, 10.5 per 
cent of total project costs, of which US$ 2.23 million is related to investment costs in policy 
support and US$ 4.37 is related to re-current costs.  
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1: Project cost by component (RWF / US$) 
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2: Project expenditure accounts by components (US$) 
4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 3: Financing Plan by Components (US$) 
5 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 4: Financing Plan by Expenditure Accounts (US$) 
6 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix B:  
Detailed Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1.1: 
Table 1.2:  
Table 1.3:  
Table 1.4: 
Table 2:               Project management and Policy support  
Support smallholder farmers production and productivity 
Improvement of rural Infrastructure activities 
Capacity building of producer organisations  
Backward and forward market linkages 
8 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1.1. Support smallholder farmers production and productivity (US$) 
9 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1.2. Improvement of rural Infrastructure activities (US$) 
10 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1.3. Capacity building of producer organisations (US$) 
\a For 50 co-operatives (1 training per co-operative) 
\b Strengthened by proximity coaching,  targeting 1300 FFS @30farmers 
\c Managing FFS: roles and responsibility, method of engagement and problem solving - Training and exposure visit (For 2600 
Lead Farmers - 2 per FFS and 120 FFS coaches, 90 batches, 3 days 
\d 4 women per cooperative for 50 co-operatives i.e. 200 women(in eight batches - 1 day 
\e Through local benchmarking 
\f PSAC approach, targeting, interventions and role of FFS (For FFS Coaches) 
\g Managing FFS: roles and responsibility, method of engagement and problem solving - Training and exposure visit (For Lead 
Farmers and FFS coaches - 700 persons, 25 batches, 3 days 
11 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
\h Capacity Building in strategies for Social inclusion - Targeting for PSAC, Gender and Youth in Horticulture value chain (Lead 
Farmers and FFS Coaches) - 700 persons, 25 batches, 3 days 
\i (lead farmers and FFS coaches) - 700 persons, 25 batches,  3 days, 
\j targeting 225 FFS @30farmers 
\k (for lead farmers and FFS coaches) Regular training in Yr. 1 &2 with refresher training in 3 &4 
\l for training of lead farmers and operators (Protective agriculture) 
\m Production, storage, post-harvest handling, logistics, quality management 
\n Cooperatives principles, law, policies, relations with external stakeholders 
\o accounting system, accounting policies, cash handling, 
\p budgeting, external finance, finance strategy, membership contribution, savings 
\q financial reporting, costs & sales price, cash flow, income, expenditure, liquidity, transaction recording/record and 
bookkeeping, access and use of financial information 
\r To ensure they provide value for money & demand driven BDS 
\s To develop paid for services 
\t Includes training and coaching FFS coaches on Farming as business module 
\u Trajectories around equipment maintenance  
\v Farming as a business / business creation /link to challenge fund  
\w Govt, FO, Pvt sector, ... 
\x Through Financial Inclusion  
\y Aflatoxin control, proper post-harvest handling 
12 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1.4. Backward and forward market linkages (US$) 
13 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
\a By entering into MOUs with the farmers in the zones they operate in (Women and Youth Led) 
\b Patenting, Branding and designing of packaging materials (Lumpsum) 
\c Preparation of appellate coffee samples for promotion in diplomatic mission trade attach'es, and International trade fairs 
(Lumpsum) 
\d For all commodities 
\e identification of niche, identification of certification requirements, coaching exporters 
\f for 30 youth, 4 weeks 
\g for 10 persons 
\h 1 from each of progressive cooperatives (Capacity Building for local coffee quality , barrister, coffee grading quality specialists 
\i Includes international recognition (Technical Assistance and upgrading the observed gaps for compliance as per scoped 
accreditation) 
\j Mobilize and provide specialized training to smallholder farmers to engage in improved sustainable farming practices (irrigation, 
green houses and integrated farming) 
\k Post-harvest handling, All-year round production techniques, climate risk management 
\l capacity building on good governance, business plans development, input supply, marketing and access to finance. 
\m Through product diversification and increased access to markets 
\n For horticulture products and create market linkage services. 
\o Facilitate the establishment of Youth Agribusiness Hubs at identified central locations to improve farmer’s access to inputs and 
relevant Business Development Services. 
\p like MoU, Service level agreement for the parties agreements, etc.  
\q between equipment supplier and FOs  
\r Agri- financing through the introduction of the digital credit assessment tool (Simbuka+)  
\s in partnership with AMIR - CORDAID 
\t product offering, client orientation, loan assessment and automation (Ingabo CBS) 
\u creating Create comprehensive farmer profiles, (access to credit status of individual farmers, field data, supply contracts, GPS 
location)  
\v digital market inf, weather inf, digital market platform, supply mgt solutions, product traceability, mobile payments, etc  
\w learning visits, development knowledge products such as factsheets, blogs, and documentary video, participation in webinar, 
conference 
\x field visit, quality data audits, quick assessments, human interest stories 
14 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2. Project management and Policy support (US$) 
\a To engage in coffee value chain policy research and development 
\b on a) intercropping in coffee (banana, essential oil plants), b) packaging material and c) increasing airfreight capacity and 
maintaining affordable rates d) supply contact business models 
\c for organization of annual multistakeholder meeting  on addressing policy issues in horticulture Value chain and developing 
action plan 
\d Quantitative surveys to support implementation (annual mortality rate of fruit plants, co-operative ratings etc.) 
15 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
16 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................... 2 
PROJECT AREA AND BENEFICIARIES ................................................................................................ 2 
ASSUMPTIONS ................................................................................................................................ 4 
BENEFITS ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
POTENTIAL MARKET AND PRICE EFFECTS ....................................................................................... 5 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ....................................................................................................................... 6 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS .................................................................................................................... 15 
CONCLUDING REMARKS ............................................................................................................... 17 
APPENDICES .................................................................................................................................. 18 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
Promoting Smallholder agro-export Competitiveness (PSAC) is being designed to focus 
on  improving  the  competitiveness  of  targeted  Value  Chains  through:  (i)  promoting  gender 
sensitive and climate smart productivity enhancing technologies; (ii) reduction of post-harvest 
losses;  (iii)  inclusive  infrastructural  development;  (iv)  use  of  climate-resilient  agricultural 
practices; (v) backward and forward market linkages; (vi) enhanced quality control/assurance 
to  ascertain  compliance  with  export  market  requirements;  and  (vii)  equitable  access  to 
financial services by leveraging the proposed value chain approach.  
2. 
The agriculture sector in Rwanda accounts for one-third of the GDP and employs over 
67 per cent of the Rwandan population. The sector continues to be predominantly subsistence 
and low-income agriculture. The average land holding is 0.4 hectares, which negatively affects 
productivity  and  competitiveness.  The  majority  of  farmers  are  dependent  on  rain-fed 
agriculture, which limits productivity in times when rains are not adequate. Agriculture is also 
affected by climate change (CC), soil degradation and other vulnerabilities.  
3. 
Strong  opportunities  exist  in  the  coffee,  tea  and  horticulture  sectors  that  enjoy 
favourable  agro-climatic  conditions  and  an  investment-friendly  environment  that  led  to 
classify  them  as  priority  export  VCs.  This  Economic  and  Financial  Analysis  (EFA)  has  been 
carried  out  to  establish  the  viability  of  costs  against  expected  benefits  from  investment  in 
PSAC  targeted  value  chains.  The  targeted  value  chains  are  coffee,  tea  and  horticultural 
products.  Benefits  expected  to  accrue  to  project  beneficiaries  will  arise  from  increased 
productivity  due  to  better  crop  management  practices,  access  to  better  infrastructure, 
participation in production for the export market which may fetch higher prices compared to 
local  markets,  increased  value  addition  to  local  products,  better  quality  of  production, 
increased demand for both family and hired labour, participation in climate smart practices in 
production, among others. Exports are also expected to generate foreign currency inflow into 
the economy of Rwanda. 
PROJECT AREA AND BENEFICIARIES 
1)  Project Area 
The project will target a total of fourteen (14) districts distributed across Rwanda, with 
4. 
a particular emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, that are also including some of 
the most vulnerable rural population. The final selection of the districts and their respective 
sectors has been based on the following criteria: (i) high poverty rates and high rates of food 
insecurity; (ii) comparative advantage for the development of targeted export-driven value 
chains, such as the existence of a traditional production basin or regulated zone, the proximity 
of  a  strong  market,  and  favorable  agro-climatic  conditions;  and  (iii)  alignment  and 
development of strategic partnerships with other development partners in Rwanda to avoid 
the  duplication  of  investments  and  to  seek  complementarity  among  the  proposed 
interventions. 
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
2)  Beneficiaries 
Two  main  categories  of  beneficiaries  will  be  targeted  through  complementary 
5. 
interventions meant to support their participation in commercial and inclusive VCs: (i) rural 
smallholder farmers, grouped as much as possible along Producer Organizations (POs)1, with 
a  strong  focus  on  women  and  youth;  (ii)  off-takers  processors/exporters,  who  can  be 
cooperatives, individuals or rural SMEs. PSAC will mostly focus on existing actors with proven 
track record in inclusive VC development; yet new producers/off-takers will also be given an 
opportunity to benefit from project support, especially in the more nascent horticulture sector. 
The targeting mechanisms will be based on the Ubudehe system, as is currently done for all 
IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. 
PSAC  will  target  beneficiaries  with  various  value  chain  crops.  The  classification  of 
6. 
beneficiaries is as shown in the table below: 
Table 1: Expected PSAC beneficiaries 
7. 
Production  will  be  supported  on  a  total  of  8,242  hectares  used  to  produce  project 
supported value chains. Given the average land holding by households at 0.4 hectares, it is 
assumed  that  each  beneficiary  household  will  allocate  50  per  cent  of  its  available  land  to 
project  promoted  value  chain  crops.  The  8,242  hectares  to  be  supported  by  PSAC  will 
therefore  be  contributed  by  56,695  households  with  each  allocating  an  average  of  0.2 
hectares  to  project  supported  value  chain  crops.  With  the  average  household  size  at  4.5 
individuals, PSAC interventions are expected to affect 255,128 individuals. 
1 This includes cooperatives, smallholder farmers grouped along out-grower schemes, informal associations,  community-based nurseries, FFS 
groups, etc. Individual farmers may also be considered on a case-by-case basis according to their role in the target VCs and the services they can 
offer to the community. 
3 
HectaresHouseholdsIndividualsCoffee rehabilitation3,050       27,730       124,785       Coffee rehabilitation1,082       9,840          44,280          Tea expansion1,790       Tea inflilling620           Macadamia500           1,000          4,500            French beans-            500             2,250            Essential oils200           1,000          4,500            Avocado800           1,600          7,200            Mango200           400             1,800            Chilli cultivation-            1,000          4,500            Greenhouse crops2,000          9,000            Total8,242       56,695       255,128       11,625       52,313           
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 2: Cost per beneficiary 
Given that allocation to PSAC currently stands at US$ 62.89 million and that there are 
8. 
255,128 beneficiaries, the unit cost per beneficiary is expected to be US$ 247. 
ASSUMPTIONS 
-  Average size of land available to each family is assumed to be 0.4 hectares per 
- 
- 
- 
- 
household. 
Participating smallholder farmers will allocate 50 per cent of the available land 
holding to production of crops for export supported by the project. 
Interest rates on commercial loans taken from banks is assumed to be 17 per cent 
for smallholder farmers to finance farming activities. 
Future earnings have been discounted at a rate of 12 per cent, being the prevailing 
market rate used in the financial analysis. 
Future returns from project supported value chains are expected to continue 
accruing to beneficiaries for a period of 20 years. 
-  The exchange rate from RwF to US$ is expected to be US$ 1 equals RwF 1030. 
Prices in RwF have been used in this analysis, and converted to US$ whenever 
- 
required at an exchange rate of US$ 1 = RwF 1030.  
BENEFITS 
Capacity building of producer organizations 
PSAC will closely involve community producer organizations. Community nurseries will 
9. 
be  targeted  to  supply  seedlings  required  for  coffee,  tea,  macadamia,  avocado  and  mango 
value chains. The project demand which is expected to be fulfilled by community nurseries is 
as indicated in the table below. 
Table 3: Quantity of seedlings required from community nurseries by year 
4 
PSAC Cost (USD)62,894,094        Individual beneficiaries255,128              Cost per beneficiary (USD)247                      ItemUnitsTotalPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5Coffee seedlingsSeedlings1,305,000 2,607,500      2,607,500      1,105,000          -                       7,625,000      Tea SeedlingsSeedlings5,600,000 14,280,000    7,000,000      6,860,000          -                       33,740,000    Shade/Woodlot seedlingsSeedlings171,000     431,750          652,000          762,500              762,500              2,779,750      Macadamia seedlingsSeedlings30,600       40,800            20,400            -                       -                       91,800            Avocado seedlingsSeedlings80,000       120,000          80,000            -                       280,000          Mango seedlingsSeedlings20,000       30,000            20,000            -                       70,000            Total seedlings7,206,600 17,510,050    10,379,900    8,727,500          762,500              44,586,550    Number of seedlings required per period 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
10.  A total of 44,586,550 seedlings will be required. The largest number of seedlings to be 
supplied will be tea seedlings, due to the high density of 14,000 seedlings required per hectare 
supported. Coffee seedlings will be required at a rate of 2,500 seedlings per hectare, leading 
to a total demand of 7,625,000 seedlings. Avocado, Mango and Macadamia seedlings will be 
required in less quantities due to the comparatively smaller hectares to be supported under 
the project. 
Enhanced access to financial services 
11.  The  quality  and  outreach  of  rural  financial  services  provided  by  financial  service 
providers will be improved. At the same time, the capacity of intended beneficiaries to access 
financial  services  will  also  be  improved.  Partner  financial  institutions  will  be  expected  to 
increase  their  business  profitability  given  the  increased  market  and  credit  lines  availed 
through  the  project.  The  financial  literacy  module  for  FFS  will  also  improve  the  ability  of 
project beneficiaries to consume financial services in a sustainable manner even the project 
period. Transaction costs, increased efficiency and sustainable access to financial services will 
also  arise  due  to  the  financial  digitization  interventions  of  PSAC.  A  credit  line  will  also  be 
accessed by financial service providers for on lending to participants in the targeted project 
value chains. 
12. 
Investment in project supported value chains will require external financing to absorb 
the cash requirements per hectare during the initial years of production. Details of financing 
requirements per crop will be as indicated in the table below. 
Table 4: External financing required per year 
13.  The project interventions will require to provide a total of RwF 28.7 billion to finance the 
short term cash requirements of smallholders that engage in the production of value chain 
crops promoted by the project. The largest financing requirement will be in the first year, and 
keep  reducing  as  returns  from  harvested  crops  continue  increasing.  Rural  financial  service 
providers are expected to provide these finances, and in the process, earn interest of RwF 4.8 
billion as a result of business opportunities presented by PSAC investments. 
POTENTIAL MARKET AND PRICE EFFECTS 
5 
HectaresY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8TotalCoffee replacement30502,789,987,500    3,806,018,750   2,086,581,250  523,456,250     -                       -                   -                   -                   9,206,043,750    Coffee rehabilitation1082868,034,500        1,034,392,000   507,593,250     63,973,250        -                       -                   -                   -                   2,473,993,000    Tea expansion17903,510,190,000    1,331,760,000   1,331,760,000  -                       -                       -                   -                   -                   6,173,710,000    Tea inflilling620884,318,400        -                        -                       -                       -                       -                   -                   -                   884,318,400        Macadamia500634,400,000        68,150,000         68,150,000        68,150,000        68,150,000        68,150,000    68,150,000    68,150,000    1,111,450,000    French beans50-                         -                        -                       -                       -                       -                   -                   -                   -                         Essential oils20013,400,000          -                        -                       -                       -                       -                   -                   -                   13,400,000          Avocado8003,301,753,600    1,330,713,600   1,330,713,600  1,330,713,600  610,713,600     -                   -                   -                   7,904,608,000    Mango200585,438,400        92,678,400         92,678,400        92,678,400        92,678,400        -                   -                   -                   956,152,000        Total financing required12,587,522,400  7,663,712,750   5,417,476,500  2,078,971,500  771,542,000     68,150,000    68,150,000    68,150,000    28,723,675,150  Interest charges17%2,139,878,808    1,302,831,168   920,971,005     353,425,155     131,162,140     11,585,500    11,585,500    11,585,500    4,883,024,776    Total external financing14,727,401,208  8,966,543,918   6,338,447,505  2,432,396,655  902,704,140     79,735,500    79,735,500    79,735,500    33,606,699,926  Subsidy required (RwF)Value chain 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
14.  PASC investments are expected to increase the volume of products exported per year 
due to additional production. Additional production expected are as shown in the table below. 
Table 5: Expected increase in volumes for export 
15.  Production under PSAC is expected to increase export volumes for all value chain crops 
that  will  be  supported,  with  percentages  ranging  from  21%  to  112%.  The  increased 
productivity is expected to translate into increased foreign exchange earnings from exports, 
as well as improve on Rwanda’s balance of payments.  
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
16.  A financial analysis was carried out in order to determine how financially viable project 
interventions are from the perspective of the private stakeholders involved in the project. The 
financial  analysis  considered  the  market  aspects  of  PSAC  interventions.  The  analysis  also 
helped  to  indicate  areas  in  which  PSAC  may  provide  incentives  in  order  to  enhance 
participation  and  on  boarding  of  potential  beneficiaries.  Expected  cash  flows  from  various 
crops were determined per hectare, and  expected returns to  each  farming household were 
also  determined.  The  financial  analysis  considered  returns  expected  from  investment  in 
coffee, tea and horticulture (mango, avocado, French beans, essential oils and macadamia), 
as  well  as  benefits  expected  from  project  investment  in  tea  hangars,  coffee  solid  waste 
management systems, tea transportation tracks, among others. All costs and benefits in the 
financial analysis were valued at market prices. 
17.  As an opportunity cost of capital for investments in Rwanda, the yield of treasury bonds 
by  the  National  Bank  of  Rwanda  was  studied.  Bond  yields  were  compiled  for  all  bonds 
auctioned over the past ten  years (2012 to 2021). The  results were as shown in the table 
below. 
6 
IncreaseAdded by projectTotal expected%Coffee19,723,300          22,045,750            41,769,050        112%Tea32,634,900          15,180,480            47,815,380        47%Macadamia405,000                1,175,000               1,580,000          290%French beans918,990                400,000                  1,318,990          44%Essential oils726,500                405,000                  1,131,500          56%Avocado823,500                176,400                  999,900              21%Source: NAEB for production figures without projectWith project (Kgs)Production per yearCropWithout project (Kgs) 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 6: Deduction of an appropriate financial discount rate
18.  Based on rates listed on the table above, the average coupon rate was 12 per cent. As 
such, a discount rate of 12 per cent is used for financial analysis. 
19.  The production models developed in this analysis are based on the fact that PSAC will 
primarily  support  beneficiaries  to  produce  for  the  export  market.  Production  considered 
therefore is only that which relates to export-oriented project promoted value chains, as well 
as  benefits  from  project  investment  in  attendant  facilities.  It  is  assumed  that  each 
participating smallholder will allocate only up to 50 per cent of the household land holding to 
project promoted value chains, and the remaining 50 per cent will be allocated to other crops 
to  ensure food production for the  family. Returns from non-export crops has therefore not 
been included in this analysis. Given the average land holding of 0.4 hectares per household, 
it  is  therefore  assumed  that  each  household  will  allocate  0.2  hectares  to  export-oriented 
production. 
Table 7: Financial returns for some crops per household after project implementation
20.  Based on financial returns computed in this analysis, all value chain crops supported by 
the  projected  are  expected  to  generate  adequate  income  that  will  move  participating 
smallholders further above the national poverty line of RwF 159,375 per year.  
7 
Bond Tenor( Years)20122013201420152016201720182019202020212311         12         12         11         11         11         11         512         12         12         12         12         11         11         11         712         13         12         11         11         1013         13         12         12         1514         13         13         13         2013         13         13         Average Coupon rate = 12%Value chainHectaresFinancial returns per year /ha with projectNo. of beneficiary HouseholdsExpected Financial returns per hh/year with projectCoffee replacement3,050      1,056,500             15,250         211,300                         Coffee rehabilitation1,082      1,056,500             5,410            211,300                         Tea expansion1,790      2,887,800             8,950            577,560                         Tea inflilling620          2,940,780             3,100            588,156                         Macadamia500          3,426,200             2,500            685,240                         French beans50            738,500                 250               147,700                         Essential oils200          1,015,000             1,000            203,000                         Avocado800          8,047,608             4,000            1,609,522                     Mango200          6,697,608             1,000            1,339,522                     Total8,292      41,460          
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Farm models 
Coffee Conversion Farm 
21.  PSAC is expected to support rehabilitation of existing farms as well as replace old coffee 
trees whose productivity has declined. This process will require gradual implementation, with 
all activities being implemented within four years of the project life. Onboarding of hectares 
per year will be as shown in the table below. 
Table 8: Onboarding of beneficiaries for coffee replacement intervention
22.  Farms that take on coffee replacement will be  expected to replace existing old coffee 
plants at a rate of 25 per cent per year. This will help absorb shock that will arise from missed 
income  that  should  have  accrued  from  old  trees  that  have  been  uprooted.  Earnings  are 
expected to drop during the first four years, but then pick up and stabilize during the 6th year 
of  implementation  when  replaced  coffee  plants  have  regained  their  productivity.  This  is 
illustrated in the coffee replacement conversion farm model. 
23.  Rehabilitation involves rejuvenating already existing plants to increase productivity. At 
farm level, beneficiaries who are supported for rehabilitation will be provided with technical 
assistance  on  best  practices  that  can  increase  productivity  of  their  coffee  plants,  such  as 
pruning,  fertilizer  application,  and  inclusion  of  shade  trees,  among  others.  Onboarding  of 
hectares per year will be as shown in the table below. 
Table 9: Onboarding of beneficiaries for coffee rehabilitation intervention
24.  The 1,082 targeted hectares are expected to be on boarded over a period of four years 
of  project  implementation.  Farms  that  take  on  coffee  rehabilitation  will  be  expected  to 
rehabilitate 25 per cent of their coffee plants each year, in order to cushion farm earnings 
during crop rehabilitation. Rehabilitation is expected to utilize around 190 man hours per year, 
but increase crop productivity by 20 per cent when complete.  Earnings from investment in 
coffee rehabilitation are expected to turn positive in the 6th year of project implementation. 
25.  Parabolic drying structures are expected to be used to dry coffee so as to improve the 
quality  of  output  which  will  fetch  higher  prices  in  the  international  market.  A  total  of  27 
parabolic structures will be set up, with each serving coffee output from the equivalent of 2 
hectares.  Considering  post-harvest  losses  avoided  as  well  as  a  premium  price  for  properly 
8 
Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year4,746            9,483                        9,483                       4,019                    -                        Cummulative4,746            14,229                      23,711                     27,730                  27,730                  HectaresOnboarded in the year         522               1,043              1,043               442 Cummulative5221,565                        2,608                       3,050                    3,050                    Graduation pathwayY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year           2,465 2,465          2,455                        2,455                     -                        -                        Cummulative           2,465 4,929          7,385                        9,840                     9,840                    9,840                    HectaresOnboarded in the year        271         271                 270               270 0Cummulative               271 542             812                            1,082                     1,082                    1,082                     
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
dried coffee, the present value of investment in parabolic drying structures was found to be 
positive over a 20 year period. 
26.  PSAC  will  also  support  the  establishment  of  solid  waste  handling  facilities  at  various 
coffee processing centers. Husks generated at these solid waste handling facilities will be sold 
which  will  lead  to  better  environmental  management  as  well  as  additional  income  to 
beneficiary off-takers. 
27.  Extension services will be provided through a network of farmer field schools. Under this 
arrangement,  beneficiaries  will  have  the  opportunity  to  acquire  hands  on  skills  from  fellow 
farmers who will share experiences and pass on skills. 
Tea Conversion Farm 
28.  PSAC is expected to a total of 1,790 hectares of tea. Under this arrangement, a total of 
14,000 tea seedlings will be planted per hectare. Onboarding of beneficiaries is expected to 
be as shown in the table below. 
Table 10: Onboarding of beneficiaries on tea expansion intervention
29.  Revenues  from  tea  expansion  are  expected  to  start  flowing  in  the  6th  year  of  project 
implementation and stabilize in the 7th year onwards. Present value of net returns over a 20 
year period for investment in tea expansion was found to be positive. 
30.  With regard to tea infilling, a total of 620 hectares will be supported under the project. 
Beneficiaries  will  be  on  boarded  over  a  period  of  four  years  of  project  implementation,  as 
shown in the table below. 
Table 11: Beneficiaries onboarding for tea infilling 
31.  Revenues from infilling are expected to be realized starting from the 6th year of project 
implementation.  Tea  infilling  is  expected  to  be  at  a  rate  of  14,000  seedlings  per  hectare. 
9 
Y1Y2Y3Y4Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year2,590              4,317                    1,727                    Cummulative2,590              6,907                    8,634                    HectaresOnboarded in the year400400                        500Cummulative400800                        1,300                    Y1Y2Y3Y4Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year02,991                    0Cummulative02,991                    2,991                  HectaresOnboarded in the year0               -               620                 - Cummulative0620                       620                       
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Present value of net returns over a 20 year period for investment in tea infilling was found to 
be positive. 
32.  PSAC will also support the establishment of 50 hectares of French beans. On boarding 
of beneficiaries will be as shown below. 
Table 12: Onboarding for French beans 
Community Nurseries 
33.  Community  nurseries  are  expected  to  supply  seedlings  to  project  beneficiaries.  The 
opportunity to supply seedlings will increase capacity within the country, as well as increase 
incomes  of  beneficiaries  involved  in  production  of  seedlings  in  the  community  managed 
nurseries.  The  financial  revenues  expected  from  community  nurseries  are  as  shown  in  the 
table below. 
Table 13: Revenues expected to be earned by community managed nurseries from seedlings
34.  A total of RwF 4.4 billion is expected to be earned by community managed nurseries for 
supply of  seedlings to  project beneficiaries.  This will enhance effectiveness,  ownership and 
value for money within PSAC. 
Horticulture and essential oils 
35.  PSAC is expected to support the establishment of 200 hectares of macadamia for the 
export market.  This intervention is expected to generate 600,000 kilograms of nut-in-shell 
macadamia  by  the  10th  year  of  the  project.  The  project  will  provide  technical  support  to 
community  nurseries  to  increase  the  survival  of  macadamia  seeds  in  the  nurseries.  On 
boarding of beneficiaries for macadamia production is as shown in the table below. 
10 
Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year3004507507507500Cummulative3007501,500                    2,250                    3,000                    3,000                    HectaresOnboarded in the year1010                          1515Cummulative1020                          35                          50                          50                          ItemUnitPrice/unitTotalPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5RwFCoffee seedlingsSeedlings150195,750,000 391,125,000     391,125,000     165,750,000     -                   1,143,750,000  Tea SeedlingsSeedlings63352,800,000 899,640,000     441,000,000     432,180,000     -                   2,125,620,000  Shade/Woodlot seedlingsSeedlings15025,650,000    64,762,500        97,800,000        114,375,000     114,375,000 416,962,500     Macadamia seedlingsSeedlings5,000153,000,000 204,000,000     102,000,000     -                       -                   459,000,000     Avocado seedlingsSeedlings73058,360,000    87,540,000        58,360,000        -                       -                   204,260,000     Mango seedlingsSeedlings73014,590,000    21,885,000        14,590,000        -                       -                   51,065,000        Total cost of seedlings800,150,000 1,668,952,500  1,104,875,000  712,305,000     114,375,000 4,400,657,500  Amount (RwF) for seedlings required per period 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 14: On boarding of beneficiaries for macadamia production
36.  Returns from investment in macadamia are expected to start flowing in in year 10 of 
the project, expected to stabilize in year 13. The present value of net benefits over a 20 year 
period were found to be negative. However, given the long term nature of macadamia tree 
harvests, returns will be expected from this investment even in the longer term. 
37.  Project beneficiaries are expected to establish avocado plantations on 800 hectares of 
land and mangoes on 200 hectares. Present value of investment in both crops was found to 
be positive over a 20 year period.   
38.  French  beans  and  essential  oils  production  will  be  carried  out  on  50  hectares.  On 
boarding of beneficiaries will be as shown in the table below. 
Table 15: on boarding of beneficiaries for essential oils
39.  Returns from investment in essential oils are expected to stabilize after the fourth year, 
with a positive net present value over a 20 year period.  
Crop models 
40.  Crop models were developed to present the technical and physical description of each 
value chain, as well as to present the cost implications of participating in the identified value 
chain. All costs and revenues were valued at constant market prices in Rwanda Francs. 
41.  An  analysis  was  carried  out  to  determine  the  situation  without  project  interventions 
(business as usual) for each value chain in which PSAC investments will be made, at current 
market prices. The analysis involved a projection of expected earnings from value chains over 
the next 20 years, without adjustment for inflation. It was assumed that, where the proposed 
crops are already grown, the same current practices would continue for the next twenty years 
but returns would keep on reducing due to external factors such as soil fertility loss. Where 
the proposed crop was not already in production, it was assumed that the land would instead 
be allocated to an alternative crop (maize in this case) as a means to earn revenue for the 
household. 
11 
Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year2502502502500Cummulative250500           750                 1,000       1,000      HectaresOnboarded in the year5050              5050Cummulative50100           150                 200           200          Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Beneficiary householdsOnboarded in the year505075750Cummulative50100            175            250           250          HectaresOnboarded in the year1010              1515Cummulative1020              35              50             50              
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
42.  For  value  chain  crops,  earnings  considered  were  those  expected  from  one  hectare  of 
production. For facilities such as drying structures, earnings considered were those from one 
unit of the facility. The without project scenario for infrastructure was considered to be the 
alternative ways in which households are enjoying the services. For example, the alternative 
to purchase of tea transportation trucks was considered to be routine hiring of trucks. 
43.  The results of profitability per unit of project promoted value chain were as shown in 
the table below. 
12 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 16: Profitability per unit of project promoted value chains (RwF) 
44.  The analysis indicated that without PSAC intervention, many of the activities in which 
potential beneficiaries are currently engaged in, would produce negative returns over  a 20 
year period. However, with project intervention, all activities would produce positive returns 
per unit.  
45. 
Investment in project promoted value chains are expected to increase labor required. 
This labor will be provided by the family, and where family labor is not adequate, hired labor 
will  be  used  by  the  smallholder  beneficiaries.  An  analysis  of  how  investment  in  project 
promoted value chains would affect family labor over a 20 year period. The results were as 
presented in the table below.  
Table 17: Returns to family labour (RwF) 
13 
 Without project  With project ChangeCoffee replacement80,230            13,673,125    13,592,895    Coffee rehabilitation(19,740)          205,607          225,347          Tea expansion(53,738)          39,445,700    39,499,438    Tea inflilling453,563          48,176,480    47,722,917    Macadamia(53,738)          594,618          648,356          French beans(71,833)          11,646,000    11,717,833    Essential oils(71,833)          17,900,000    17,971,833    Avocado(1,128,493)    103,609,360 104,737,853 Mango(1,508,493)    83,974,360    85,482,853    Coffee drying structures17,187,500    23,375,000    6,187,500      Solid waste handling(8,750,000)    4,500,000      13,250,000    Tea hangars63,678,000    86,356,000    22,678,000    Tea trucks96,480,000    171,480,000 75,000,000    Avocado line39,525,000    62,700,000    23,175,000    Greenhouses(1,128,493)    68,180,000    69,308,493    Totals204,617,932 735,816,250 531,198,318  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
46.  Based on the results, the project is expected to contribute positive increase in returns 
to family labor per hectare of value chain crop grown.  
47.  Given that not all intended beneficiaries would adopt project promoted value chains at 
the  same  time,  a  phasing  approach  was  developed  to  reflect  the  adoption  rate  of  project 
interventions over time. This is shown in the table below.  
Table 18: Adoption rates for various value chain crops 
48.  The  first  year  is  expected  to  have  low  adoption  rates  because  project  promoted 
interventions are expected to be new to intended beneficiaries. However, most beneficiaries 
are  expected  to  have  adopted  project  interventions  by  the  third  year,  and  all  intended 
beneficiaries would be on board before the 6th year of project implementation. 
49. 
It was recognized that substantial investments would need to be made by beneficiaries 
in order to realize the benefits expected from project interventions. These costs, made upfront, 
were compared to expected future earnings. Profitability indicators were derived, considering 
the  costs  and  benefit  streams,  as  well  as  net  benefits  derived  by  investing  in  various 
interventions. 
Table 19: Profitability indicators for various project interventions 
14 
Without projectWith projectChangeCoffee replacement5,375          11,019       5,644          Coffee rehabilitation3,619          12,593       8,974          Tea expansion595             4,376          3,780          Tea inflilling3,321          4,638          1,316          Macadamia595             59,795       59,199       French beans595             857             262             Essential oils595             1,088          493             Avocado595             58,033       57,438       Mango595             15,332       14,737       Greenhouse crops595             23,664       23,069       Total15,887       191,395     175,507     Crop and Type of plantationPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalCoffee  replacementHa0%17%34%34%14%0%100%Coffee rehabilitationHa25%25%25%25%0%0%100%Tea plantations -Expansion Ha0%30%50%20%0%0%100%Tea plantation-Infilling Ha0%0%100%0%0%0%100%Mango -  Plantation (including seedling, manure and other inputs)Ha13%25%38%25%0%0%100%Avocado - Plantation  Ha13%25%38%25%0%0%100%Macadamia - Plantation Ha10%30%40%20%0%0%100%Essential oil - (Plantation and all the inputs)Ha10%25%25%40%0%0%100%Average9%22%44%24%2%0%100%Adoption per year  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
50.  Based  on  the  above  analysis,  investments  in  all  PSAC  interventions  are  expected  to 
generate positive net present values. The benefits are also expected to exceed costs.  
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
51.  An economic analysis was carried out in order to the economic viability of the project 
investments from the perspective of government and the wider society, the economic rate of 
return and determine how sensitive the project is to foreseen risks (sensitivity). The economic 
analysis considered how PSAC interventions will affect social well-being. A social discount rate 
was  computed  to  reflect  the  social  perspectives  of  how  future  benefits  and  costs  of  PSAC 
interventions are valued against present ones.  
Aggregated financial costs and benefits 
52.  Financial PSAC costs were  compared to the incremental net present  value of benefits 
expected  from  project  value  chains  promoted.  PSAC  costs  included  in  this  computation 
excluded all costs already covered in the various farm conversion models already developed 
under various crops.  The results were as shown in the table below: 
Table 20: Financial profitability of PSAC investment 
53.  The  net  present  value  of  PSAC  costs  not  already  included  in  farm  conversion  models 
was  found  to  be  RwF  18.0  billion.  However,  the  net  present  value  of  project  benefits  was 
15 
 NPV (RwF)  BCR Coffee replacement2,211,946                1.46                            Coffee rehabilitation2,760,110                2.15                            Tea expansion8,055,396                1.83                            Tea inflilling13,513,954             4.17                            Macadamia4,853,598                2.03                            French beans2,914,590                1.10                            Essential oils5,594,423                1.32                            Avocado21,644,250             2.40                            Mango15,991,189             1.85                            Coffee drying structures8,195,616                1.36                            Tea hangars24,980,174             1.05                            Tea trucks40,670,686             -                              Avocado line15,625,931             1.04                            Greenhouses19,563,120             1.34                            Average13,326,785             1.65                             NPV of Project costs  NPV Project benefits  FNPV  FIRR 18,023,303,864  34,128,172,215  16,104,868,352   16% 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
found  to  be  RwF  34.1  billion.  The  Financial  Net  Present  Value  of  benefits  from  PSAC 
intervention was therefore found to be RwF 16.1 billion with a FIRR of 16 per cent. The project 
is therefore considered financially viable. 
Determination of economic prices 
54.  Market  prices  used  in  the  financial  analysis  were  converted  into  shadow  prices  using 
conversion  factors  that  reflect  social  opportunity  costs  of  each  good  and  services  without 
taxes and subsidies. The numeraire is the domestic market prices expressed in Rwanda Francs 
in which project resources have been valued in this analysis. 
55.  The aggregated net incremental benefits generated by all project supported value chains 
were used in this economic analysis. All project investments that can be directly related to a 
specific  value  chain  were  considered  before  arriving  at  the  aggregated  net  incremental 
benefits. 
56.  The  analysis  considered  a  twenty  year  time  period  in  which  project  investments  are 
expected to continue generating revenue streams for project beneficiaries. Prevailing market 
prices  of  June  2022  were  used  in  computation.  Project  costs  were  extracted  from  Costabs 
already developed. 
57.  Productivity models used in the financial analysis were adjusted  for distortions in the 
market (such as subsidies and taxes) and opportunity costs foregone by investing in project 
supported value chains. 
58.  Economic parity prices were used to value project inputs and outputs using conversion 
factors.  
Determination of the economic discount rate 
59.  A social discount rate was used as the economic discount rate in this analysis. The social 
discount rate was determined by considering an average of the data data over the past 10 
years for interest rates given on deposits within the Rwanda economy, interest rates given 
by National Bank of Rwanda on 364 day treasury bills over the past 10 years, as well as the 
real interest rates. This combination of variables is as shown in the table below: 
Table 21: Social Discount Rate
60.  Based on results of the above analysis, The Economic Discount Rate used is 10 per cent, 
being the weighted average. 
Economic programme costs 
61.  Economic programme costs were arrived at in costab software by removing taxes, duties 
and subsidies from the financial costs. The results were are shown in the table below. 
16 
Variable2012201320142015201620172018201920202021Deposits interest rates9               10            8               8               8               8               8               8               8               8               1 year Treasury bills interest rates12         10         6           6           9           9           7           7           8           8           Real interest rates11         14            12            17            12            8               18            14            9               13            Average interest rate = 10% 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 22 Programme economic costs 
Economic viability and sensitivity analysis 
62.  Project economic benefits were compared to the economic value of PSAC investment in 
the various value chains. Costs already included in conversion models were excluded in order 
to avoid double counting. The results were are shown below. 
Table 23 PSAC Economic viability 
63.  Based on results on the table above, the project is expected to generate a positive ENPV 
of RwF27.8 billion with an EIRR of 19 per cent. The project is therefore economically viable 
and should be undertaken. 
64.  Sensitivity analysis was also carried out on the effects of changes in costs and expected 
benefits on expected viability of the project. The results were as shown below. 
Table 24 PSAC Sensitivity to changes in costs and benefits 
65.  Based  on  the  results  above,  PSAC  costs  not  included  in  the  farm  model  conversion 
models can increase by up to 110 per cent while the project still remains viable. PSAC benefits 
should  not  reduce  by  more  than  57  per  cent  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  project  is  still 
economically viable.  
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
66.  PSAC has potential to positively contribute to export volumes by increasing the volume 
and value of value chain crops exported. The RwF 64 billion (US$ 62.89 million) investment 
in order to achieve the desired financial and economic benefits will be fully recovered through 
export earnings. 
17 
 RwandaPromoting Smallholder Agro-export CompetitivenessComponents by FinanciersEconomic Costs (US$)PrivateIFADSector/BeneficiariesHeiferCoraidGovernment of SpainThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Investment to enhance climate smart production and productivity of selected export - driven value chain 11,284,455.839.13,768,330.013.1209,575.00.7--9,478,508.032.84,129,170.114.328,870,038.958.72. Enabling business environment along selected export - driven value chains 8,623,854.359.0--757,611.75.2574,413.63.94,624,623.231.636,214.60.214,616,717.529.73. Project management and Policy support 3,814,414.666.5------1,753,759.630.6165,391.42.95,733,565.611.6Total PROJECT COSTS 23,722,724.848.23,768,330.07.7967,186.72.0574,413.61.215,856,890.832.24,330,776.08.849,220,322.0100.0 ENPV of Project costs  ENPV Project benefits  ENPV  EIRR 14,612,624,872  32,527,650,920  27,770,839,250   19%ENPVEIRRENPVEIRRENPVEIRRENPVEIRRENPVEIRRChange in PSAC Costs30,859,184,647  20%29,315,011,949   19%26,226,666,552     18%24,682,493,853     17%10,784,939,566    110%Change in Benefits19,128,326,003  17%23,449,582,627   18%32,092,095,874     19%36,413,352,497     20%3,139,676,496      -57%-20%-10%10%20%Switching 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 1: Financial Net benefits and costs 
Appendix 2: Economic Net benefits and costs 
18 
Financial  (RwF)Incremental returns:Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Coffee replacement-                                     (713,769,750)      (2,275,710,813)    (3,642,667,022)    (3,556,039,902)    (2,040,273,344)      (125,092,302)          1,490,122,782        2,484,498,205        2,878,870,795      3,038,326,005        3,189,808,455        3,333,716,782        3,470,429,693        3,600,306,958        3,680,363,951        3,840,904,592        3,952,258,113        4,058,043,957        4,158,540,509        Coffee rehabilitation(314,012,781)                  (650,889,917)      (836,803,409)        (894,553,820)        (479,913,929)        111,235,093           567,089,788           908,590,499           1,103,669,299        1,157,537,909      1,208,713,088        1,257,329,509        1,303,515,109        1,347,391,428        1,389,073,932        1,418,017,254        1,466,290,770        1,502,028,306        1,535,978,966        1,568,232,093        Tea expansion-                                     (738,400,000)      (1,083,000,000)    (1,604,980,000)    (1,872,271,000)    (790,505,950)          394,468,598           2,145,773,918        3,854,823,623        4,912,559,356      5,365,105,988        5,256,115,788        5,278,260,099        5,299,297,194        5,319,282,434        5,338,268,413        5,356,305,092        5,373,439,937        5,389,718,041        5,405,182,239        Tea inflilling-                                     -                         (1,441,574,400)    (418,599,200)        254,549,060         848,690,007           1,440,751,107        1,724,109,951        1,759,774,134        1,793,655,107      1,825,842,032        1,856,419,610        1,885,468,310        1,913,064,574        1,939,281,025        1,964,186,654        1,987,847,001        2,010,324,331        2,031,677,795        2,051,963,585        Macadamia(77,190,000)                     (255,385,000)      (403,117,500)        (340,432,625)        (226,685,994)        (218,234,194)          (210,204,984)          (202,577,235)          (137,425,885)          81,553,170            448,093,012           814,305,861           1,120,208,068        1,395,815,165        1,581,141,906        1,646,202,311        1,651,009,696        1,655,576,711        1,659,915,375        1,664,037,107        French beans-                                     (8,735,000)           (12,080,000)          (14,572,000)          (9,157,525)            12,132,601              28,098,221              36,461,560              37,085,065              37,949,746            38,638,508              39,292,833              39,914,441              40,504,969              41,065,971              41,598,922              42,105,226              42,586,215              43,043,154              43,477,246              Essential oils(15,050,000)                     (43,355,000)        (50,119,000)          (55,293,550)          33,272,128            96,697,521              149,871,645           152,963,063           155,201,572           158,689,914          161,340,418           163,858,398           166,250,478           168,522,954           170,681,806           172,732,716           174,681,080           176,532,026           178,290,425           179,960,903           Avocado(275,839,200)                  (725,417,600)      (1,346,930,200)    (1,586,983,850)    (1,282,310,338)    (710,750,501)          464,631,344           2,221,369,097        3,500,701,613        4,890,039,534      5,740,531,877        6,275,499,604        6,494,968,943        6,503,964,816        6,512,510,895        6,520,629,671        6,528,342,507        6,535,669,702        6,542,630,537        6,549,243,330        Mango(33,559,800)                     (102,304,400)      (205,782,550)        (276,445,963)        (210,477,584)        (46,587,625)            242,532,836           540,492,274           708,600,403           892,659,884          979,282,969           1,015,374,901        1,017,742,236        1,019,991,204        1,022,127,724        1,024,157,418        1,026,085,627        1,027,917,425        1,029,657,634        905,870,632           Coffee drying structures(2,671,875)                       (3,515,625)           140,625                  3,796,875              7,453,125              11,953,125              7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125              11,953,125              7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125                11,953,125              7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125                7,453,125                Solid waste handling-                                     (20,437,500)        (15,875,000)          (11,312,500)          (6,750,000)            18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000            18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              18,250,000              Tea hangars(121,661,000)                  (164,152,500)      (136,644,000)        (109,135,500)        (8,630,400)            117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600          117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           117,369,600           Tea trucks-                                     (429,000,000)      66,000,000            66,000,000            66,000,000            66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000            66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              66,000,000              Avocado line(13,091,250)                     1,908,750            1,908,750              1,908,750              1,908,750              1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750              1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                1,908,750                Greenhouses-                                     (110,745,000)      (72,465,000)          (33,914,250)          4,893,713              154,691,027           155,695,476           156,649,702           157,346,715           158,417,406          159,235,536           160,012,759           160,751,121           161,452,565           162,118,937           162,751,990           163,353,390           163,924,721           164,467,485           164,983,110           (853,075,906)                  (3,964,198,542)  (7,812,052,496)    (8,917,184,654)    (7,284,159,896)    (2,367,423,890)      3,318,823,203        9,384,937,085        13,835,256,220     17,172,914,295    19,180,590,909     20,238,999,192     21,011,777,061     21,531,416,037     21,948,573,064     22,184,390,773     22,447,906,456     22,651,238,962     22,844,404,843     22,902,472,229     Project costs7,421,728,713                16,392,731,431  17,872,796,878   12,742,390,979   6,704,301,220      3,646,967,620        Costs included in coversion models3,408,761,283                11,410,113,996  12,700,210,342   8,161,649,714      2,778,907,230      394,261,131           Other project costs4,012,967,429                4,982,617,435   5,172,586,535     4,580,741,265     3,925,393,989     3,252,706,489       -                            -                            -                            -                          -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            Financial Net returns(4,866,043,336)               (8,946,815,977)  (12,984,639,032)  (13,497,925,919)  (11,209,553,885)  (5,620,130,379)      3,318,823,203        9,384,937,085        13,835,256,220     17,172,914,295    19,180,590,909     20,238,999,192     21,011,777,061     21,531,416,037     21,948,573,064     22,184,390,773     22,447,906,456     22,651,238,962     22,844,404,843     22,902,472,229     FNPV of returns16,104,868,352              FIRR of returns16%Earnings (RwF)Economic (RwF)Incremental returns:Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Coffee replacement(362,733,885)                  (1,195,854,388)  (1,914,400,390)    (1,795,728,406)    (798,127,594)        481,735,531           1,542,779,094        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563      2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        2,148,787,563        Coffee rehabilitation(164,984,461)                  (351,843,704)      (436,359,054)        (438,850,060)        (170,820,873)        221,129,534           511,327,190           719,505,628           686,641,565           686,641,565          686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           686,641,565           Tea expansion-                                     (738,400,000)      (1,083,000,000)    (1,604,980,000)    (1,872,271,000)    (790,505,950)          394,468,598           2,145,773,918        3,854,823,623        4,912,559,356      5,365,105,988        5,256,115,788        5,278,260,099        5,299,297,194        5,319,282,434        5,338,268,413        5,356,305,092        5,373,439,937        5,389,718,041        5,405,182,239        Tea inflilling-                                     (682,068,200)      18,234,200            428,652,500         766,093,700         1,103,534,900        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380      1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        1,284,825,380        Macadamia(60,735,800)                     (109,596,950)      (174,745,150)        (207,319,250)        (162,870,500)        (162,870,500)          (162,870,500)          (162,870,500)          (74,370,500)            146,879,500          412,379,500           655,754,500           877,004,500           1,054,004,500        1,142,504,500        1,164,629,500        1,164,629,500        1,164,629,500        1,164,629,500        1,164,629,500        French beans(9,172,500)                       (12,727,000)        (10,876,750)          (1,844,500)            15,743,500            25,319,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500            30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              30,107,500              Essential oils(11,994,800)                     (34,949,800)        (41,332,800)          (46,448,000)          22,300,000            71,956,000              112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000          112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           112,852,000           Avocado(170,886,840)                  (399,762,120)      (686,625,840)        (689,704,320)        (463,907,520)        (211,907,520)          403,917,480           1,515,342,480        2,700,267,480        3,630,853,920      4,040,353,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        4,204,153,920        Mango(60,105,710)                     (146,986,030)      (260,640,960)        (280,859,080)        (214,196,880)        (170,816,880)          (61,691,880)            139,533,120           358,488,120           519,453,120          634,113,120           716,013,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           748,773,120           Coffee drying structures918,563                            5,770,688            13,637,813            21,504,938            29,372,063            32,387,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063            32,387,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              32,387,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              29,372,063              Solid waste handling-                                     (15,391,250)        (14,032,500)          (12,673,750)          (11,315,000)          5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000              5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                5,435,000                7,691,250                5,435,000                5,435,000                Tea hangars(46,943,420)                     (23,558,550)        46,726,320            117,011,190         215,462,112         299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112          299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           299,882,112           Tea trucks-                                     (338,770,080)      81,979,920            81,979,920            81,979,920            81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920            81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              81,979,920              Avocado line(7,294,200)                       (7,294,200)           (7,294,200)            (7,294,200)            (7,294,200)            2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800              2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                2,755,800                Greenhouses-                                     19,611,750          43,776,375            72,479,981            105,709,370         119,565,251           129,094,589           134,299,959           134,979,548           136,023,471          136,821,147           137,578,940           138,298,843           138,982,751           139,632,463           140,249,690           140,836,055           141,393,103           141,922,298           142,425,033           (893,933,054)                  (4,031,819,834)  (4,424,953,016)    (4,364,073,038)    (2,464,142,902)    1,109,579,761        4,604,234,344        8,487,581,941        11,656,827,173     14,028,408,268    15,274,427,577     15,652,255,170     15,929,129,384     16,127,850,387     16,236,985,340     16,281,728,545     16,297,336,590     16,317,284,732     16,331,835,780     16,347,802,713     Project costs6,055,149,051                13,001,824,238  13,861,724,833   9,761,047,978      5,145,537,274      2,871,648,270        Costs included in coversion models2,734,026,698                8,920,244,048    9,666,810,993      6,082,136,792      2,023,116,037      309,805,501           Other project costs3,321,122,352                4,081,580,190   4,194,913,840     3,678,911,186     3,122,421,236     2,561,842,769       -                            -                            -                            -                          -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            -                            Financial Net returns(4,215,055,406)               (8,113,400,024)  (8,619,866,856)    (8,042,984,223)    (5,586,564,139)    (1,452,263,008)      4,604,234,344        8,487,581,941        11,656,827,173     14,028,408,268    15,274,427,577     15,652,255,170     15,929,129,384     16,127,850,387     16,236,985,340     16,281,728,545     16,297,336,590     16,317,284,732     16,331,835,780     16,347,802,713     ENPV of returns27,770,839,250              EIRR of returns19%Earnings (RwF) 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 3: Coffee replacement per hectare 
19 
UnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Replacement progression (%)Labor cost (Quantity in Men/Day):Hired labourLabour for Uprooting old treesMan days                   25 2,50062,500Planting Shading treesMan days52,50012,500Pesticide applicationMan days102,50025,000WeedingMan days402,500100,000MulchingMan days402,500100,000StorageMan days52,50012,500Family labourLabour for replantingMan days                   10 2,50025,000Fertilizer ApplicationMan days52,50012,500PrunningMan days202,50050,000harvestingMan days202,50050,000DryingMan days102,50025,000SortingMan days52,50012,500OthersMan days102,50025,000Total Labor668,000Inputs cost:Manure (1kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500375,000Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500800800,000Shading trees seedlingsTree25015037,500Purchase of new coffee seedlingsSeedling2,500150375,000Insecticides (per hectare)Liter113,00013,000FungicideLiter113,00013,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)PercentageProduction transportation Lumpsum330,00090,000Total input costs1,403,500Total Production Costs2,071,500               BenefitsProductivity percentage100%Yield (kg/tree)2.5Production (kg/ha)2500                         6,250 Price (per kg)RwF410Total Revenues from coffee sales2,562,500               Net income                    491,000 Coffee replacement, 2500 coffee trees per ha 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 4: Coffee replacement farm conversion 
20 
UnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6-20Replacement progression (%)25%25%25%25%Labor cost (Quantity in Men/Day):Hired labourLabour for Uprooting old treesMan days                   25 2,50062,50015,625                  15,625                  15,625                  15,625                Planting Shading treesMan days52,50012,5003,125                    3,125                    3,125                    3,125                  Pesticide applicationMan days102,50025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                25,000                25,000                WeedingMan days402,500100,000100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000              100,000              100,000              MulchingMan days402,500100,000100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000              100,000              100,000              StorageMan days52,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                12,500                12,500                Family labourLabour for replantingMan days                   10 2,50025,0006,250                    6,250                    6,250                    6,250                  Fertilizer ApplicationMan days52,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                12,500                12,500                PrunningMan days202,50050,00050,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                50,000                50,000                harvestingMan days202,50050,00050,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                50,000                50,000                DryingMan days102,50025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                25,000                25,000                SortingMan days52,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                12,500                12,500                OthersMan days102,50025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                25,000                25,000                Total Labor668,000437,500               437,500               437,500               437,500              412,500              412,500              Inputs cost:Manure (1kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500375,00075,00075,00075,00075,00075,00075,000Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500800800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000Shading trees seedlingsTree25015037,5009,375                    9,375                    9,375                    9,375                  -                       -                       Purchase of new coffee seedlingsSeedling2,500150375,00093,750                  93,750                  93,750                  93,750                -                       -                       Insecticides (per hectare)Liter113,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,000FungicideLiter113,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)Percentage                 461,250                  153,750                  230,625                358,750                486,875                615,000 Production transportation Lumpsum330,00090,00090,000                  90,000                  90,000                  90,000                90,000                90,000                Total input costs1,403,5001,555,3751,247,8751,324,7501,452,8751,477,8751,606,000Total Production Costs2,071,500               1,992,875            1,685,375            1,762,250            1,890,375          1,890,375          2,018,500          BenefitsProductivity percentage100%45%20%45%70%95%120%Yield (kg/tree)2.51.1250.51.1251.752.3753Production (kg/ha)2500                         6,250 2,813                    1,250                    2,813                    4,375                  5,938                  7,500                  Price (per kg)RwF410Total Revenues from coffee sales2,562,500               1,153,125            512,500               1,153,125            1,793,750          2,434,375          3,075,000          Net income                    491,000                (839,750)            (1,172,875)               (609,125)                (96,625)               544,000             1,056,500 With ProjectCoffee replacement, 2500 coffee trees per ha 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 5: Coffee rehabilitation per hectare 
21 
UnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Rehabilitation progression (%)Labor cost (Quantity in Men/Day):Hired LabourLabour for stumping old treesMan days                 10 2,50025,000Planting Shading treesMan days52,50012,500Fertilizer ApplicationMan days52,50012,500Pesticide applicationMan days102,50025,000WeedingMan days402,500100,000MulchingMan days402,500100,000Family labourPrunningMan days202,50050,000harvestingMan days202,50050,000DryingMan days102,50025,000SortingMan days52,50012,500StorageMan days52,50012,500OthersMan days102,50025,000Total Labor668,000Inputs cost:Manure (10kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500375,000Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500800800,000Shading trees seedlingsTree25015037,500Insecticides (per hectare)Liter113,00013,000FungicideLiter113,00013,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)Percentage                  512,500 Production transportation Lumpsum330,00090,000Total input costs1,541,000Total Production Costs2,209,000            BenefitsProductivity percentage100%Yield (kg/tree)2.5Production (kg/ha)2500                      6,250 Price (per kg)RwF410Total Revenues from coffee sales2,562,500            Net benefit                  353,500 Coffee rehabilitation, 2500 coffee trees per ha 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 6: Coffee rehabilitation conversion farm 
22 
UnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Without ProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6-20Rehabilitation progression (%)25%25%25%25%Labor cost (Quantity in Men/Day):Hired LabourLabour for stumping old treesMan days                 10 2,50025,0006,250                    6,250                    6,250                    6,250                    Planting Shading treesMan days52,50012,5003,125                    3,125                    3,125                    3,125                    Fertilizer ApplicationMan days52,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  Pesticide applicationMan days102,50025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  WeedingMan days402,500100,000100,000100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               MulchingMan days402,500100,000100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               100,000               Family labourPrunningMan days202,50050,00050,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  harvestingMan days202,50050,00050,00050,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  50,000                  DryingMan days102,50025,00025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  SortingMan days52,50012,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  StorageMan days52,50012,50012,50012,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  12,500                  OthersMan days102,50025,00025,00025,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  Total Labor668,000668,000421,875               421,875               421,875               421,875               412,500               412,500               Inputs cost:Manure (10kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500375,00075,00075,00075,00075,00075,00075,000Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs2,500800800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000Shading trees seedlingsTree25015037,5009,375                    9,375                    9,375                    9,375                    -                        -                        Insecticides (per hectare)Liter113,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,000FungicideLiter113,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,00013,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)Percentage                  512,500                  717,500                  461,250                  230,625                  256,250                  358,750                  486,875                  615,000 Production transportation Lumpsum330,00090,00090,00090,000                  90,000                  90,000                  90,000                  90,000                  90,000                  Total input costs1,541,000445,0001,461,6251,231,0001,256,6251,359,1251,477,8751,606,000Total Production Costs2,209,000            1,113,000            1,883,500            1,652,875            1,678,500            1,781,000            1,890,375            2,018,500            BenefitsProductivity percentage100%70%45%30%50%70%95%120%Yield (kg/tree)2.51.751.1250.751.251.752.3753Production (kg/ha)2500                      6,250 4,375                    2,813                    1,875                    3,125                    4,375                    5,938                    7,500                    Price (per kg)RwF410Total Revenues from coffee sales2,562,500            1,793,750            1,153,125            768,750               1,281,250            1,793,750            2,434,375            3,075,000            Net benefit                  353,500                  680,750                (730,375)               (884,125)               (397,250)                   12,750                  544,000               1,056,500 With ProjectCoffee rehabilitation, 2500 coffee trees per ha 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 7: Costs and returns from parabolic drying structures 
Appendix 8: Costs and returns from solid waste handling facility 
23 
ItemUnitQuantityUnit CostTotal costY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7-20Cost of acquisitionRwF11,500,000          1,500,000      1,500,000      1,500,000      Labour for drying per hectareMan days102,500                  25,000            25,000            25,000            25,000            25,000            25,000            25,000            25,000            replacementYear520%300,000         300,000         300,000         300,000         300,000         300,000         300,000         300,000         Total Cost1,825,000      1,825,000      325,000         325,000         325,000         325,000         1,825,000      325,000         UnitQuantityUnitsTotalPrice per kg of post-harvest loss avoidedRwF1410                  Kgs produced per hectareKilograms2.52,500                  6,250              Kgs per tree saved by proper dryingKilograms2.510%0.25                Hectares per drying structureHectares2                      Total post-harvest loss avoided per drying structureRwF1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      1,281,250      Returns from premium price/KgRwF10%410                      41                    Returns from premium price/hectareRwF512,500         512,500         512,500         512,500         512,500         512,500         512,500         512,500         Total returns from parabolic dryersRwF1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      1,793,750      Net inflows from parabolic dryers(31,250)          (31,250)          1,468,750      1,468,750      1,468,750      1,468,750      (31,250)          1,468,750      ItemUnitQuantityUnit CostTotal costY1Y2-20Cost of constructionRwF15,000,000      5,000,000      5,000,000      Labour for maintenance Man days1002,500              250,000          250,000          250,000          TrainingMan days102,500              25,000            25,000            25,000            replacementYear1010%500,000          500,000          500,000          Total Cost5,775,000      5,775,000      775,000          UnitQuantityUnitsTotalSolid waste generated per hectareKilograms6,250      40%2,500              Price per kg of solid wasteRwF150                    Hectares per CWSHectare10                    Total income from sale of wasteRwF1,250,000      1,250,000      1,250,000      Net inflows from sale of husks(4,525,000)    (4,525,000)    475,000           
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 9: Costs and returns from tea collection trucks 
Appendix 10: Costs and returns from tea hangars 
24 
ItemUnitQuantityUnit CostTotal costY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7-20Cost of acquisitionRwF145,000,000     45,000,000        45,000,000   Operating costs for truckMan days30015,000             4,500,000          4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     replacementYear1010%4,500,000          4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     4,500,000     Total Cost54,000,000        54,000,000   9,000,000     9,000,000     9,000,000     9,000,000     9,000,000     9,000,000     UnitQuantityUnitsTotalLoss avoided by transporting in time/hectarePercentage10%16,800             1,680                  Price per kg of post-harvest loss avoidedRwF1295                   495,600              Hectares per truck per yearHectares40                        Total post-harvest loss avoided per truckRwF19,824,000        19,824,000   19,824,000   19,824,000   19,824,000   19,824,000   19,824,000   19,824,000   Net inflows from tea trucks(34,176,000)      (34,176,000) 10,824,000   10,824,000   10,824,000   10,824,000   10,824,000   10,824,000   ItemUnitQuantityUnit CostTotal costY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7-20Cost of acquisitionRwF114,000,000         14,000,000     14,000,000   Labour for tea handlingMan days102,500                    25,000              25,000           25,000           25,000           25,000           25,000           25,000           25,000           replacementYear1010%1,400,000        1,400,000     1,400,000     1,400,000     1,400,000     1,400,000     1,400,000     1,400,000     Total Cost15,425,000     15,425,000   1,425,000     1,425,000     1,425,000     1,425,000     1,425,000     1,425,000     UnitQuantityUnitsTotalLoss avoided by proper tea handling/treePercentage10%1.20                      0.12                  Price per kg of post-harvest loss avoidedRwF1295                        35.4Kgs produced per hectareKilograms1.214,000                  16,800              Hectares per hangarHectares10                      Total post-harvest loss avoided per hangarRwF5,947,200        5,947,200     5,947,200     5,947,200     5,947,200     5,947,200     5,947,200     5,947,200     Premium on properly dried teaPercentage10%1.2                         0.12                  Returns from premium price/KgRwF10%295                        29.50                Returns from premium price/hectareRwF495,600           495,600         495,600         495,600         495,600         495,600         495,600         495,600         Total returns from tea hangarsRwF6,442,800        6,442,800     6,442,800     6,442,800     6,442,800     6,442,800     6,442,800     6,442,800     Net inflows from tea hangars(8,982,200)      (8,982,200)    5,017,800     5,017,800     5,017,800     5,017,800     5,017,800     5,017,800      
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 11: Costs and returns from avocado grading line 
25 
ItemUnitQuantityUnit CostTotal costY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7-20Cost of acquisitionRwF115,000,000        15,000,000            15,000,000            Labour for handling per yearMan days606,500                  390,000                  390,000                  390,000         390,000         390,000         390,000         390,000         390,000         replacementYear1010%1,500,000               1,500,000               1,500,000     1,500,000     1,500,000     1,500,000     1,500,000     1,500,000     Total Cost16,890,000            16,890,000            1,890,000     1,890,000     1,890,000     1,890,000     1,890,000     1,890,000     UnitQuantityUnitsTotalLoss avoided by proper grading/hectarePercentage10%3,500                  350                           Price per kg of post-harvest loss avoidedRwF13,000                  1,050,000               Hectares per drying structureHectares5                               Total post-harvest loss avoided per lineRwF5,250,000               5,250,000               5,250,000     5,250,000     5,250,000     5,250,000     5,250,000     5,250,000     Premium on properly graded avocadoPercentage10%3,500                  350                           Returns from premium price/KgRwF10%3,000                  300                           Returns from premium price/hectareRwF525,000                  525,000                  525,000         525,000         525,000         525,000         525,000         525,000         Total returns from avocado grading lineRwF5,775,000               5,775,000               5,775,000     5,775,000     5,775,000     5,775,000     5,775,000     5,775,000     Net inflows from tea hangars(11,115,000)           (11,115,000)           3,885,000     3,885,000     3,885,000     3,885,000     3,885,000     3,885,000      
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 12: Costs and returns on tea expansion per hectare 
26 
UnitQuantityUnit cost (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Labor costHired labourLand clearingMan day302,50075,000Manure transportationMan day42,50010,000Land preparationMan day302,50075,000PlantingMan day72,50017,500WeedingMan day352,50087,500Family labourFertilizer applicationMan day82,50020,000Pest controlMan day122,50030,000PrunningMan day402,500100,000PluckingMan day3602,500900,000Total labour costs1,315,000InputsKgSeedlings14,00063882,000Manure14,00020280,000Lime20010020,000Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)bags1220,000240,000Pesticides41,5006,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)6,7201,982,400Small tools103003,000Total Input Costs3,413,400Total Production Costs4,728,400Production (Kg/ha) (50%,75%,100%)Kilograms                  1.20 14,00016,800Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)295Total Benefits4,956,000Net Benefits227,600 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 13: Tea expansion farm conversion model 
27 
UnitQuantityUnit cost (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7-20Labor costHired labourLand clearingMan day302,50075,00075,000Manure transportationMan day42,50010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Land preparationMan day302,50075,00075,000PlantingMan day72,50017,50017,500WeedingMan day352,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,500Family labourFertilizer applicationMan day82,50020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Pest controlMan day122,50030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000PrunningMan day402,500100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000PluckingMan day3602,500900,000540,000540,000540,000630,000Total labour costs1,315,000415,000247,500247,500787,500787,500787,500877,500InputsKgSeedlings14,00063882,000882,000Manure14,00020280,000280,000280,000280,000280,000280,000280,000280,000Lime20010020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)bags1220,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000Pesticides41,5006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)6,7201,982,400000371,700495,600371,700371,700Small tools103003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,000Total Input Costs3,413,4001,431,000549,000549,000920,7001,044,600920,700920,700Total Production Costs4,728,4001,846,000796,500796,5001,708,2001,832,1001,708,2001,798,200Production (Kg/ha) (50%,75%,100%)Kilograms                  1.20 14,00016,800000420084001260016800Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)295Total Benefits4,956,000-                         -                          -                          1,239,000             2,478,000             3,717,000             4,956,000             Net Benefits227,600(1,846,000)            (796,500)               (796,500)               (469,200)               645,900                 2,008,800             3,157,800              
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 14: Cost and returns of tea infilling per hectare 
28 
UnitQuantityU.C (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Labor costHire labourManure transportationMan day42,50010,000Land preparationMan day302,50075,000PlantingMan day72,50017,500WeedingMan day352,50087,500Fertilizer applicationMan day82,50020,000Family labourPest controlMan day122,50030,000PrunningMan day402,500100,000PluckingMan day3602,500900,000Total labour costs1,240,000InputsKgSeedlings14,00063882,000Manure200204,000Lime20010020,000Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)bags1220,000240,000Pesticides41,5006,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)6,7201,982,400Small tools103003,000Total Input Costs3,137,400Total Production Costs4,377,400Production (Kg/ha) (5%,25%,50%,75%,100%)Kilograms                     1.20 14,00016,800Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)295Total Benefits4,956,000Net Benefits578,600Cost benefit Ratio (CBR)1.13 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 15: Tea infilling conversion farm 
29 
UnitQuantityU.C (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5 - 20Labor costHire labourManure transportationMan day42,50010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Land preparationMan day302,50075,00075,000PlantingMan day72,50017,50017,500WeedingMan day352,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,50087,500Fertilizer applicationMan day82,50020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Family labourPest controlMan day122,50030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000PrunningMan day402,500100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000PluckingMan day3602,500900,00045,000                  225,000450,000675,000900,000Total labour costs1,240,000385,000472,500697,500922,5001,147,500InputsKgSeedlings14,00063882,000882,000Manure200204,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,000Lime20010020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)bags1220,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000240,000Pesticides41,5006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Post harvest losses (40% - 20%)6,7201,982,40099,120371,700495,600743,400991,200Small tools103003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,000Total Input Costs3,137,4001,254,120644,700768,6001,016,4001,264,200Total Production Costs4,377,4001,639,1201,117,2001,466,1001,938,9002,411,700Production (Kg/ha) (5%,25%,50%,75%,100%)Kilograms                     1.20 14,00016,800840                        4,200                 8,400                       12,600                  16,800                  Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)295Total Benefits4,956,000247,800                1,239,000          2,478,000                3,717,000             4,956,000             Net Benefits578,600(1,391,320)           121,800             1,011,900                1,778,100             2,544,300             Cost benefit Ratio (CBR)1.130.151.111.691.922.05 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 16: Costs and returns of macadamia per hectare 
30 
Items/haUnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw) Total Cost (Frw) Labor costsHired labour   Land preparation Man days252,50062,500                  Digging holesMan days102,50025,000                  PlantingMan days102,50025,000               Harvesting costs402,500100,000             Family labour   Wedding and slashingMan days252,50062,500                  PunningMan days202,50050,000                  Pest applicationMan days102,50025,000               Total labour costs350,000             InputsMacadamia seedlings2045,0001,020,000         Transportation62,50015,000               Compost20403061,200               Urea10280081,600               Insecticides11300013,000               Post harvest losses (40%-20%)900,000             Farm tools103003,000                 Total other input costs2,093,800         Total Expenses/ha2,443,800        Production per hectareKgs3000Price per Kg of Nut-in-shellRwF11500Revenues/sales4,500,000         Net returns/ha2,056,200         
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 17: Macadamia conversion farm 
31 
Items/haUnitsQuantityUnit Price (Frw) Total Cost (Frw)  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Y7  Y8  Y9  Y10  Y11  Y12  Y13-20 Labor costsHired labour   Land preparation Man days252,50062,500               62,500                   Digging holesMan days102,50025,000               25,000                   PlantingMan days102,50025,000               25,000                Harvesting costs402,500100,000             100,000             100,000            100,000            100,000            100,000            100,000            100,000            100,000            100,000          100,000          100,000              100,000              100,000              Family labour   Wedding and slashingMan days252,50062,500               62,500                62,500              62,500              62,500              62,500              62,500              62,500              62,500              62,500            62,500            62,500                62,500                62,500                   PunningMan days202,50050,000               50,000                50,000              50,000              50,000              50,000              50,000              50,000              50,000              50,000            50,000            50,000                50,000                50,000                   Pest applicationMan days102,50025,000               25,000                25,000              25,000              25,000              25,000              25,000              25,000              25,000              25,000            25,000            25,000                25,000                25,000                Total labour costs350,000             350,000             237,500            237,500            237,500            237,500            237,500            237,500            237,500            237,500          237,500          237,500              237,500              237,500              InputsMacadamia seedlings2045,0001,020,000         1,020,000          Transportation62,50015,000               15,000                15,000              15,000              15,000              15,000              15,000              15,000              15,000              15,000            15,000            15,000                15,000                15,000                Compost20403061,200               61,200                61,200              61,200              61,200              61,200              61,200              61,200              61,200              61,200            61,200            61,200                61,200                61,200                Urea10280081,600               81,600                81,600              81,600              81,600              81,600              81,600              81,600              81,600              81,600            81,600            81,600                81,600                81,600                Insecticides11300013,000               13,000                13,000              13,000              13,000              13,000              13,000              13,000              13,000              13,000            13,000            13,000                13,000                13,000                Post harvest losses (40%-20%)900,000             300,000          450,000          600,000              750,000              900,000              Farm tools103003,000                 3,000                  3,000                3,000                3,000                3,000                3,000                3,000                3,000                3,000              3,000              3,000                  3,000                  3,000                  Total other input costs2,093,800         1,193,800           173,800             173,800             173,800             173,800             173,800             173,800             173,800             473,800           623,800           773,800               923,800               1,073,800           Total Expenses/ha2,443,800        1,193,800          173,800            173,800            173,800            173,800            173,800            173,800            173,800            473,800          623,800          773,800              923,800              1,073,800          Production per hectareKgs30001,000              1,500              2,000                  2,500                  3,000                  Price per Kg of Nut-in-shellRwF11500Revenues/sales4,500,000         -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     1,500,000      2,250,000      3,000,000          3,750,000          4,500,000          Net returns/ha2,056,200        (1,193,800)        (173,800)          (173,800)          (173,800)          (173,800)          (173,800)          (173,800)          (173,800)          1,026,200      1,626,200      2,226,200          2,826,200          3,426,200           
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 18: Costs and returns on French beans per hectare 
32 
QuantityFrw/kg/unitTotal FrwFERTILIZERS (Kg/lt)DAP100390            39,000                   UREA / CAN50390            19,500                   NPK50540            27,000                   Di-Grow F167,500         120,000                 Total Fertilizers205,500                 CHEMICALS (Kg/Lt)Ridomil417,000      68,000                   Cypermethrin44,000         16,000                   compost1150,000    150,000                 Rodazim415,000      60,000                   Umeme410,000      40,000                   Mancozeb102,600         26,000                   TOTAL Chemicals and fertilizers360,000                 post harvest losses (40%-10%)Household consumption (5%)SEEDS (Bags)French beans2190,000    380,000                 Total Seeds2                 380,000                 TOTAL INPUTS945,500                 LABOUR (Man days)Hired labourSpraying602,500         150,000                 Irrigation1002,500         250,000                 Land Preparation1602,500         400,000                 Grading shed1100,000    100,000                 Family labourWeeding602,500         150,000                 2nd Weeding602,500         150,000                 Harvesting5002,500         1,250,000             Sorting/grading1002,500         250,000                 TOTAL Labor Cost (Rwf)2,700,000             TOTAL PRODUCTION COST4,211,000             Production (Kg/ha) 8,000                     Selling Price (Rwf/kg)700Income per ha5,600,000Net Profit /ha1,389,000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 19: French beans farm conversion 
33 
QuantityFrw/kg/unitTotal Frw Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 - 20 FERTILIZERS (Kg/lt)DAP100390            39,000                   39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000              39,000              UREA / CAN50390            19,500                   19,500                  19,500                  19,500                  19,500                  19,500              19,500              NPK50540            27,000                   27,000                  27,000                  27,000                  27,000                  27,000              27,000              Di-Grow F167,500         120,000                 120,000               120,000               120,000               120,000               120,000            120,000            Total Fertilizers205,500                 CHEMICALS (Kg/Lt)Ridomil417,000      68,000                   68,000                  68,000                  68,000                  68,000                  68,000              68,000              Cypermethrin44,000         16,000                   16,000                  16,000                  16,000                  16,000                  16,000              16,000              compost1150,000    150,000                 150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000            150,000            Rodazim415,000      60,000                   60,000                  60,000                  60,000                  60,000                  60,000              60,000              Umeme410,000      40,000                   40,000                  40,000                  40,000                  40,000                  40,000              40,000              Mancozeb102,600         26,000                   26,000                  26,000                  26,000                  26,000                  26,000              26,000              TOTAL Chemicals and fertilizers360,000                 565,500               565,500               565,500               565,500               565,500            565,500            post harvest losses (40%-10%)2,016,000            1,512,000            1,008,000            504,000               504,000            504,000            Household consumption (5%)252,000               252,000               252,000               252,000               252,000            252,000            SEEDS (Bags)French beans2190,000    380,000                 380,000               380,000               380,000               380,000               380,000            380,000            Total Seeds2                 380,000                 380,000               380,000               380,000               380,000               380,000            380,000            TOTAL INPUTS945,500                 3,213,500            2,709,500            2,205,500            1,701,500            1,701,500        1,701,500        LABOUR (Man days)Hired labourSpraying602,500         150,000                 150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000            150,000            Irrigation1002,500         250,000                 250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000            250,000            Land Preparation1602,500         400,000                 400,000               400,000               400,000               400,000               400,000            400,000            Grading shed1100,000    100,000                 100,000               Family labourWeeding602,500         150,000                 150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000            150,000            2nd Weeding602,500         150,000                 150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000            150,000            Harvesting5002,500         1,250,000             1,250,000            1,250,000            1,250,000            1,250,000            1,250,000        1,250,000        Sorting/grading1002,500         250,000                 250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000            250,000            TOTAL Labor Cost (Rwf)2,700,000             2,700,000            2,600,000            2,600,000            2,600,000            2,600,000        2,600,000        TOTAL PRODUCTION COST4,211,000             5,913,500            5,309,500            4,805,500            4,301,500            4,301,500        4,301,500        Production (Kg/ha) 8,000                     7,200                    7,200                    7,200                    7,200                    7,200                7,200                Selling Price (Rwf/kg)700Income per ha5,600,0005,040,0005,040,0005,040,0005,040,0005,040,0005,040,000Net Profit /ha1,389,000(873,500)              (269,500)              234,500               738,500               738,500            738,500             
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 20: Costs and returns on essential oils production per hectare 
34 
Land & InputsQty (Kg/ha)Unit cost (Frw)Total Cost (Frw)Urea5041020,500NPK5055027,500DAP10047047,000Compost20,00028560,000Foliar fertilizers213,00026,000Total fertilizers costs681,000Seeds              0.50 48,00024,000Post harvest losses240,000Total other input costs945,000Labour CostMan-daysRate (Frw)Cost (Frw)Hired labourLand preparation1201,000120,000Removing weeds /2nd tillage201,00020,000Holes preparation51,0005,000Compost application301,00030,000DAP Application31,0003,000Planting201,00020,0001st Weeding, molding, urea application201,00020,000Family labour2nd weeding, NPK, thinning and mulching201,00020,000Total Watering2001,000200,0001st Spraying41,0004,0002nd spraying41,0004,0003rd Spraying41,0004,0004th spraying41,0004,000Total harvesting2501,000250,000Total labor cost704,000Total expenses1,385,000Production (Kg/ha)3,000Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)800Total Revenues5,0002,400,000Net Income/ha1,015,000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 21: Essential oils conversion farm 
35 
Land & InputsQty (Kg/ha)Unit cost (Frw)Total Cost (Frw) Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4 - 20 Urea5041020,50020,50020,50020,50020,500NPK5055027,50027,50027,50027,50027,500DAP10047047,00047,00047,00047,00047,000Compost20,00028560,000560,000560,000560,000560,000Foliar fertilizers213,00026,00026,00026,00026,00026,000Total fertilizers costs681,000681,000681,000681,000681,000Seeds              0.50 48,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,000Post harvest losses240,000480,000504,000384,000240,000Total other input costs945,0001,185,0001,209,0001,089,000945,000Labour CostMan-daysRate (Frw)Cost (Frw)Hired labourLand preparation1201,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000Removing weeds /2nd tillage201,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Holes preparation51,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Compost application301,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000DAP Application31,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,000Planting201,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,0001st Weeding, molding, urea application201,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Family labour2nd weeding, NPK, thinning and mulching201,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Total Watering2001,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,0001st Spraying41,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0002nd spraying41,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0003rd Spraying41,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004th spraying41,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,000Total harvesting2501,000250,000250,000250,000250,000250,000Total labor cost704,000704,000704,000704,000704,000Total expenses1,385,0001,385,0001,385,0001,385,0001,385,000Production (Kg/ha)3,0001500210024003,000Farmgate Price (Frw/kg)800Total Revenues5,0002,400,0001,200,000          1,680,000      1,920,000      2,400,000        Net Income/ha1,015,000(185,000)            295,000          535,000          1,015,000         
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 22: Costs and returns on mango production per hectare 
36 
Items/haRwfLabor costsHired labour   Land preparation 750,000   Digging holes306,000   Planting30,000   Weeding30,000   Punning30,000Family labourHarvesting30,000   Pest application9,000   Extension services900,000Labor costs2,055,000  Mango seedlings291,800400   Compost306,000   Urea2,142   Insecticides17,250Inputs617,192   Farm tools18,000   Harvesting150,000   Transportation to market210,000Other input costs378,000Post harvest lossesTotal other input costs995,192Total Expenses3,050,192Productivity per hectare21,000Price per Kg (farm gate)400Revenues/sales8,400,000Net profit/ha5,349,808 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 23: Mango conversion farm 
37 
 Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Y7  Y8  Y9  Y10-20 Items/haRwfLabor costsHired labour   Land preparation 750,000750,000   Digging holes306,000306,000   Planting30,00030,000   Weeding30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000   Punning30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000Family labourHarvesting30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000   Pest application9,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,000   Extension services900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000Labor costs2,055,0002,085,000999,000999,000999,000999,000999,000999,000999,000999,000999,000  Mango seedlings291,800400291,800   Compost306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000   Urea2,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,142   Insecticides17,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,250Inputs617,192617,192325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392   Farm tools18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000   Harvesting150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000   Transportation to market210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000Other input costs378,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000Post harvest losses2,016,0001,764,0001,344,0001,512,0001,680,000Total other input costs995,192635,192343,392343,392343,392343,3922,719,3922,467,3922,047,3922,215,3922,383,392Total Expenses3,050,1922,720,1921,342,3921,342,3921,342,3921,342,3921,702,3921,702,3921,702,3921,702,3921,702,392Productivity per hectare21,00012,60014,70016,80018,90021,000Price per Kg (farm gate)400Revenues/sales8,400,000-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     5,040,000          5,880,000          6,720,000          7,560,000          8,400,000          Net profit/ha5,349,808(2,720,192)      (1,342,392)      (1,342,392)      (1,342,392)      (1,342,392)      3,337,608          4,177,608          5,017,608          5,857,608          6,697,608           
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 24: Costs and returns on avocado production per hectare 
38 
Items/haRwfLabourHired labour   Extension services900,000   Land preparation 750,000   Digging holes306,000   Planting30,000   Weeding 30,000Family labour   Punning30,000   Pest application9,000Labor costs1,155,000Inputs  Avocado seedlings291,800400   Compost306,000   Urea2,142   Insecticides17,250Total fertilizer and chemicals617,192Other costs   Farm tools18,000   Harvesting150,000   Transportation to market210,000Total other costs378,000Post harvest losses4,200,000Total other input costsTotal Expenses/ha2,150,192Productivity per hectare (Kgs)Kgs3,500Price per Kg (RwF)RwF3,000Revenues/sales10,500,000Net returns/ha8,349,808 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 25: Costs and returns on a unit of greenhouse 
39 
QuantityFrw/kg/unitTotal FrwStructural costsMaterials and construction costs (including irrigation)110,000,000  10,000,000          replacement 1,000,000             Routine irrigation costs1220,000          240,000                Structure repairs & maintenance1210,000          120,000                Sub total11,360,000          FERTILIZERS (Kg/lt)DAP100390                39,000                  UREA / CAN100390                39,000                  NPK500540                270,000                Sub total348,000                CHEMICALS (Kg/Lt)Ridomil417,000          68,000                  Cypermethrin44,000            16,000                  compost1150,000        150,000                Rodazim415,000          60,000                  Umeme410,000          40,000                  Mancozeb102,600            26,000                  Sub total360,000                Sub total chemicals & fertilizerspost harvest lossesSEEDS (Sachets)Tomato seeds2100,000        200,000                Sub total2                    200,000                TOTAL INPUTS12,268,000          LABOUR (Man days)Hired labourSpraying522,500            130,000                Irrigation1802,500            450,000                Garden Preparation102,500            25,000                  Routine Weeding522,500            130,000                Family labourRoutine Harvesting522,500            130,000                Sorting/grading1002,500            250,000                TOTAL Labor Cost (Rwf)1,115,000             TOTAL PRODUCTION COST14,091,000          Production (Kg/plant) 10500                5,000                     Selling Price (Rwf/kg)1,200Income per greenhouse6,000,000Net Profit /greenhouse-8,091,000 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 26: Avocado farm conversion model 
40 
 Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Y7  Y8  Y9  Y10-20 Items/haRwfLabourHired labour   Extension services900,000900,000900,000900,000900,000   Land preparation 750,000750,000   Digging holes306,000306,000   Planting30,00030,000   Weeding 30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000Family labour   Punning30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000   Pest application9,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,000Labor costs1,155,0001,155,00069,00069,00069,00069,00069,00069,00069,00069,00069,000Inputs  Avocado seedlings291,800400291,800   Compost306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000306,000   Urea2,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,142   Insecticides17,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,25017,250Total fertilizer and chemicals617,192325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392325,392Other costs   Farm tools18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000   Harvesting150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000   Transportation to market210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000Total other costs378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000378,000Post harvest losses4,200,0002,520,0002,205,0001,680,0001,680,0001,680,000Total other input costs703,392703,392703,392703,392703,3923,223,3922,908,3922,383,3922,383,3922,383,392Total Expenses/ha2,150,1922,150,192772,392772,392772,392772,3923,292,3922,977,3922,452,3922,452,3922,452,392Productivity per hectare (Kgs)Kgs3,5002,1002,4502,8003,1503,500Price per Kg (RwF)RwF3,000Revenues/sales10,500,000-                       -                        -                        -                        -                        6,300,000          7,350,000            8,400,000            9,450,000            10,500,000          Net returns/ha8,349,808(2,150,192)        (772,392)              (772,392)              (772,392)              (772,392)              3,007,608          4,372,608            5,947,608            6,997,608            8,047,608             
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 27: Greenhouse farm conversion model 
41 
QuantityFrw/kg/unitTotal Frw Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 - 20 Structural costsMaterials and construction costs (including irrigation)110,000,000  10,000,000                     10,000,000 replacement 1,000,000                           1,000,000               1,000,000               1,000,000               1,000,000           1,000,000           1,000,000 Routine irrigation costs1220,000          240,000                                 240,000                  240,000                  240,000                  240,000              240,000              240,000 Structure repairs & maintenance1210,000          120,000                                 120,000                  120,000                  120,000                  120,000              120,000              120,000 Sub total11,360,000                     11,360,000               1,360,000               1,360,000               1,360,000           1,360,000           1,360,000 FERTILIZERS (Kg/lt)DAP100390                39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000              39,000              UREA / CAN100390                39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000                  39,000              39,000              NPK500540                270,000                270,000               270,000               270,000               270,000               270,000            270,000            Sub total348,000                348,000               348,000               348,000               348,000               348,000            348,000            CHEMICALS (Kg/Lt)Ridomil417,000          68,000                  68,000                  68,000                  68,000                  68,000                  68,000              68,000              Cypermethrin44,000            16,000                  16,000                  16,000                  16,000                  16,000                  16,000              16,000              compost1150,000        150,000                150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000               150,000            150,000            Rodazim415,000          60,000                  60,000                  60,000                  60,000                  60,000                  60,000              60,000              Umeme410,000          40,000                  40,000                  40,000                  40,000                  40,000                  40,000              40,000              Mancozeb102,600            26,000                  26,000                  26,000                  26,000                  26,000                  26,000              26,000              Sub total360,000                360,000               360,000               360,000               360,000               360,000            360,000            Sub total chemicals & fertilizers708,000               708,000               708,000               708,000               708,000            708,000            post harvest losses1,800,000            1,500,000            1,200,000            900,000               600,000            600,000            SEEDS (Sachets)Tomato seeds2100,000        200,000                200,000               200,000               200,000               200,000               200,000            200,000            Sub total2                    200,000                200,000               200,000               200,000               200,000               200,000            200,000            TOTAL INPUTS12,268,000          12,268,000           2,268,000             2,268,000             2,268,000             2,268,000         2,268,000         LABOUR (Man days)Hired labourSpraying522,500            130,000                130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000            130,000            Irrigation1802,500            450,000                450,000               450,000               450,000               450,000               450,000            450,000            Garden Preparation102,500            25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000                  25,000              25,000              Routine Weeding522,500            130,000                130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000            130,000            Family labourRoutine Harvesting522,500            130,000                130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000               130,000            130,000            Sorting/grading1002,500            250,000                250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000               250,000            250,000            TOTAL Labor Cost (Rwf)1,115,000             1,115,000            1,115,000            1,115,000            1,115,000            1,115,000        1,115,000        TOTAL PRODUCTION COST14,091,000          13,383,000         2,023,000            2,023,000            2,023,000            2,023,000        2,023,000        Production (Kg/plant) 10500                5,000                     Selling Price (Rwf/kg)1,200Income per greenhouse6,000,0006,000,0006,000,0006,000,0006,000,0006,000,0006,000,000Net Profit /greenhouse-8,091,000(7,383,000)          3,977,000            3,977,000            3,977,000            3,977,000        3,977,000         
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
42 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 28: PSAC costs and returns from investment in Coffee replacement – financial prices 
Appendix 29: PSAC costs and returns from investment in Coffee replacement – economic prices 
43 
PSAC Coffee Replacement Intervention at Financial PricesItemUnitQuantityY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsHectare 3,050            228,375,000          684,687,500       1,141,000,000   1,334,375,000   1,321,325,000   1,295,250,000  1,269,175,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000     1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  1,258,125,000  Manure (1kg/plant/year)Kgs7,625,000    39,150,000             117,375,000       195,600,000       228,750,000       228,750,000       228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000         228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     228,750,000     Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs3,050,000    417,600,000          1,252,000,000   2,086,400,000   2,440,000,000   2,440,000,000   2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000     2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  2,440,000,000  Shading trees seedlingsTrees762,500       4,893,750               14,671,875         24,450,000         28,593,750         23,700,000         13,921,875        4,143,750          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Purchase of new coffee seedlingsSeedling7,625,000    48,937,500             146,718,750       244,500,000       285,937,500       237,000,000       139,218,750     41,437,500        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Insecticides (per hectare)Liter3,050            6,786,000               20,345,000         33,904,000         39,650,000         39,650,000         39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000           39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        FungicideLiter3,050            6,786,000               20,345,000         33,904,000         39,650,000         39,650,000         39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000           39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        39,650,000        Post harvest lossesPercentage0.40              240,772,500          561,341,250       761,831,250       792,043,125       936,824,375       1,304,953,125  1,628,853,125  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750     1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  1,819,118,750  Production transportation Lumpsum46,980,000             140,850,000       234,720,000       274,500,000       274,500,000       274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000         274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     274,500,000     Total input costs1,040,280,750       2,958,334,375   4,756,309,250   5,463,499,375   5,541,399,375   5,775,893,750  5,966,159,375  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750     6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  6,099,793,750  OutputExpected yieldKgs1,468,125               3,585,938            5,705,313            7,764,063            11,148,438         15,914,063        19,864,063        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375           22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        Expected revenueRwF601,931,250          1,470,234,375   2,339,178,125   3,183,265,625   4,570,859,375   6,524,765,625  8,144,265,625  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750     9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  9,095,593,750  Net returns(438,349,500)         (1,488,100,000)  (2,417,131,125)  (2,280,233,750)  (970,540,000)     748,871,875     2,178,106,250  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000     2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  Incremental net returns(438,349,500)         (1,488,100,000)  (2,417,131,125)  (2,280,233,750)  (970,540,000)     748,871,875     2,178,106,250  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000     2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  2,995,800,000  NPV of incremental net returns5,782,462,772       IRR of incremental net returns23%With projectItemUnitQuantityY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsHectare -                189,551,250          568,290,625       947,030,000       1,107,531,250   1,096,699,750   1,075,057,500  1,053,415,250  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750     1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  1,044,243,750  Manure (1kg/plant/year)Kgs-                30,537,000             91,552,500         152,568,000       178,425,000       178,425,000       178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000         178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     178,425,000     Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)Kgs-                292,320,000          876,400,000       1,460,480,000   1,708,000,000   1,708,000,000   1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000     1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  1,708,000,000  Shading trees seedlingsTrees30,500          3,817,125               11,444,063         19,071,000         22,303,125         18,486,000         10,859,063        3,232,125          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Purchase of new coffee seedlingsSeedling15,250          38,171,250             114,440,625       190,710,000       223,031,250       184,860,000       108,590,625     32,321,250        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                          -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Insecticides (per hectare)Liter30,500          5,293,080               15,869,100         26,445,120         30,927,000         30,927,000         30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000           30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        FungicideLiter-                5,293,080               15,869,100         26,445,120         30,927,000         30,927,000         30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000           30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        30,927,000        Post harvest lossesPercentage0.40              228,733,875          533,274,188       723,739,688       752,440,969       889,983,156       1,239,705,469  1,547,410,469  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813     1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  1,728,162,813  Production transportation Lumpsum38,523,600             115,497,000       192,470,400       225,090,000       225,090,000       225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000         225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     225,090,000     Total input costs832,240,260          2,342,637,200   3,738,959,328   4,278,675,594   4,363,397,906   4,607,581,656  4,809,748,094  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563     4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  4,945,775,563  OutputExpected yieldKgs1,468,125               3,585,938            5,705,313            7,764,063            11,148,438         15,914,063        19,864,063        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375           22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        22,184,375        Expected revenueRwF469,506,375          1,146,782,813   1,824,558,938   2,482,947,188   3,565,270,313   5,089,317,188  6,352,527,188  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125     7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  7,094,563,125  Net returns(362,733,885)         (1,195,854,388)  (1,914,400,390)  (1,795,728,406)  (798,127,594)     481,735,531     1,542,779,094  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563     2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  Incremental net returns(362,733,885)         (1,195,854,388)  (1,914,400,390)  (1,795,728,406)  (798,127,594)     481,735,531     1,542,779,094  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563     2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  2,148,787,563  ENPV of incremental net returns5,222,306,023       EIRR of incremental net returns21%With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 30: PSAC costs and returns from investment in Coffee rehabilitation – financial prices 
Appendix 31: PSAC costs and returns from investment in Coffee rehabilitation – economic prices 
44 
ItemUnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs114,328,125        228,656,250       342,562,500       456,468,750       453,928,125       451,387,500       448,856,250       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000       446,325,000     Manure (1kg/plant/year)20,325,000          40,650,000         60,900,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000         81,150,000        Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)216,800,000        433,600,000       649,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000       865,600,000     Shading trees seedlings2,540,625            5,081,250            7,612,500            10,143,750         7,603,125            5,062,500            2,531,250            -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                       Insecticides (per hectare)3,523,000            7,046,000            10,556,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000        Fungicide3,523,000            7,046,000            10,556,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000         14,066,000        Post harvest losses124,998,750        187,498,125       256,480,625       353,471,250       360,620,625       464,658,125       561,648,750       630,836,250       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000       665,430,000     Production transportation 24,390,000          48,780,000         73,080,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000         97,380,000        Total input costs510,428,500        958,357,625       1,411,347,625   1,892,345,750   1,894,413,875   1,993,370,125   2,085,298,250   2,149,423,250   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000   2,184,017,000  OutputExpected yield762,188                1,270,313            2,114,375            3,298,125            4,144,688            5,666,563            6,849,375            7,693,125            7,693,125            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000          Expected revenue312,496,875        520,828,125       866,893,750       1,352,231,250   1,699,321,875   2,323,290,625   2,808,243,750   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250   3,154,181,250  Net returns(197,931,625)      (437,529,500)     (544,453,875)     (540,114,500)     (195,092,000)     329,920,500       722,945,500       1,004,758,000   970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250       970,164,250     With projectItemUnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs94,892,344          189,784,688       284,326,875       378,869,063       376,760,344       374,651,625       372,550,688       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750       370,449,750     Manure (1kg/plant/year)15,853,500          31,707,000         47,502,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000         63,297,000        Fertilizer NPK (.4kg/plant/year)151,760,000        303,520,000       454,720,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000       605,920,000     Shading trees seedlings1,981,688            3,963,375            5,937,750            7,912,125            5,930,438            3,948,750            1,974,375            -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                        -                       Insecticides (per hectare)2,747,940            5,495,880            8,233,680            10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480        Fungicide2,747,940            5,495,880            8,233,680            10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480         10,971,480        Post harvest losses118,748,813        178,123,219       243,656,594       335,797,688       342,589,594       441,425,219       533,566,313       599,294,438       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500       632,158,500     Production transportation 19,999,800          39,999,600         59,925,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600         79,851,600        Total input costs408,732,024        758,089,641       1,112,536,179   1,493,590,435   1,496,291,935   1,591,037,154   1,679,102,935   1,740,755,748   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810   1,773,619,810  OutputExpected yield762,188                1,270,313            2,114,375            3,298,125            4,144,688            5,666,563            6,849,375            7,693,125            7,693,125            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000            8,115,000          Expected revenue243,747,563        406,245,938       676,177,125       1,054,740,375   1,325,471,063   1,812,166,688   2,190,430,125   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375   2,460,261,375  Net returns(164,984,461)      (351,843,704)     (436,359,054)     (438,850,060)     (170,820,873)     221,129,534       511,327,190       719,505,628       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565     Incremental net returns(164,984,461)      (351,843,704)     (436,359,054)     (438,850,060)     (170,820,873)     221,129,534       511,327,190       719,505,628       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565       686,641,565     ENPV of incremental net returns1,731,037,256    EIRR of incremental net returns23%With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 32: PSAC costs and returns from investment in tea expansion 
Appendix 33: PSAC costs and returns from investment in tea infilling – financial prices 
Appendix 34: PSAC costs and returns from investment in tea infilling – economic prices 
45 
UnitQuantityY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsHectare 1,790              166,000,000       265,000,000       405,500,000       741,100,000       875,025,000       1,145,025,000    1,445,625,000    1,589,625,000    1,742,625,000  1,921,725,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  2,054,025,000  SeedlingsKgs25,060,000    352,800,000       352,800,000       441,000,000       432,180,000       -                         -                         -                         -                         -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       ManureKgs25,060,000    112,000,000       224,000,000       364,000,000       501,200,000       501,200,000       501,200,000       501,200,000       501,200,000       501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      501,200,000      LimeTrees358,000          8,000,000            16,000,000         26,000,000          35,800,000          35,800,000          35,800,000          35,800,000          35,800,000          35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        35,800,000        Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)Bags14,320            96,000,000         192,000,000       312,000,000       429,600,000       429,600,000       429,600,000       429,600,000       429,600,000       429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      429,600,000      PesticidesLiter7,160              2,400,000            4,800,000            7,800,000            10,740,000          10,740,000          10,740,000          10,740,000          10,740,000          10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        10,740,000        Post harvest lossesVarious 0.40                 -                        -                        -                         148,680,000       346,920,000       532,770,000       727,293,000       726,054,000       665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      665,343,000      Small toolsPercentage17,900.00      1,200,000            2,400,000            3,900,000            5,370,000            5,370,000            5,370,000            5,370,000            5,370,000            5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          5,370,000          Total input costs1,057,000,000   1,560,200,000    2,304,670,000    2,204,655,000    2,660,505,000    3,155,628,000    3,298,389,000    3,390,678,000  3,569,778,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  3,702,078,000  Overhead costsRevolving Fertilizer Scheme1,000,000,000    2042 hectares of woodlot10,820,000          10,820,000          10,820,000          10,820,000          52 Green leaft collection hangars50,000,000          50,000,000          50,000,000          50,000,000          50,000,000          Total overhead costs60,820,000          60,820,000          1,060,820,000    60,820,000          50,000,000          OutputExpected yieldKgs-                        -                        -                         1,680,000            5,040,000            10,500,000          18,018,000          23,856,000          28,014,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        30,072,000        Expected revenueRwF-                        -                        -                         495,600,000       1,486,800,000    3,097,500,000    5,315,310,000    7,037,520,000    8,264,130,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  8,871,240,000  Net returns-                        (1,057,000,000)  (1,621,020,000)  (1,869,890,000)  (1,778,675,000)  376,175,000       2,109,682,000    3,739,131,000    4,873,452,000  5,301,462,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  5,169,162,000  Incremental net returns(1,057,000,000)    (1,621,020,000)    (1,869,890,000)    (1,778,675,000)    376,175,000         2,109,682,000     3,739,131,000     4,873,452,000    5,301,462,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    5,169,162,000    PV of incremental net returns12,688,700,584   IRR of incremental net returns33%With Project (RwF)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs-                       238,700,000      292,950,000    432,450,000          571,950,000       711,450,000       711,450,000       711,450,000       711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      711,450,000      Seedlings-                       546,840,000      -                     -                           -                         -                         -                         -                         -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Manure-                       2,480,000           2,480,000        2,480,000              2,480,000            2,480,000            2,480,000            2,480,000            2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          2,480,000          Lime-                       12,400,000         12,400,000      12,400,000            12,400,000          12,400,000          12,400,000          12,400,000          12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        12,400,000        Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)-                       148,800,000      148,800,000    148,800,000          148,800,000       148,800,000       148,800,000       148,800,000       148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      148,800,000      Pesticides-                       3,720,000           3,720,000        3,720,000              3,720,000            3,720,000            3,720,000            3,720,000            3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          3,720,000          Post harvest losses-                       61,454,400         230,454,000    307,272,000          460,908,000       614,544,000       675,998,400       675,998,400       675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      675,998,400      Small tools-                       1,860,000           1,860,000        1,860,000              1,860,000            1,860,000            1,860,000            1,860,000            1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          1,860,000          Total input costs-                       1,016,254,400   692,664,000    908,982,000          1,202,118,000    1,495,254,000    1,556,708,400    1,556,708,400    1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  1,556,708,400  OutputExpected yield-                       520,800               2,604,000        5,208,000              7,812,000            10,416,000          11,457,600          11,457,600          11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        Expected revenue-                       153,636,000      768,180,000    1,536,360,000      2,304,540,000    3,072,720,000    3,379,992,000    3,379,992,000    3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  3,379,992,000  Net returns-                       (862,618,400)     75,516,000      627,378,000          1,102,422,000    1,577,466,000    1,823,283,600    1,823,283,600    1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  1,823,283,600  With ProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs-                       198,121,000      243,148,500    358,933,500          474,718,500       590,503,500       590,503,500       590,503,500       590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      590,503,500      Seedlings-                       426,535,200      -                     -                           -                         -                         -                         -                         -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Manure-                       1,934,400           1,934,400        1,934,400              1,934,400            1,934,400            1,934,400            1,934,400            1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          1,934,400          Lime-                       8,680,000           8,680,000        8,680,000              8,680,000            8,680,000            8,680,000            8,680,000            8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          8,680,000          Fertilizer (NPK 26:5:5)-                       104,160,000      104,160,000    104,160,000          104,160,000       104,160,000       104,160,000       104,160,000       104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      104,160,000      Pesticides-                       2,901,600           2,901,600        2,901,600              2,901,600            2,901,600            2,901,600            2,901,600            2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          2,901,600          Post harvest losses-                       58,381,680         218,931,300    291,908,400          437,862,600       583,816,800       642,198,480       642,198,480       642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      642,198,480      Small tools-                       1,190,400           1,190,400        1,190,400              1,190,400            1,190,400            1,190,400            1,190,400            1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          1,190,400          Total input costs-                       801,904,280      580,946,200    769,708,300          1,031,447,500    1,293,186,700    1,351,568,380    1,351,568,380    1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  1,351,568,380  OutputExpected yield-                       520,800               2,604,000        5,208,000              7,812,000            10,416,000          11,457,600          11,457,600          11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        11,457,600        Expected revenue-                       119,836,080      599,180,400    1,198,360,800      1,797,541,200    2,396,721,600    2,636,393,760    2,636,393,760    2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  2,636,393,760  Net returns-                       (682,068,200)     18,234,200      428,652,500          766,093,700       1,103,534,900    1,284,825,380    1,284,825,380    1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  1,284,825,380  ENPV of incremental net returns6,802,483,794    EIRR of incremental net returns69%With Project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 35: Costs and returns from investment in macadamia – financial prices 
Appendix 36: Costs and returns from investment in macadamia – economic prices 
Appendix 37: Costs and returns from investment in French beans – financial prices 
46 
UnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Y21InputsLabour costs17,500,000      53,125,000       100,625,000   124,375,000   118,750,000   118,750,000   118,750,000   118,750,000   118,750,000   118,750,000 118,750,000 118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     118,750,000     Macadamia seedlings51,000,000      51,000,000       51,000,000      51,000,000      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                   -                   -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Transportation750,000            3,000,000          6,000,000        7,500,000        7,500,000        7,500,000        7,500,000        7,500,000        7,500,000        7,500,000      7,500,000      7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          7,500,000          Compost3,060,000        12,240,000       24,480,000      30,600,000      30,600,000      30,600,000      30,600,000      30,600,000      30,600,000      30,600,000    30,600,000    30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        30,600,000        Urea4,080,000        16,320,000       32,640,000      40,800,000      40,800,000      40,800,000      40,800,000      40,800,000      40,800,000      40,800,000    40,800,000    40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        40,800,000        Insecticides650,000            2,600,000          5,200,000        6,500,000        6,500,000        6,500,000        6,500,000        6,500,000        6,500,000        6,500,000      6,500,000      6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          6,500,000          Post harvest losses (40%-20%)-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     30,000,000      105,000,000 195,000,000 277,500,000     352,500,000     412,500,000     442,500,000     450,000,000     450,000,000     450,000,000     450,000,000     450,000,000     450,000,000     Farm tools150,000            600,000             1,200,000        1,500,000        1,500,000        1,500,000        1,500,000        1,500,000        1,500,000        1,500,000      1,500,000      1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          Total input costs77,190,000      138,885,000     221,145,000   262,275,000   205,650,000   205,650,000   205,650,000   205,650,000   235,650,000   310,650,000 400,650,000 483,150,000     558,150,000     618,150,000     648,150,000     655,650,000     655,650,000     655,650,000     655,650,000     655,650,000     655,650,000     OutputExpected yield-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     100,000            350,000          650,000          925,000              1,175,000          1,375,000          1,475,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          Expected revenue-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     150,000,000   525,000,000 975,000,000 1,387,500,000  1,762,500,000  2,062,500,000  2,212,500,000  2,250,000,000  2,250,000,000  2,250,000,000  2,250,000,000  2,250,000,000  2,250,000,000  Net returns(77,190,000)    (138,885,000)   (221,145,000)  (262,275,000)  (205,650,000)  (205,650,000)  (205,650,000)  (205,650,000)  (85,650,000)    214,350,000 574,350,000 904,350,000     1,204,350,000  1,444,350,000  1,564,350,000  1,594,350,000  1,594,350,000  1,594,350,000  1,594,350,000  1,594,350,000  1,594,350,000  With projectUnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Y21InputsLabour costs14,525,000      44,093,750       83,518,750      103,231,250   98,562,500      98,562,500      98,562,500      98,562,500      98,562,500      98,562,500    98,562,500    98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        98,562,500        Macadamia seedlings39,780,000      39,780,000       39,780,000      39,780,000      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                   -                   -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Transportation585,000            2,340,000          4,680,000        5,850,000        5,850,000        5,850,000        5,850,000        5,850,000        5,850,000        5,850,000      5,850,000      5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          5,850,000          Compost2,386,800        9,547,200          19,094,400      23,868,000      23,868,000      23,868,000      23,868,000      23,868,000      23,868,000      23,868,000    23,868,000    23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        23,868,000        Urea2,856,000        11,424,000       22,848,000      28,560,000      28,560,000      28,560,000      28,560,000      28,560,000      28,560,000      28,560,000    28,560,000    28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        28,560,000        Insecticides507,000            2,028,000          4,056,000        5,070,000        5,070,000        5,070,000        5,070,000        5,070,000        5,070,000        5,070,000      5,070,000      5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          5,070,000          Post harvest losses (40%-20%)-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     28,500,000      99,750,000    185,250,000 263,625,000     334,875,000     391,875,000     420,375,000     427,500,000     427,500,000     427,500,000     427,500,000     427,500,000     427,500,000     Farm tools96,000              384,000             768,000            960,000            960,000            960,000            960,000            960,000            960,000            960,000          960,000          960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              960,000              Total input costs60,735,800      109,596,950     174,745,150   207,319,250   162,870,500   162,870,500   162,870,500   162,870,500   191,370,500   262,620,500 348,120,500 426,495,500     497,745,500     554,745,500     583,245,500     590,370,500     590,370,500     590,370,500     590,370,500     590,370,500     590,370,500     OutputExpected yield-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     100,000            350,000          650,000          925,000              1,175,000          1,375,000          1,475,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          1,500,000          Expected revenue-                     -                      -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     117,000,000   409,500,000 760,500,000 1,082,250,000  1,374,750,000  1,608,750,000  1,725,750,000  1,755,000,000  1,755,000,000  1,755,000,000  1,755,000,000  1,755,000,000  1,755,000,000  Net returns(60,735,800)    (109,596,950)   (174,745,150)  (207,319,250)  (162,870,500)  (162,870,500)  (162,870,500)  (162,870,500)  (74,370,500)    146,879,500 412,379,500 655,754,500     877,004,500     1,054,004,500  1,142,504,500  1,164,629,500  1,164,629,500  1,164,629,500  1,164,629,500  1,164,629,500  1,164,629,500  ENPV of incremental net returns1,469,241,479     EIRR of incremental net returns21%With projectUnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs27,000,000         53,000,000         92,000,000         131,000,000       130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000   130,000,000 Seeds3,800,000            7,600,000            13,300,000         19,000,000         19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000      19,000,000    Fertilizers & chemicals5,655,000            11,310,000         19,792,500         28,275,000         28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000      28,275,000    Post harvest losses (40%-20%)20,160,000         35,280,000         50,400,000         57,960,000         40,320,000      30,240,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000      25,200,000    Total input costs56,615,000         107,190,000       175,492,500       236,235,000       217,595,000   207,515,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000   202,475,000 Overhead costsTrainings and Extension servicesProtective agriculture 200 units50,000,000         50,000,000         50,000,000         50,000,000         Total overhead costs50,000,000         50,000,000         50,000,000         50,000,000         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                   OutputExpected yield80,000                  160,000               280,000               280,000               400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000          Expected revenue50,400,000         100,800,000       176,400,000       252,000,000       252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000   252,000,000 Net returns(56,215,000)        (56,390,000)        (49,092,500)        (34,235,000)        34,405,000      44,485,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000      49,525,000    With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 38: Costs and returns from investment in French beans – economic prices 
47 
UnitQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs22,410,000         43,990,000         76,360,000         108,730,000       107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000   107,900,000 Seeds2,964,000            5,928,000            10,374,000         14,820,000         14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000      14,820,000    Fertilizers & chemicals3,958,500            7,917,000            13,854,750         19,792,500         19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500      19,792,500    Post harvest losses (40%-20%)19,152,000         33,516,000         47,880,000         55,062,000         38,304,000      28,728,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000      23,940,000    Total input costs48,484,500         91,351,000         148,468,750       198,404,500       180,816,500   171,240,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500   166,452,500 OutputExpected yield80,000                  160,000               280,000               280,000               400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000            400,000          Expected revenue39,312,000         78,624,000         137,592,000       196,560,000       196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000   196,560,000 Net returns(9,172,500)          (12,727,000)        (10,876,750)        (1,844,500)          15,743,500      25,319,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500      30,107,500    ENPV of incremental net returns120,975,281        EIRR of incremental net returns38%With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 39: Costs and returns on investment in essential oils – financial prices 
Appendix 40: Costs and returns on investment in essential oils – economic prices 
Appendix 41: Costs and returns on investment in avocado expansion – financial prices 
48 
CostsQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs14,080,000       49,280,000    84,480,000    140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   140,800,000   Seeds480,000             1,680,000      2,880,000      4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        4,800,000        Fertilizers & chemicals13,620,000       47,670,000    81,720,000    136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   136,200,000   Post harvest losses (40%-20%)9,600,000          34,080,000    56,880,000    87,600,000     76,320,000     59,520,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     48,000,000     Total input costs37,780,000       132,710,000 225,960,000 369,400,000   358,120,000   341,320,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   329,800,000   OutputExpected yield30,000                117,000          228,000          405,000           498,000           552,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           Expected revenue24,000,000       93,600,000    182,400,000 324,000,000   398,400,000   441,600,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   480,000,000   Net returns(13,780,000)      (39,110,000)  (43,560,000)  (45,400,000)    40,280,000     100,280,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   150,200,000   With projectCostsQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costs11,686,400       40,902,400    70,118,400    116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   116,864,000   Seeds374,400             1,310,400      2,246,400      3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        3,744,000        Fertilizers & chemicals9,534,000          33,369,000    57,204,000    95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     95,340,000     Post harvest losses (40%-20%)9,120,000          32,376,000    54,036,000    83,220,000     72,504,000     56,544,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     45,600,000     Total input costs30,714,800       107,957,800 183,604,800 299,168,000   288,452,000   272,492,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   261,548,000   OutputExpected yield30,000                117,000          228,000          405,000           498,000           552,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           600,000           Expected revenue18,720,000       73,008,000    142,272,000 252,720,000   310,752,000   344,448,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   374,400,000   Net returns(11,994,800)      (34,949,800)  (41,332,800)  (46,448,000)    22,300,000     71,956,000     112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   112,852,000   ENPV of incremental net returns421,169,595      EIRR of incremental net returns39%With projectCostsQuantityY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsRwF115,500,000        237,900,000     367,200,000       272,400,000       55,200,000         55,200,000         55,200,000        55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          55,200,000          SeedlingsRwF29,180,000          58,360,000        87,540,000         58,360,000         -                        -                        -                       -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         Fertilizers and chemicals32,539,200          97,617,600        195,235,200       260,313,600       260,313,600       260,313,600       260,313,600     260,313,600        260,313,600        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        227,774,400        Other input costsRwF37,800,000          113,400,000     226,800,000       302,400,000       302,400,000       302,400,000       302,400,000     302,400,000        302,400,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        264,600,000        Post harvest losses (40%-20%)RwF-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        252,000,000       724,500,000     1,365,000,000    1,669,500,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    1,176,000,000    Total input costs215,019,200        507,277,600     876,775,200       893,473,600       617,913,600       869,913,600       1,342,413,600  1,982,913,600    2,287,413,600    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    1,723,574,400    Overhead costsTrainings and Extension servicesInfrastructureAvocado line250,000,000     Total overhead costs250,000,000     OutputExpected yieldKgs-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        210,000               665,000              1,400,000            2,030,000            2,205,000            2,380,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            Expected revenueRwF-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        630,000,000       1,995,000,000  4,200,000,000    6,090,000,000    6,615,000,000    7,140,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    7,350,000,000    Net returns(215,019,200)      (757,277,600)    (876,775,200)     (893,473,600)     (617,913,600)     (239,913,600)     652,586,400     2,217,086,400    3,802,586,400    4,891,425,600    5,416,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    5,626,425,600    With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 42: Costs and returns on investment in avocado expansion – economic prices 
Appendix 43: Costs and returns on investment in mango expansion – financial prices 
Appendix 44: Costs and returns on investment in mango expansion – economic prices 
49 
CostsQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsRwF95,865,000          197,457,000     304,776,000       226,092,000       45,816,000         45,816,000         45,816,000        45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          45,816,000          SeedlingsRwF22,760,400          45,520,800        68,281,200         45,520,800         -                        -                        -                       -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         -                         Fertilizers and chemicals22,777,440          68,332,320        136,664,640       182,219,520       182,219,520       182,219,520       182,219,520     182,219,520        182,219,520        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        159,442,080        Other input costsRwF29,484,000          88,452,000        176,904,000       235,872,000       235,872,000       235,872,000       235,872,000     235,872,000        235,872,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        206,388,000        Post harvest losses (40%-20%)RwF-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        239,400,000       688,275,000     1,296,750,000    1,586,025,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    1,117,200,000    Total input costs170,886,840        399,762,120     686,625,840       689,704,320       463,907,520       703,307,520       1,152,182,520  1,760,657,520    2,049,932,520    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    1,528,846,080    OutputExpected yieldKgs-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        210,000               665,000              1,400,000            2,030,000            2,205,000            2,380,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            2,450,000            Expected revenueRwF-                         -                       -                        -                        -                        491,400,000       1,556,100,000  3,276,000,000    4,750,200,000    5,159,700,000    5,569,200,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    5,733,000,000    Net returns(170,886,840)      (399,762,120)    (686,625,840)     (689,704,320)     (463,907,520)     (211,907,520)     403,917,480     1,515,342,480    2,700,267,480    3,630,853,920    4,040,353,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    4,204,153,920    ENPV of incremental net returns11,481,086,437   EIRR of incremental net returns37%With projectCostsQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsRwF52,125,000      129,225,000   231,300,000   254,100,000   199,800,000   199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     199,800,000     SeedlingsRwF7,295,000        14,590,000      21,885,000      14,590,000      -                     -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Fertilizers and chemicals15,429,800      38,994,400      70,693,800      79,668,400      65,078,400      65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        65,078,400        Other input costsRwF450,000            1,350,000        2,700,000        3,600,000        3,600,000        12,600,000        30,600,000        57,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        75,600,000        Post harvest losses (40%-20%)RwF-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     50,400,000        144,900,000     273,000,000     338,100,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     306,600,000     Total input costs75,299,800      184,159,400   326,578,800   351,958,400   268,478,400   327,878,400     440,378,400     595,478,400     678,578,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     647,078,400     Overhead costsTrainings and Extension servicesInfrastructureCoffee drying structuresCoffee Washing StationsTotal overhead costsOutputExpected yieldKgs-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     315,000              997,500              2,100,000          3,045,000          3,465,000          3,832,500          4,095,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          Expected revenueRwF-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     126,000,000     399,000,000     840,000,000     1,218,000,000  1,386,000,000  1,533,000,000  1,638,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  1,680,000,000  Net returns(75,299,800)    (184,159,400)  (326,578,800)  (351,958,400)  (268,478,400)  (201,878,400)    (41,378,400)      244,521,600     539,421,600     738,921,600     885,921,600     990,921,600     1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  1,032,921,600  With projectCostsQuantityWithout projectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20InputsLabour costsRwF43,263,750      107,256,750   191,979,000   210,903,000   165,834,000   165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     165,834,000     SeedlingsRwF5,690,100        11,380,200      17,070,300      11,380,200      -                     -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Fertilizers and chemicals10,800,860      27,296,080      49,485,660      55,767,880      45,554,880      45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        45,554,880        Other input costsRwF351,000            1,053,000        2,106,000        2,808,000        2,808,000        9,828,000          23,868,000        44,928,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        58,968,000        Post harvest losses (40%-20%)RwF-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     47,880,000        137,655,000     259,350,000     321,195,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     291,270,000     Total input costs60,105,710      146,986,030   260,640,960   280,859,080   214,196,880   269,096,880     372,911,880     515,666,880     591,551,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     561,626,880     OutputExpected yieldKgs-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     315,000              997,500              2,100,000          3,045,000          3,465,000          3,832,500          4,095,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          4,200,000          Expected revenueRwF-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     98,280,000        311,220,000     655,200,000     950,040,000     1,081,080,000  1,195,740,000  1,277,640,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  1,310,400,000  Net returns(60,105,710)    (146,986,030)  (260,640,960)  (280,859,080)  (214,196,880)  (170,816,880)    (61,691,880)      139,533,120     358,488,120     519,453,120     634,113,120     716,013,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     748,773,120     ENPV of incremental net returns1,315,763,534      EIRR of incremental net returns22%With project 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 45: Shadow Exchange Rate computation 
50 
2009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021 AverageTotal imports of G&S M 1,3081,4312,0392,3002,3022,4702,3822,2542,2392,4452,7033,4103,1952,570Total exports of G&S X 2352974645917037236827311,0421,1211,1661,4001,162932Average duties on imports t 18%12%12%14%14%14%15%16%15%14%14%15%15%0Import duties Tm 235           172          245          322          322          346          357          361          336          342          378          507          475          375Average taxes on exports s 00000000000000Export duties Tx 00000000000000Total international commerce M+X 1,5431,7282,5032,8913,0053,1933,0642,9853,2813,5663,8694,8104,3573,502M+Tm 1,5431,6032,2842,6222,6242,8162,7392,6152,5752,7873,0813,9173,6702,945X-Tx 23529746459170372368273110421121116614001162932SCF0.870.910.910.90.90.90.90.890.910.910.910.90.90.90         OER (LCU/USD)5685836006146466827197878318619009481007800SER65564165968271575680388291694498810481117885SERF1.15          1.10         1.10         1.11         1.11         1.11         1.12         1.12         1.10         1.10         1.10         1.11         1.11         1.11          
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 46: Conversion factors 
51 
 Financial price Conversion factor Economic price CostsHired unskilled labour2,500                0.833,012                Hired skilled labour4,000                0.834,819                Certification facilities5,000,000        0.855,882,353        Post harvest losses0.95-                    Transport0.82-                    Manure30                      0.7838                      Fertilizers390                    0.7557                    Farm tools300                    0.64469                    Insecticides & pesticides17,000              0.7821,795              Solid Waste facility5,000,000        0.677,462,687        Tea hangar14,000,000     0.6720,895,522     Tea collection truck45,000,000     0.8552,941,176     Tomato seedlings100,000           0.78128,205           Coffee seedlings150                    0.78192                    Tea seedlings63                      0.7881                      Macadamia seedlings5,000                0.786,410                Avocado seedlings291,800           0.78374,103           Mango seedlings291,800           0.78374,103           French beans seedlings190,000           0.78243,590           Essential oils seedlings48,000              0.7861,538              CommoditiesTomatoes1,200                0.781,538                Mango400                    0.78513                    Avocado400                    0.78513                    Essential oils500                    0.78641                    French beans700                    0.78897                    Macadamia400                    0.78513                    Tea295                    0.78378                    Coffee410                    0.78526                     
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
The SECAP Review note should build on the preliminary note mentioned above, draw on the results of the screening exercise and be
informed by the issues raised during the design mission, the stakeholders interviews, publicly available tools and dataset, and
environmental, social or climate-related studies that inform on the characteristics of the project location. The SECAP review note
includes the revised ESMP and should be attached to the Project Design Report, integrated in Draft Project Implementation Manual
(PIM) and COSTAB and shall be submitted to Design Review Meeting (DRM) or IRC (for NSOs).
1/42
1. Introduction
1.
2.
The SECAP Review Note assesses the issues related to the environment, social and climate risks that are likely to affect the
implementation of the PSAC and also provides related mitigation actions. It also identifies how the challenges related to IFAD's
mainstreaming themes (gender, youth, nutrition, environment and climate change) could be addressed through an integrated
approach. In addition, the review also considers and analyses issues that are related to policy, legislation and institutional
analysis of supportive national frameworks.
The SECAP assessment is based on: (i) a desk review of existing information from studies and reports, (ii) a desk review of
relevant national policies and strategies, (iii) consultations with national stakeholders, civil society organisations and farmers
organisations, including cooperatives. This report is also informed by existing environmental, social and climate change studies
and assessments.
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts
3.
4.
5.
The Rwandan economy is, and will remain for the foreseeable future, heavily dependent on the agricultural sector, with over 80
percent of its population depending directly or indirectly on the sector. The economic landscape is dominated by the services
sector, which represents 47.8 percent, the agriculture sector represents 31.9 percent and the industry sector represents 20.3
percent of GDP[1] The sector employs around 70 percent of the population, provides 91 percent of the food consumed in the
country, it accounts for a significant part of the foreign exchange earnings from the exports of products, including coffee, tea,
horticulture, and phyrethrum. 75% of Rwanda’s agricultural production comes from smallholder farmers[2].
Although marketable surpluses have begun to increase, the relatively poor performance of the agricultural sector has been a
major impediment to economic development and it now faces further challenges due to climate change as a consequence of
global warming. Further, harvest and post-harvest losses are still relatively high, at 20 percent for key commodities, thus the full
production potential is not being realised. Improving post-harvest management and provision of infrastructures in this regard is
important.
Investments in smallholder sector following a commercial orientation have the potential to substantially contribute to
strengthening the country’s agricultural export capacity. This constitutes an unique opportunity to involve youth, at scale, across
selected value chains.
2.1 Socio-economic assessment
a. Overall poverty situation
6.
7.
8.
While in the past 20 years, poverty in Rwanda has declined, 38.2 percent of the population continue to live below the poverty
line. Poverty in rural areas is at 43.1 percent and almost 20 percent of the rural population lives in situations of extreme
poverty[3]. Female-headed households are poorer than male-headed households[4]. Around 57 percent of the population are
either food insecure or close to being food insecure. Rwanda’s increased food insecurity in spite of monetary poverty reduction, is
linked to a set of inter-related underlying causes: small plot sizes, limited land availability, low productivity in subsistence
agriculture and low farmers’ purchasing power. These factors are accentuated by erratic weather patterns including intense rains
in some locations and recurrent droughts in others[5]. Poverty is highest among households that depend on income from
seasonal labour and own little or no arable land. Resource poor rural households who cultivate small plots are the most food
insecure[6].
Poverty also relates with households' vulnerability to shocks and their ability to cope. Most of the rural population is dependent on
rain-fed agriculture and consumption of home-produced food, therefore their food and nutrition security are susceptible to shocks
caused by periodic droughts and floods. Coping strategies during times of food and financial shortages include seeking casual
labour, reducing the number of meals; migration to neighbouring areas to look for food and reliance on the government to provide
food relief.
The Project intervention area comprises fourteen (14) districts in four provinces: Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, Nyabihu and
Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe and Nyanza in Southern Province; Rulindo and Musanze in Northern
Province and Rwamagana and Bugesera in Eastern Province. The targeted districts are mostly in the western and southern part
of the country where with the highest poverty rates are reported.
b. Gender
2/42
9.
The latest Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based inequalities in health, empowerment and economic
dimensions, ranks Rwanda 92nd out of 162 countries. According to the national Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index
Study from 2020, the largest contributor to women’s disempowerment in Rwanda is workloads7]. Access to credit, decisions on
credit, and difficulty speaking publicly also are important contributors to disempowerment. Among the three PSAC target
provinces (Southern, Western and Eastern), additional constraints to empowerment for women include also the purchase, sale
and transfer of assets.
Table 1. Percentage of disempowered rural women and men who have inadequate achievement by indicator, by province[8]
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
In terms of economic opportunities, both men and women in Rwanda face constraints in accessing markets and finance.
However, men have more access and control over agriculture resources at household level compared with women[9]. The
Revised National Gender Policy from 2021[10], notes that women remain present at the subsistence level of agricultural value
chain-production due to inadequate access to agricultural inputs and extension services among others.
In addition, while women have equal access to and ownership of land as men[11], this does not necessarily translate into equal
access to assets, decision making and control over income resulting from the agricultural production. Gender disparities are also
evident in the value addition and marketing of agricultural commodities where more economic commodities are controlled by
men. In general, women are associated with marketing small quantities of production while larger quantities are marketed by men
who also control the income from the sales.
With low education level and lack of financial literacy, women have also less access to financial services which, in turn, limits
their opportunity to engage in income-generating activities. Lack of assets challenges women to access financial services and
products, as they are often not able to satisfy collateral requirements needed, for example, to receive a loan and start a new
business.
In terms of unequal workloads, in male-headed households, women work for more hours (15.5 hours) than men (7 hours),
spending over three hours more on farming activities than the seven hours worked by men, in addition to five hours on unpaid
reproductive and household work[12].
While Rwanda is internationally recognized for its achievements in gender-equal parliamentary representation, health, and
education[13], persisting discriminatory social norms which negatively affect women’s decision-making power and opportunities
for economic participation, remain in place. The 2020 UN gender social norms index[14], which looks at four dimensions
(political, educational, economic and physical integrity) and captures how social beliefs can obstruct gender equality notes that in
Rwanda almost 90% of people hold some kind of bias against women. These biases are especially related to physical integrity
including intimate partner violence and reproductive rights. This is particularly significant given that in Rwanda, among women
age 15-49, 37% have experienced physical violence since age 15 and 23% have ever experienced sexual violence. The
corresponding proportions among men are 30% and 6% [15].
15.
Furthermore, the Rwandan agricultural sector and its related policies often construct gendered inequality as an ‘add-on problem’’
to key action areas such as farmers’ market integration, agricultural productivity, technology adoption, and innovation[16] and
notions of gender as a system of power relations that form specific norms and practices in agriculture remain silent.
c. Youth
Youth Engagement
3/42
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Rwanda is a youthful country, where working age of youth (16 to 30 years old) represent 77 percent of the rural population. Yet,
the involvement of youth in agriculture is low, only a quarter of farmers (26.6%) are between 16 and 30 years old[17]. Young
people are also amongst the most vulnerable sectors of the population: in Rwanda, almost 30 per cent of young people live in
households that are below the poverty line. Gender disparities also exist, with more young women extremely poor (12 per cent)
compared to men (10.4 per cent) in 2016/2017[18].
Young people in rural areas are mostly literate (83 per cent, with no significant difference between males and females); however,
the level of education is low and the percentage of young people attending tertiary education and technical or vocational schools
is extremely limited (only 2.8 per cent of the rural youth population)[19] which challenges their involvement in the formal labour
market. Indeed, precarious forms of employment with low level of earning is the main employment problem for the youth.
Root causes of rural youth unemployment in agriculture are mostly related to lack of access to productive assets and natural
resources, goods and services; lack of knowledge and technical and business skills; a negative perception of agriculture among
youth and a non-conducive environment for youth involvement in agriculture and agribusiness[20]. Youth perceive agriculture as
associated to mere subsistence and poverty and seek other options; however, these are not accessible for them due to lack of
skills, assets and services.
Providing the right incentives and support to rural youth to engage in commercially oriented agricultures will be critical to
spearhead youth entrepreneurship, accelerate adoption of new technologies and provide the labour market with the skilled youth
it requires to drive Rwanda´s agri-export capacity. The project will ensure that at least 30% of the beneficiaries are youth. Key
issues considered being supporting youth access to productive assets, skills and services in specific value chains with the view
to i) support youth agripreneurship (start-ups and business acceleration); and ii) fostering youth access to wage employment.
The project will capitalize on the youth employment ecosystem created by IFAD´s agribusiness hub grant in Rwanda, by
engaging with the stakeholders involved in that programme to upgrade youth skills to meet the development of the coffee, tea and
horticulture value chains. PASC will tap into the agribusiness hubs dual training (on irrigation, horticulture, mechanisation, etc.);
“matching services” (matching skilled unemployed youth with potential employers) and entrepreneurship supportive interventions.
In these cases, the project will finance youth participation in these ecosystem services. The project will utilize existing labour
market assessments (or undertake new ones if necessary for coffee and tea commodities, as necessary), to understand the job
opportunities available to youth of different ages and gender.  If necessary, it will also develop specific courses to be
administered in TVETs and / or IPRCs specifically catered for the coffee and tea value chains. Key partners will thus include
Kilimo Trust, the Rural Youth in Agribusiness Forum (RYAF), a network of Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges (IPRCs) and
Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutes (TVETs), together with Rwanda’s Skills Development Fund (SDF),
Business Development Fund (BDF) and FONERWA Rwanda Green Fund (RGF), among others. Furthermore, additional
partnerships will be explored with multiple employers from the private sector, particularly with companies in select VCs that are
growth oriented and short of labour demand. In addition, potential entry points for rural youth groups may include community-
based nurseries, organized groups of pluckers and certification trainers.  Finally, the project intends to hire young women and
men graduates for the positions of NAEB focal persons in each district.
d. Indigenous peoples
21.
22.
In Rwandan context, recognizing the ethnicity publicly is banned. It is noted that the minority group classified as historically
marginalized people. It is hard to get exact data and figures on the economic-situation faced by the indigenous community due to
the lack of disaggregate data in the country. However, in 2019, a large-scale assessment was carried out by minority group-
supporting organizations African Initiative for Mankind Progress (AIMPO), Women’s Organization for Promoting Unity (WOPU),
and Minority Rights Group International (MRG), with funding from the European Union, in order to understand the inclusion and
involvement of minority groups in various socio-economic and political programs and to gauge their understanding of human
rights[21].
Historically, this category of people suffered from insecure land tenure and being landless. Although the government’s policies
and programs for poverty reduction and social welfare in general have included vulnerable communities as historically
marginalized communities through the distribution of state land and houses in village settlements, they have often failed to
effectively address their problems. These groups currently live in conditions of great hardship and poverty on the margins of
mainstream society and experience unequal treatment in all areas of economic, social and political life in the country[22].
Because the Government of Rwanda is promoting people to live together, harmonized, integrated and not legally or publicly
identify the ethnicity. Although the indigenous communities to be included as a part of the project, it is not suggested to recognize
the indigenous identity. In the event the communities are present in the PSAC project area, the project should follow the steps to
seek their free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)[23] outlined in Section 11 of the SECAP review Note.
e. Marginalised groups
e. Marginalised groups
23.
4/42
Socially vulnerable groups include households with older people aged above 65 years and persons with disabilities (PWD).
Households with older people aged above 65 years, have a poverty rate 5.7 percent higher than the national average with 79.1
percent regarded as poor or vulnerable to falling into poverty. There are 511,738 older persons (60 and above) living in Rwanda
out of a total population of 10,515,973 inhabitants. The older persons are composed of 207,239 men and 304,499 women. Thus,
older persons represent 4.9 percent of the total resident population. 7.4 percent of the older persons receive formal pension from
the Social Security Fund for Rwanda (SSFR), since in the context of high levels of poverty and the lack of formal employment,
only a fraction of older people will have contributed to a pension[24]. The households with older people are particularly vulnerable
in the absence of assistance from Government.
24.
The poverty level of households with a disabled member is 1.7 percent above the national average. 76.6 percent of such
households are either poor or vulnerable to falling into poverty[25]. The requirement to care for disabled people means that some
households cannot engage as much in income generating activities and the disabled family members cannot work themselves,
since they cannot meet the additional costs they face when accessing work. PWD are disproportionately exposed to stigma and
discrimination, lack of employment opportunities and homelessness.
25.
People who are both old and disabled experience double vulnerability. Those who are chronically ill are also very vulnerable to
living in poverty: 22% of food insecure households have a chronically ill member. Although PSAC’s focus is on improvement of
competitiveness in agriculture, its programming should engage these groups and increase their ability to meaningfully and
equitably engage in the economy.
f. Nutrition
Nutrition and Food Security Situation
26.
27.
28.
29.
Nationally, 38percent of children under 5 years are stunted. Stunting increases with the age of the child up until 23 months, rising
from 18 % among children 6–8 months to a peak of 49% among children 18–23 months.[26] Forty-one percent of rural children
are stunted, as compared with 24perecent of urban children. Both a mother’s level of education and wealth quintile have a clear
inverse relationship with prevalence of stunting. Underweight (low weight for age) affects 9% of children under 5 while wasting,
(acute malnutrition or low weight for height) which is associated with a high death rate, affects 2.2% of children under 5 (wasting
rates <5% are considered within an acceptable range). In addition to chronic and acute malnutrition, anaemia levels in children
under 5 are high and the pace of reduction is slow while steadily increasing in prevalence among women. Currently, anaemia
affects 37% of Rwandan children under 5 and 19% of women of reproductive age (15-49 years)[27] .
Underweight (low weight for age) affects 9% of children under 5 while wasting, (acute malnutrition or low weight for height) which
is associated with a high death rate, affects 2.2% of children under 5 (wasting rates <5% are considered within an acceptable
range).
Early childbearing also contributes to malnutrition in Rwanda. By age 19, 21% of adolescent girls had begun childbearing in
2014–2015, which is a slight increase from 20% in 2010[28]. This has serious consequences because, relative to older mothers,
adolescent girls are more likely to be malnourished and have a low-birth-weight baby who is more likely to become malnourished
and be at increased risk of illness and death than those born to older mothers. The risk of stunting is 33% higher among first-born
children of girls under 18 years in Sub-Saharan Africa, and as such, early motherhood is a key driver of malnutrition[29].
Despite impressive economic growth, the progress on reducing the level of stunting in smallholder rural children continues to be
a serious concern. The country faces triple burden of malnutrition (undernutrition, micronutrient deficiencies and
overweight/obesity). Making value chains more nutrition-sensitive can help improve the quality of the foods that are available,
affordable and acceptable. The introduction of improved processing and packaging of horticulture produce will help in addressing
the access, acceptability and nutritional quality of what the consumer eats. A substantial part of value chain actors (producers,
processors, retailors and etc.) lack knowledge of nutritional value of produce, importance of quality and safety of different
products, including choosing products that are safe and nutritious, at the same time environmentally sustainable and eco-friendly,
including proper food preparation and waste management.
5/42
Figure 1      Trends in under nutrition among children under 5 years compared to the WHO severity threshold
Food Security
30.
Eighty percent of all households are food secure, which corresponds to about 1,963,975 households. However, 979,045 (40%) of
these households are considered marginally food secure, meaning they are at high risk of becoming food insecure. Of the
473,847 (17%) households considered food insecure, 63,696 (3%) are severely food insecure. The level of food insecurity is
particularly high in the western and northern parts of the country, especially in the livelihood zones of Western Congo Nile Crest
Tea Zone (49%), Lake Kivu Coffee Zone (37%), and the Northern Highland Beans and Wheat Zone (32%). At the provincial level,
the Western Province is most concerning, with over 35% of its households considered food insecure. Although the Western
Province holds 22% of the country’s households, 42% of all severely food insecure households in Rwanda are found there. At the
district level, Rutsiro (57%), Nyamagabe (42%), Nyabihu (39%), Nyaruguru (37%), Rusizi (36%), Karongi (35%), and
Nyamasheke (35%) have the highest percentages of households classified as food insecure[30]. Figure 2 depicts the food
security situation in Rwanda.
Figure 2      Households' Food Security situation in Rwanda (2018)
6/42
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications
31.
The environmental and climate context, trends and implications are elaborated in the sections below. The environmental context
is influenced by the topography of the country and the geographic locations of the areas being cultivated. Specific measures can
be adopted in PSAC to address the environmental related challenges such as erosion and efficiency of natural resource use.
The climate change trends are mainly the temperature rises and the rainfall variability that has adverse impacts on the
agricultural productivity particularly for rain-fed cultivation. The impacts on the different PSAC value chains are linked to yields,
pest and diseases and post-harvest management. Climate change adaptation measures are available to manage the risks related
to increasing temperatures and rainfall variability.
a. Environmental assessment
32.
33.
34.
35.
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network is composed of nine catchments.
The topography is characterized by hills and mountains and therefore widely varying altitudes (900 m in south-west, 1500-2000
m in the south and the centre of the country, 1800-3000 m in the highlands of the north and the west and 3000-4507 m in the
regions of Congo-Nile Crest and the chain of volcanoes). The country is divided into 12 agro-ecological zones that can be
clustered into three natural regions: highlands, midlands, and lowlands.
The topography, results in 60% of the total land area being under cultivation. The climatic conditions and the generally fertile
soils favour cultivation of both cash crops the most important being coffee, tea, sugar cane and pyrethrum and food crops such
as roots and tubers, bananas, fruits, vegetables, cereals and pulses (beans and peas). Most crop land (90%) is located on slopes
with a gradient ranging from 5% to 50%. occupied mostly by terraced agriculture. The gradients exacerbate vulnerability to the
impacts of climate change such as intense rainfall that leads to soil erosion and soil fertility loss[31].
The topography in the target districts includes slopes and this leads to soil erosion with reduced water holding capacity and soil
fertility when cultivating in slopes. Improved land resources management would therefore be of benefit to the productivity of the
small holders targeted under PSAC. Soil and water conservation measures and environmentally friendly practices such as
mulching, composting of organic wastes from all VCs, erosion control measures and intercropping with other crops and shade
trees, which can have the additional benefit of improving soil fertility, will be included under the PSAC activities.
Land scarcity in Rwanda has led to the reduction or abandonment of fallow periods in many areas, which along with limited
manure and mineral fertilizer inputs, few soil conservation practices, results in low yields. Land scarcity, in many instances, has
resulted in over-cultivation and land degradation with the long-term impact has been a vicious cycle of erosion and reduced soil
fertility and thus low agricultural productivity[32]. Conversion of wetlands into agricultural lands, has also affected biodiversity,
water regulation and water purification.
b. Climate trends and impacts
Climate trends and projections
36.
37.
The climate of Rwanda is dominated by the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) which passes over the country twice a year
and is further modified by a widely varying altitude across the country and by the presence of large adjacent water bodies of the
great lakes. Most parts of the country benefit from two agriculture rainy seasons (February - May; September – December). The
duration of the two rainy seasons is increasingly variable, ranging from seven to nine months, with an annual rainfall amount of
up to 1,500 mm.
Average temperature has increased by 0.29°C per decade from 1985 to 2015, with increased interannual variability over the last
few decades[33]. Analyses illustrate regional changes, such as in the Northern and Western provinces, where the rainy season is
becoming shorter and more intense[34]. Overall, the total annual precipitation will be reduced in all provinces until Mid-century.
Total rainfall during the months of September to December the first and long rainy season is predicted to be reduced by ~22 mm
(from ~465 to 443 mm) while the shorter second rainy season March to May is predicted to be reduced by ~40 mm (from ~400 to
360 mm)). The average annual temperature, TMean will increase by at least 1.7⁰C by mid-century. The hottest months of August
and September are predicted to increase by 2.1 ⁰C, relative to a Historical average of ~21⁰C. The overall effect of these increases
in TMean is likely to result in complex impacts on the agricultural sector, particularly when considered in combination with the
predicted decreases in precipitation.
Climate change and Variability impacts
38.
The productivity of smallholders in the tea, coffee and horticulture VCs is adversely affected by climate change and variability.
Increasing temperatures, rainfall variability and events such as droughts reduce yields and have negative effects on volumes,
costs and quality of produce. Specifically for the tea value chain, high temperatures may lead to decreased yields and quality,
reduced water content in the tea, dry weather pests and aggressive weed growth. On the other hand, excessive rain can lead to
spread of fungal diseases, wet weather pests, poor drainage in low-lying areas, heavy soil erosion that results in reduced water
holding capacity, poor soil nutrients, and poor bud break and shoot development. Rainfall variability affects the flowering of the
coffee plants, which at different stages of maturity poses a challenge in disease management, insect management and
harvesting. Models indicate that the impact of climate change will be highly negative for arabica coffees, effectively reducing the
areas suitable for production by 20–50% by 2050. Impacts are highest in low latitudes and at low altitudes[35]. The changing
climate also poses challenges to patterns of cherry ripening and drying of parchment because of unpredictable rainfall patterns
as well as uncertainty regarding the timing of fertilizer application and drying. Climate change may also result in shifts in
production areas due to the risk of increasing temperature and increasing pests and diseases[36]. The adverse climate change
impacts on productivity are also expected for the horticulture value chains included under PSAC.
7/42
c. Climate change mitigation
39.
PSAC will implement “multiple-benefit” approaches, which will typically build climate resilience alongside other benefits,
contributing to poverty reduction, enhancement of biodiversity, increased agricultural productivity and lowering of greenhouse
gas emissions from the agriculture sector. Climate change mitigation benefits in PSAC are expected from i) the use of shade
trees such as carbon sequestration, ii) improved net assimilation of tealeaf and additional organic matter from leaf litter and
minimized wind damage, and reduced soil erosion[37] . iii) capacity building in timing of husbandry activities such as pruning and
fertilizer application, iv) when to plant, which varieties to plant and which inputs to use, v) adjustment of spraying programs and
wider use of improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones, vi) intercropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops, vii)
construction of erosion control and water holding structures and viii) composting and mulching among others. The agro-forestry
activities will also have GHG benefits from reduced soil carbon loss through tree planting and regeneration of degraded soils
through increased agroforestry practices.
2.3 Target group profiles
40.
41.
42.
43.
In line with the COSOP’s targeting strategy and consistent with the national wealth ranking system (Ubudehe), the Project will
directly target the following different categories of beneficiaries, applying complementary approaches aimed at enabling poor
farmers to graduate from poverty. Amongst the target groups, attention will be provided to women and among those, to
adolescent girls and women heads of households; youth will be another priority target group, as well as vulnerable households.
Rural women. Compared to men, women in agricultural production are more exposed to vulnerabilities. Adolescent girls are
even more vulnerable due to early pregnancy[38]. Women headed households are disproportionally faced with the challenges of
poverty and small-sized land (<0.5 ha), compared to male-headed households, which limits their access to productive resources.
PSAC will address gender disparities and the key constraints, which limit women’s participation by: (i) ensuring that women and
men have equal access to project’s interventions including addressing unbalanced workloads and targeting 40 percent women as
direct beneficiaries; (ii) increasing women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level; (iii) increasing
women’s financial literacy, encouraging their economic empowerment and participation throughout the selected value chains iv)
and promoting gender transformative outcomes through addressing discriminatory social norms and structures.
Young people have low rate of education (only primary) and limited skills on financial services. The project will ensure that at
least 30% of the beneficiaries are youth[39]. The project will have specific interventions to reflect the unique roles, needs and
priorities of young people and include them along community-based nurseries and certification trainers. With this, the project
aims to generate employment and income-generating opportunities for rural youth.
Vulnerable households. The poorest and most food insecure households are more likely to have women with low level of
education, children suffering from undernutrition and stunting and persons with disabilities. To tackle the multiple barriers that
traditionally prevent very poor and vulnerable households from improving livelihoods (access to land and assets, lack of
capacities, poor culture of saving, lower position and decision-making power in representing organization, etc.) and enable them
to gradually improve their livelihoods, a social inclusion strategy will be required, directly targeting the poorest households with
services and activities.
3. Institutional analysis
Gender
Youth
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) plays a leading role in the implementation of
the gender agenda in the country. The project, through its Gender Specialist, will coordinate with
MIGEPROF on initiatives for gender equality and women empowerment at the district level (coordinating
with the Gender and Family Promotion Officers) in particular.
8/42
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO) is mandated by the Constitution, along with the Ministry of Gender
and Family Promotion, and the National Women’s Councilfor executing several programs and policies to
address these gender gaps and constraints. Women’s Council at the district level will be key reference to
align KIIWP’s gender strategy with the priorities set by Kayonza district on gender mainstreaming and to
articulate with women’s associations and cooperatives.
In the Ministry of Agriculture, a gender advisor supports capacity building of staff through development of
performance contracts that address gender integration, including identification of key gender-responsive
indicators.
Rwanda Youth Agribusiness Forum (RYAF) is a platform established to bring together different youth
organizations, individual youth farmers and entrepreneurs. RYAF already engaged in IFAD-supported
projects PASP and RDDP in the delivery of training and extension services, and it could be further involved
to engage youth in agriculture, as service providers as well as beneficiaries of capacity building, business
and financial services.
HoReCo is a business company of professionals in agriculture who were trained in matters of horticulture
development and value chain, irrigation and agriculture mechanization as well as building capacity of youth
in agriculture.
Environment and
Climate
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), under the Ministry of Environment, reserves the
legal mandate for national environmental protection, conservation, promotion and overall management,
including advisory to the government on all matters pertinent to the environment and climate change.
REMA aims to closely monitor and assess development programs to ensure compliance with the laws on
environment during their preparation and implementation.
FONERWA
The National Fund for Environment – FONERWA is a ground breaking Environment and climate change
Fund, established by the Rwandan Government in 2012. The Fund’s purpose is to be the engine of green
growth in Rwanda, while serving as a touchstone for Africa and the rest of the world. Our strategy is to
provide unheralded technical and financial support to the best public and private projects that align with
Rwanda’s commitment to a green economy.
The Fund’s core responsibilities are to:
Mobilise and manage resources used in financing activities aiming at protecting and preserving
environment and natural resources;
Mobilise and manage funds to be used in the fight against climate change and its impact;
Collect and manage funds from the public and private sector, through bilateral and multi-lateral
partnerships, to achieve the country’s objectives to advance national priorities in the field of
environment and climate change;
Support public organs, associations and individuals for environment protection and conservation,
research as well as the fight against the climate change;
Coordinate and ensure that various finance partnership agreements related to prevention as well
as fighting against climate change are prepared and effectively managed across various national
stakeholders;
Collaborate with other national regional and international institutions with the same mission.
44.
National strategies, policies and regulatory frameworks relevant to PSAC include:
Gender
9/42
Revised National Gender Policy 2021, puts emphasis on ensuring that gender equality concepts and
principles are well understood and applied by all. The policy will further strengthen pre-established
foundation not only by addressing the remaining policy gaps in mainstreaming gender across sectors and
ensuring that sector-specific planning and implementation of programs that are gender responsive but also
proposes mechanisms for addressing the persistent cultural norms and stereotypes hindering the
effectiveness of gender equality and equity. Unlike the 2010 National Gender Policy, the 2021 gender
policy emphasizes on effective engagement of men and boys and accelerating gender mainstreaming in
the private sector.
Gender and youth mainstreaming strategy in agriculture 2019-2025, builds on the work of the previous
gender-specific sector strategy developed in 2010. It aims to support the implementation of the Fourth
Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation (PSTA4, 2018) and the National Agriculture Policy (NAP,
2018)
The 4th Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation (PSTA4), Empowerment of women in PSTA 4
focuses on training and capacity development in leadership and management skills for women to actively
participate in decision-making at the household, cooperative, community, and institutional level. In parallel,
women economic empowerment will be fostered through provision of technical skills and promoting access
to inputs. This includes for example, providing targeted support to women to access suitable financial
products for income generating activities, productive and off farm.
National Strategy for Transformation (NST1), Gender and Family Promotion is one of the cross-cutting
areas under the National Strategy for transformation (NST1 2017-2024) and emphasizes on interventions
geared to: promote access to finance for women, mainstreaming gender in employment and job creation
strategies, capacity development of the gender machinery and scaling-up Early Childhood Development
(ECD) services at village levels as well as strengthening and promoting gender equality and ensure equal
opportunities for all Rwandans
District Development Strategy (DDS), in 2018, all districts in Rwanda developed their DDS translating
their intended development aspirations over the course of NST-1. The DDSs emphasize on strengthening
and promoting gender equality and ensure equal opportunities for all Rwandans. Women and youth
employment are another area of focus for DDSs.
National Gender Coordination and Partnership Strategy (2016-2020), guides the coordination of
gender promotion, establishing a framework for stakeholders’ coordination and engagement and set
strategic priorities for action.
National Policy against Gender-Based Violence (2011) supports gender-based violence prevention and
response and provides an opportunity for further advancements. Significant steps have been taken in the
country to have dedicated staff and resources to provide services to victims and reduce impunity for GBV.
The existing One-Stop Centers provide critical support to victims of GBV and can be used as a model for
integrated care and support.
Youth
National Youth Policy (2015) focuses on youth economic empowerment by addressing issues related to
unemployment and underemployment, limited skills, low rate of access to finance and markets, among
others.
Environment and
Climate
The National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development (NCCLCD) for Green
Growth and Climate Resilience underlines the need to manage the implications of climate variability for
the social, environmental and economic development of the country. The Green Growth Plan fosters the
development of irrigation infrastructure that give farmers more control of the water resource, facilitate
diversification of crops, contribute to efficient land and water usage and ensure water availability in dry
areas.
In 2020, Rwanda updated its Nationally determined Contributions. PSAC will contribute to the following
prioritised adaptation interventions: i) develop climate resilient post-harvest and value addition facilities and
technologies; iii) develop sustainable land use management practices; v) expand irrigation and improve
water management and; vi) development of Agroforestry and sustainable agriculture
10/42
4. Environmental and social category
Environmental and social category (substantial)
45.
46.
47.
The environment and social category for PSAC is substantial, recognizing that some activities can have adverse impacts on the
environment and increase pressure on the natural resources. This categorisation and classification is in cognisance of the
activities of the PSAC that focus on productivity and the enabling environment for the tea, coffee and horticulture value chains.
However, the potential adverse impacts are predictable, will be localized, mostly reversible and can be managed with appropriate
measures. The activities will take place in non-sensitive areas and infrastructure being developed will be small scale.
The activities to improve production may have some adverse effects on the environmental and natural resources, such as
increased erosion, particularly when cultivating on slopes, possible siltation of water channels, increased demand for water
resources at particular times; diffuse pollution from increased use of agro-chemicals; point source pollution from increased
effluent discharges from processing plants and washing stations; and organic waste from processing of all the value chains,
vegetation removal and land use change as infrastructure such as roads and storage facilities are being developed. However,
these effects are expected to be localised with minimal adverse impacts that can be managed with appropriate actions .
PSAC also envisages expansion of production areas (approx. 4,800 ha), which may result in land use change or deforestation
and loss of biodiversity as additional risks as well as increased pressure on water and energy resources. The adverse impacts
from the development of infrastructure (roads rehabilitation, hanger construction and cold storage facilities) in non-sensitive areas
will be localized and can be managed through site-specific environment and social management plans that will be developed
during the project implementation. The main social risks include labour, health and safety related to handling of pesticides and
conditions for the seasonal labour, which is mainly informal and hardly skilled.
48.
PSAC will develop appropriate SECAP risk management instruments which will include an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Environmental
Checklists, etc. Through a dedicated Environmental Specialist PSAC will ensure that the developed SECAP risk management
instruments are implemented and that mitigation measures are instituted.
5. Climate risk category
Climate risk category (moderate)
49.
The climate risk classification for PSAC is moderate. The main climate change risks facing the smallholders in the PSAC target
areas include rising temperatures and rainfall variability with more intense rainfall in some areas, shorter rain seasons and
potential droughts in some locations. The increases in temperature (1.7–2.1⁰C) in the rainy season months will increase crop
water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water from agricultural soils; reduced rainfall is also predicted during these
months. The risk analysis will include specific recommendation for climate change adaptation options to be included in PSAC.
The adaptation measures will be costed and included in the project budget.
Impacts of climate change and projections on key agricultural and rural development sectors.
50.
Rwanda is ecologically diverse for its size, ranging from highland mountain forests in the west to savannah grasslands and low
altitude marshes in the east. Most of the country benefits from two agriculture rainy seasons (February - May; September –
December) (see below figure 2 on typical seasonal calendar). The duration of the two rainy seasons is increasingly variable,
ranging from seven to nine months, with an annual rainfall up to an amount of 1,500 mm. Rainfall in the eastern part of the
country is below the national average of 1,250 mm per annum.
11/42
Figure 3 Rwandan seasonal calendar for a typical year
51.
Environmental and ecosystem degradation in Rwanda is triggered by two main factors: climate disturbances and anthropogenic
activities. The former is caused by several factors, including the El- Niño and La Niña phenomena, associated with surface
temperatures in the Indian and Atlantic Oceans. A study by the University of Reading[40] shows that climate variability in Eastern
Africa is due to the influence of ocean –atmosphere climate phenomena, namely El Niño Oscillations (ENSO) and the Indian
Ocean Dipole (IOD). Warm ENSO events are thought to be responsible for a build-up of warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs)
in the Eastern Pacific Ocean which lead to increasing rainfall. These events are specifically observed in the short rains seasons.
Furthermore, the recently discovered Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), in addition to ENSO effects, most probably causes anomalously
high rainfall in East Africa[41] . For some years (1963, 1972, 1982, 1997), El Niño events are deemed to have coincided with
positive IOD events leading to high rainfall in East Africa, whereas high rainfall anomalies in East Africa have been documented
when positive IOD events occurred independently of ENSO events. However, as East Africa has varied topography (e.g.
mountains and rift valleys) its features are not yet adequately represented in climate model projections and deserve further
investigation, especially with the modifying influence of the Congo basin. 
Projected Changes to Temperature in Rwanda by 2050
52.
53.
The predicted trends in Mean Monthly Temperature (TMean) for the period from ‘Historical’ to ‘Future 2050’ timepoints indicate
that climate change will result in consistent increases in Mean Temperature across spatial and temporal dimensions in Rwanda.
A common prediction across each of the country’s five provinces is that TMean will increase in all provinces during the period
from ‘Historical’ to ‘Mid-Century’ timepoints by at least 1.7°C. The hottest months of August and September are predicted to
increase by 2.1°C, relative to a Historical average of 21°C. Similar increases of 1.7–2.2°C are predicted for all other months of
the year.
The overall effect of these increases in TMean and TMin is likely to result in complex impacts on the agricultural sector,
particularly when considered in combination with the predicted decreases in precipitation. The large increases in temperature
(1.7–2.1°C) in the months of October–December will increase crop water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water from
agricultural soils, coinciding with the reduced rainfall predicted for the same months. This effect is likely to increase the risks of
crop failure as a result of inadequate or erratic rainfall during the establishment of rainfed crops, particularly for climate sensitive
or marginal crops such as maize and horticultural/vegetable crops such as tomatoes and peppers. Furthermore, the increased
average temperatures are likely to include increased frequency or severity of heat waves and unusually hot days, further
contributing to evapotranspirative losses of water and crop stress.[42] Table 2. shows the projected influence of climate change
on mean monthly temperature (°C) in Rwanda at historical and mid-century periods, and monthly anomalies between the two
time periods.
Table 2.     Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly temperature (°C).
12/42
54.
The changing climate conditions are creating grater uncertainty for the Rwanda tea industry. The planning for new plantations
must take care of climate uncertainty. Existing plantations need to be managed be more resilient to rising temperatures, and the
increased risk of flooding and landslides.
55.
Lower-lying plantations are already “marginal” in terms of producing quality tea. The rising temperatures will further reduce the
quality of tea and coffee as current growing areas will become too hot for growing the current varieties.
56.
The climate-resilient innovation is to plan future plantations in locations that take account of the warmer climate such as higher,
cooler regions.
57.
58.
Tea producers need to take into consideration longer-term climate changes since it takes five years for new bushes to mature
and more than ten years before producers see a return on investment. - Thus new plantations mean that the producers are
locked in to their investment decisions for decades, up to 50 years or more.
New plantations need to be planned with this future climate in mind and be located on higher altitude areas where they will be
more likely to produce good quality leaves for several decades. The tea industry must expand into areas that are suited to the
kind of climate the region will experience in the coming decades. This means including a number of stakeholders from across the
value chain:
The large international companies which operate the factories that process and sell the tea.
The small holder farmers which dominate tea production in Rwanda and are more vulnerable to climate change.
Projected Changes to Rainfall in Rwanda by 2050
59.
60.
The predicted changes in mean monthly precipitation from the historical baseline to the mid-century (2050) future indicate that
climate change will result in complex changes in rainfall across provinces and months (see Table 2). A common prediction across
each of the country’s five provinces is that total annual precipitation will be reduced in all provinces during the period from
baseline to Mid Century timepoints. The total rainfall received during the months of September to December at the onset of the
first, long rainy season is predicted to be reduced from 465 to 443 mm (total reduction of rainfall of 22 mm). Similarly, total rainfall
at the onset of the shorter second rainy season in the months of March, April and May is predicted to be reduced from 400 to
360mm (total reduction of rainfall of 40mm).
An additional effect of climate change predicted by these analyses is the increase in monthly rainfall during the months of
December and January. These results may be indicative of a delay in the onset of the traditional rainy seasons, or alternatively
may indicate that rainy seasons (particularly season A, September-December) may effectively be extended for one to two
months. It should be noted that these effects are likely to vary on an interannual basis as well as spatially within each season,
and the consequent impacts on agricultural activities cannot be predicted with certainty. In some cases, the average reduction in
monthly rainfall, notably during the months of September-October may result in inadequate rainfall to support effective
establishment of crops during the period which is traditionally associated with the start of each growing season. Alternatively, the
positive anomalies (i.e. predicted increases) in monthly rainfall in the months of December – January may indicate an extension
in the duration of the rainy season A, thereby providing farmers with the option to extend or stagger the timing of crop
establishment.
61.
These analyses indicate that climate change may delay the onset of rainfall relative to the traditional agricultural calendar, in turn
resulting in changes to the timing of various agricultural activities such as field preparation and sowing of seed. Both of the
rainfed agricultural growing seasons are characterised by monthly rainfall deficits which may result in fundamental changes to
local crop choices and agricultural practices by the year 2050. Drought sensitive crops such as tomatoes are likely to be
increasingly unreliable or poor in yield, which will be further exacerbated by predicted increases in temperature. Table 3. shows
the projected influence of climate change on mean monthly precipitation (mm/month) in Rwanda at historical and mid-century
periods, and monthly anomalies between the two time periods.
62.
Table 3.    Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly precipitation (MM/MONTH).
13/42
63.
64.
65.
The changing climate conditions are creating grater uncertainty for the Rwanda tea industry. The planning for new plantations
must take care of climate uncertainty. Existing plantations need to be managed be more resilient to rising temperatures, and the
increased risk of flooding and landslides. Lower-lying plantations are already “marginal” in terms of producing quality tea. The
rising temperatures will further reduce the quality of tea and coffee as current growing areas will become too hot for growing the
current varieties. The climate-resilient innovation is to plan future plantations in locations that take account of the warmer climate
such as higher, cooler regions.
Tea producers need to take into consideration longer-term climate changes since it takes five years for new bushes to mature
and more than ten years before producers see a return on investment. - Thus new plantations mean that the producers are
locked in to their investment decisions for decades, up to 50 years or more.
New plantations need to be planned with this future climate in mind and be located on higher altitude areas where they will be
more likely to produce good quality leaves for several decades. The tea industry must expand into areas that are suited to the
kind of climate the region will experience in the coming decades. This means including a number of stakeholders from across the
value chain:
The large international companies which operate the factories that process and sell the tea.
The small holder farmers which dominate tea production in Rwanda and are more vulnerable to climate change.
Occurrence of Floods and Droughts
66.
In 2015, the Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs (MIDIMAR) published the National Risk Atlas. This report
encompasses a comprehensive assessment of existing risks at national and local levels. It highlights that over the last decade,
the frequency and severity of natural disasters, such as floods and droughts, have significantly increased. The National Risk Atlas
highlights the most known disasters as the droughts that occurred in 1989, 2000, 2005-2006 and 2014 and the devastating
landslides that occurred in 1988, 2006, 2010, 2011 mainly in the Northern and Western provinces. The extreme weather events
have recently destroyed crops, caused serious environmental degradation and led to food insecurity, malnutrition and famine in
affected areas, with water shortages affecting livestock and pasture productions. Below is a table summarizing main climate
change projections and potential impacts on agriculture and livestock production.
Table 4       Scenarios analysis of potential climate change impacts on agriculture sector (2018)
14/42
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation
a. Targeting communities and organizations
Entry points for promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment, youth employment, improved nutrition outcomes
and promoting social inclusion
67.
68.
69.
70.
Gender- and youth-sensitive modalities under all project components will be identified to create inclusive export-driven value
chains. For example, more favourable conditions will be made for women and youth in order to alleviate the usual barriers they
are facing when they seek loans, and thus increase their financial inclusion. Based on needs, the programme will provide
technical support and training on strategic skills like financial literacy or cooperative leadership for especially women and young
people.
PSAC will address the identified gender disparities through a Gender and Social inclusion plan and a strategy, which will cover
some of the following: (i) women and men have equal access to project’s interventions (40 percent women as direct
beneficiaries); ii) focus on addressing unbalanced workloads as the key constraint for women’s disempowerment through, for
instance, climate resilient innovations, improvement of rural infrastructure facilities and by addressing social norms (iii) increasing
women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level; (iv) increasing women’s financial literacy, encouraging
their economic empowerment and participation throughout the selected value chains v) and promoting gender transformative
outcomes through addressing discriminatory social norms and structures.
The Gender and Social inclusion strategy and action plan will also set clear targets for youth inclusion and describe the
interventions and approaches to be considered to effectively promote youth wage and self-employment and identify pathways for
the poorest and most food insecure households to tackle the multiple barriers that prevent them from improving livelihoods and
fully benefiting from the proposed project activities.
Embedding social inclusion in PMU: A strong emphasis should be put on the capacity of the SPIU to deliver gender-and youth-
sensitive programming. The SPIU will also benefit from gender parity among staff. The M&E system will be gender responsive
and sex-and age-disaggregated to track progress and provide nuanced insights into the project impacts on women, youth, and
vulnerable groups.
Entry points for mainstreaming environment management and climate change adaptation and mitigation
15/42
71.
72.
73.
Measures to reduce adverse environmental impacts in production and processing areas are available and will be incorporated in
PSAC, such as shade trees and efficient resource use in cultivation (optimal fertilizer/agro chemical use), focus on rehabilitation
and rejuvenation of existing production areas, diversification and inter-cropping and efficient use of water resources including drip
irrigation. PSAC will also include measures to control erosion in farms such as vegetated contours. The agro-forestry activities
including the avocado/mango and macadamia value chain interventions will contribute to long-term improvements in land
resources.
The capacity of the producers and their organizations will be improved in natural resources and environmental management
through training and the Environment and Social Management Systems (ESMS) for the financial institutions will also be
enhanced. For the management of the social risks Rwanda has ratified all relevant ILO conventions and control structures are in
place, however sector actors perceive labour as being used inefficiently. Therefore, better planning and wages, training of
seasonal labour, could both improve efficiencies of the CWSs and livelihoods.
Adaptation measures under PSAC include capacity building for the producers on husbandry activities (e.g., pruning and fertilizer
application), protective agriculture for some of the horticulture value chains, use of renewable energy for drying facilities, water
use efficient irrigation systems and use of improved tea clones and coffee varieties. Other options that have been incorporated
are selection of the most suitable growing areas where expansion is envisaged, crop diversification and intercropping, efficient
management of soil resources and use of shade trees in the productive landscape. Shade management reduces ambient
temperature and microclimate variability, prevents sun scorch and soil erosion and improves the resilience of agro-ecosystems.
Additional adaptation measures to be considered include the adjustment of spraying programs to cope with changing trends in
the manifestation of coffee pests and diseases[43].
7. Further studies needed
74.
Socio Economic analysis and diagnostic assessments related to the selected value chains will be implemented at baseline or
start-up phase.
75.
Socio-economic analysis and diagnostic assessment will inform the development of a social inclusion strategy and action plans,
which will further determine target groupings, identify vulnerabilities, capacity gaps and needs, and entry points for social and
economic empowerment along with enlisting potential risks, such as GBV, child labor, and adequate mitigation measures
8. Monitoring and evaluation
The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be aligned to the project logframe and include specific responsibilities for
monitoring targeting performance, beneficiary tracking, especially women and youth. To that end, all people-centred indicators will be
disaggregated by sex and age.
76.
Outcome Indicators, including the Empowerment Indicator (CI IE 2.1), Employment Indicator (CI 2.2.1), and Environmental
sustainability and Climate change (CI 3.1.1, 3.2.2) will be tracked at baseline, midterm, and endline as part of the COI surveys.
77.
The monitoring of potential impact on natural resources bases of the PSAC target beneficiaries will be important. Indicators such
as: i) the amount of land under climate resilient practices; ii) the number of smallholders adopting climate resilient and
environmentally friendly technologies; iii) the number of smallholders supported to become more climate change resilient; (iv)
number of operational ESMS in participating Financial Institutions can be considered.
9. References
As provided in the footnotes. 
ESCMP Matrix
10. Environment, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) Matrix
Table 5      Environmental and social mitigation measures, monitoring and indicators
16/42
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
1.0
Environmental risks
·       Discourage cutting of mature
trees by making it a legal
requirement during establishment
of plantations and through
targeted awareness raising
·       Ensure protection of buffer
zones along rivers (riparian
areas), as well as the protection of
ecological corridors by making it a
legal requirement during
establishment of plantations.
1.1
Deforestation –
including
clearing land for
plantations
·       Conduct awareness
campaigns on protection of
biodiversity.
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
·       Promote agroforestry through
practical demonstrations and
technical training
·       Provide for wildlife corridors
for migratory wildlife including
preserving any important bird
areas.
·       Ban the use of fire as a form
of land clearing and preparation
for any project related activities.
Erection of Erosion Control
Structures
Encourage earth/soil collection
from existing borrow pits
Practice Agro-forestry
Encourage grass planting or
(temporary) fencing to regenerate
vegetation
Promote Incorporation of residues
of leguminous crops into the soil
1.2
Land degradation
and soil erosion
MINAGRI
NAEB
REMA experts
Local extension
workers
Service provider
Inspection,
visual
observations,
pictures, geo
mapping
Quarterly
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
MINAGRI
NAEB
REMA experts
Local extension
workers
Service provider
Geo maps,
observation,
pictures,
inspection
Quarterly
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
17/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
1.3
Declining soil
health
1.4
Cultural Heritage
1.5
Contamination of
water resources
from effluent
discharges
Encourage crop diversification
Promote balanced fertilizer
application;
Promote use of bio-fertilizer or
organic fertilizers;
Promote conservation agriculture,
mulching.
Encourage plantation of
leguminous varieties for nitrogen
fixation;
No project (plantations) will be
established in a Cultural Heritage
site or area.
During plantation establishment
the farmers must be on the lookout
for any cultural heritage artifacts
and must screen and assess any
object they come across. This will
be done by contacting the National
museums department
immediately
Any sub project must be
established after meaningful
consultation leading to consent,
Any findings should be treated
with confidentiality and access to
the area must immediately be
restricted.
The project will develop and
implement a chance finds
procedure,
Established plantations should not
prevent easy access to legally
protected cultural heritage areas.
Promote compliance with national
discharge standards
Install proper effluent handling
facilities at every Coffee Washing
station.
Recycle the water as much as is
possible and discharge effluent
that meets the national discharge
standards
Maintain safe distance (30 feet)
between latrine and water sources
Take corrective action when water
contamination established
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
MINAGRI
NAEB
REMA experts
Local extension
workers
Service provider
Mapping, field
observations,
pictures
Quarterly
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
MINAGRI
NAEB
REMA experts
Local extension
workers
Service provider
Mapping, field
observations,
pictures
Quarterly
Project
Coordination,
District
/Municipal,
Environment
Departments
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Discharge of
poor-quality
effluent
Change in
chemical and
biological water
quality
Number of
reported
pollution events
Bi-annually
Annually
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
18/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
1.6
Construction
risks of spills (oil,
lubricants), dust,
noise, waste
during
establishment of
Agriculture
facilities
Avoid and minimize use of
hazardous materials
Ensure adequate waste
management
Apply dust control practices
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
Contamination of
nearby water
resources.
Service Provider
Quarterly
Number of
reported
pollution events
Promote compliance with national
solid waste management
requirements.
Ensure proper planning of soil and
water conservation works
Composting of all organic waste
emanating from farm produce
packaging and processing.
Contain all possible leachate from
temporary storage areas by
erecting banding walls.
Re-use organic waste as animal
feeds.
Encourage and establish new
business models for manure
composting and sales, potentially
by establishing and initially
subsidizing central composting
points
Promote adoption of drip irrigation
or other precision irrigation
techniques such as porous pipes.
Promote rain water harvesting
systems
Promote solar systems
Encourage the use of
local/indigenous varieties
Promote crop rotation
Protect forests and wetlands that
are critical habitats for
endangered species
Prohibit introduction of exotic
species
1.7
Land and water
resources
pollution from
Solid Organic
Waste from
farming activities.
1.8
Increased
competition over
natural resources
1.9
Monoculture and
loss of
biodiversity
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Leachate
polluting the
environment.
Organic waste
pilling at the
plant.
Quarterly
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB
REMA experts
Size of area and
species
Annually
District/Local
extension workers
affected
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Number of
species lost
Annually
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
19/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Inspection
Training and
sensitisation
records
Integrated
pesticides
management
plan produced
and
implemented
Quarterly
1.10 Pest infestation
·       Promote compliance with the
project IPMP and the national pest
management standards.
·       Promote Integrated pest
management (IPM);
·       Promote use of varieties
tolerant to pest infestation;
·       Promote crop diversification;
·       PSAC will comply with FAO
International Code of Conduct on
Pesticide Management as well as
national pest management
standards, whichever is the more
stringent.
Adequate siting of micro-
enterprises outside residential and
commercial areas;
Minimal application of chemicals
and other hazardous materials
1.11
Environmental
degradation,
primarily
pollution
Promote water management
systems with capturing of
wastewater and disposal to
designated collection points
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
Segregation of solid waste,
avoidance and monitoring of
banned/hazardous substances,
Promote renewable energy
technologies
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Record of
awareness
creation
activities
No. of
procurement
activities
embedding
environment and
social
safeguards
Annual
2.0
SOCIAL RISKS
2.1
Youth
unemployment
thus
compromising
security
Promote income generation
activities for the youth e.g., bee
keeping, tree nursery
establishment etc.
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB
REMA experts
District/Local
extension workers
Number of
youths employed
Quarterly
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
20/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
Project
Coordination,
Province/Municip
al,
Authorities
NAEB + local
extension
workers+ service
provider
Number of
reported
accidents
Annually
Promote safe work through
Standard Operating Procedures,
training and awareness raising
Encourage and enforce the use of
PPE
2.2
Health risk to
workers
Supporting first-aid box and to
provide minimal level of training;
Enlisting the names and numbers
of village doctors in nearby
community places/shops; 
Encourage regular workplace
cleaning
·       identify, evaluate and monitor
potential traffic and road safety
risks to affected local communities
and other road users.
·       Sub projects to incorporate
road safety measures into their
daily operations, like erecting
clear road signs, maintaining the
roads and bridges etc, 
·       undertake a road safety
assessment and monitor incidents
and accidents, keeping proper
records which will be easily
accessible.
2.3
Community
Health, Safety and
Security
2.4
COVID – 19
infection risk
Promote COVID-19 guidelines
(WHO compliant)
Monitor uptake of guidelines
through field visits
Organize awareness raising
sessions
Promote early closure of facilities
and enterprises in case of
suspicion of COVID-19 cases
Stakeholder
engagements
during
meetings and
field visits
NAEB + local
extension
workers+ service
provider
Records of
awareness
creation
activities
Quarterly
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
21/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
2.5
Labour and
Working
Conditions
2.6
Labour influx
All employers to institute fair
labour practices, and avail the
terms and conditions of
employment to each employee.
No sub-project shall practice
forced labour or child labour at all.
All engagements must be for
mature persons, with consent and
for fair remuneration.
The primary suppliers for the
project must also practice fair
labour practices and acceptable
conditions of service for their
workers.
Ensure contractors adopt
principles of decent work and the
associated work programme in
Rwanda
Monitor execution of cash-for-work
programmes
Ensure grievance mechanisms
are known and accessible to
workers
Promotion of nutrition-sensitive
meals during working hours
Supporting first-aid box and to
provide minimal level of training;
·       Work preferably with local
workers
·       Sensitize external workers on
behavior, through code of conduct
·       Sensitize local communities
and conduct awareness
campaigns on the potential risks
from migrant labour which
includes health implications and
exposure to communicable
diseases, threats of sexual
violence and harassment and
crime.
·       The project will protect the
local communities from the
increased vulnerability due to
increased pressure on already
scarce natural resources, by
preferring them for employment
and implementing social corporate
responsibility and providing some
essential amenities.
Stakeholder
engagements
during
meetings and
field visits
NAEB + local
extension
workers+ service
provider
Number of
reports
Annually
Stakeholder
engagements
during
Service Provider
Number of cases
reported
Annually
meetings and
field visits
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
22/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
·       Engagement with local
leaders and male household’s
members and promote campaign
for sensitisation on gender
equality and against gender
biases and GBV. Community and
Household level.
·         Staff training in gender,
environment, nutrition, project
guidelines and appraisals to give
equal opportunities to all.
Stakeholder
engagements
2.7
Gender based
violence
·       Promote women in
traditionally male dominated value
chain activities.
during
meetings and
·       Conducting gender sensitive
and participatory consultations
field visits
NAEB + local
extension
workers+ service
provider
Number of
females trained
Number of
traditional
leaders and
male family
members
engaged
Annually
·       Include safe spaces/ women-
only focus groups to encourage
women’s meaningful participation
in consultations.
·       Create female only spaces
for women to receive trainings and
services
Undertake a risk assessment of
child labour and develop
mitigation plans to inform the
labour management plan[1]
Promote cooperation between
agriculture
and labour stakeholders and
ensure
coherence of policies and
programmes on
child labour prevention.
·       Include provisions for
inclusion of the poor and barring of
the rich in the matching grants
facility.  
·       Discuss targeting issues at
the launch seminars/workshops;
·       Build the capacity of PSAC
project management and service
providers and of those involved in
the community social mobilization
and other service providers
Include targeting and social
inclusion in the ToRs of the PSAC
project management team
2.8
Child labour
2.9
Elite capture of
the matching
grant facility
Stakeholder
engagements
during
meetings and
field visits
NAEB + local
extension workers
Risk assessment
conducted
Annually
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
NAEB + local
extension
workers+ service
provider
Number of
personnel
trained in the
required
targeting
Quarterly
No.
Risks
Recommended
Mitigation/Enhancement
measures
23/42
Public
Consultation
Activities
Responsible
Institution in
Implementation
Phase
Means of
Verification/
Indicators
Frequency
of
Verification
Discriminatory
social norms
prevent
2.10
women from
participating
and benefitting
from
project activities
Extensive use of GALS+
methodology to empower women
and to engage men and boys
Improve women’s self-efficacy
through access to knowledge,
skills and capital
Increase women’s visibility as key
actors in the value chains
Promote wider structural changes
through policy support and
dialogue
Stakeholder
engagements
during meetings
and field visits
MINAGRI
NAEB
Service Provider
Number of
women
capacitated
Annually
[1] The tool is being developed by FAO and should be ready by Q3 2022
11. Free, Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects (FPIC)
78.
24/42
Figure Ann 5-8     Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC)
11.1     Free, Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects (FPIC)
79.
Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is an operational principle empowering local communities to give or withhold their
consent to proposed investment and development programmes that may affect their rights, access to lands, territories and
resources, and livelihoods[45]. FPIC is solicited through consultations in good faith with the representative institutions endorsed
by communities. It ensures that they participate in decision-making processes concerning a given development project.
80.
Consent should be sought in a way that is “free, prior and informed” [46]:
Free implies no coercion, intimidation, or manipulation.
Prior implies that consent has been sought sufficiently in advance of any decision point or commencement of activities.
Informed implies that information provided covers all relevant issues to make decision maker fully enlightened.
Consent is the expected outcome of the consultation, participation, and collective decision-making process by the local
communities.
11.2     General guiding principles
a) Responsibility and institutional capacity for seeking FPIC
81.
The IFAD general policies and procedures, stipulate that the borrower or grant recipient is responsible for programme and project
preparation, including social, environmental and climate assessments and seeking FPIC. In this case the Government of Rwanda
(GoR) through the PSAC will be responsible for seeking the FPIC.
82.
The first step is for the GoR to identify the laws that regulate the rights to land and resources, and check if it has demarcated and
recognizes community lands. If Rwanda has not done so, this can be rectified by conducting early consultations with concerned
communities and inclusion in project design of the measures, approaches and resources for ensuring demarcation and
recognition of territorial and communal rights.
25/42
b) Identifying representative institutions
83.
To ensure legitimacy, it is crucial that FPIC be obtained from the representative institutions of local communities. Understanding
how communities make decisions is the first important step in the FPIC process. The important criteria are that representation
should be determined by the concerned peoples and communities themselves to avoid misrepresentation or manipulation. This
can be done in line with the community structure for representation, figure Ann 5-9 below.
Figure Ann 5-9 The Local Governance structures in Rwanda
84.
The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) oversees the local authorities, which are structured in four tiers: 30 districts
(akarere), 416 sectors (imerenge), 2,148 cells (utugari) and 14,837 villages (imudungu).
85.
In general, representative institutions must strive to adhere to the principles of inclusive consultation, participation, and consent in
their internal decision-making processes.
86.
The FPIC process at design and implementation phases is intended to ensure that the project does not negatively affect the
future beneficiaries. Solutions should be found during the consultation on how to maximize benefits expected from local
communities.
26/42
c) Consultation, participation, and consent
87.
Consultation is an important feature of any project design process. PSAC is expected to follow the IFAD participatory approach to
ensure that local communities are included in project design. It will give appropriate attention to women, young people and
indigenous groups in these consultations.
88.
Besides the initial Impact assessments of the project at design stage, GoR will institute a continuous consultation process during
implementation.
89.
90.
91.
Consent to the project or to a project component or specific activity under a component, will be an outcome of the collective
decision-making process by the local communities. GoR will seek recorded consent agreements with the concerned communities
through their freely chosen representative bodies to engage in the FPIC process.
The consent agreement and record will document the outcome(s) of the process and terms and conditions agreed upon. It will
also document any dissent to the overall project or project activities. The agreement must be independently verified as fair and
true by the communities and follow the process agreed by them.
The procedures and rules of the FPIC process will be largely determined by the communities affected and those who have the
right to give or withhold consent. The FPIC process must be in harmony with their own governance and internal collective
process for taking decisions.
d) Documenting consultation, participation and FPIC
92.
GoR will undertake to document all consultations, participations, and consents in the following manner:
Keep record of consultations undertaken how participants were selected and invited; what documentation/information they
received beforehand and in which language; who participated; what was discussed; and what was agreed.
Keep record of participation: when did representatives of indigenous peoples and local communities participate; how they
were selected; what institutional roles or accountability links to constituents do they have; what commitments do they assume;
and what agreements were made.
Document specific instances that express FPIC: often FPIC is expressed as an agreement between the borrower (or the
duly designated implementing agency) and the concerned local communities. These agreements should clearly articulate what
has been agreed (issues, commitments, time frames, budgets, roles, responsibilities, etc.); who entered into the agreement
(clearly identifying the individuals involved as well as their tile and role); and what mechanisms have been set up to maintain
dialogue and address disagreements.
e ) Where to seek FPIC?
93.
FPIC is not so much a safeguard principle, rather a proactive approach to identify development pathways with local communities
and it is applied in two scenarios[47]:
Investment projects that may have an impact on the land access and use rights of rural communities,
Projects targeting indigenous peoples or rural areas that are home to indigenous and tribal peoples and ethnic minorities.
94.
The first scenario refers to the type of investment project and the second to the type of project area and target groups. Table 6
outlines the FPIC requirement according to these two criteria.
Table 6      FPIC requirements based on project type and areas of intervention (IFAD, 2015)
No
Location
Project likely to affect land
access and/or use rights of
communities
Agricultural and rural
development projects
unlikely to affect land
rights (agricultural
technologies and production,
value chain development,
social infrastructure)
Project supporting
demand-driven services
to individuals (rural
finance, small and
medium-sized enterprise
development)
1.
2.
3.
Rural areas without
indigenous peoples or
minorities.
YES
27/42
NO
NO
Rural areas with some
indigenous peoples and
minorities’ communities.
YES
Indigenous people’s
territories or tribal areas
YES
On a case-by-case basis
NO
YES
YES
95.
In projects that affect land access and use rights of communities, the principle of FPIC is applied to local communities in a broad
sense, i.e., the local communities that will potentially be affected, are identified during project design and in application of
SECAP.
96.
However, there is a general requirement for FPIC[48]. in areas that are home to indigenous and tribal peoples and ethnic
minorities.
When to Seek FPIC
97.
FPIC is sought at design phase when the precise nature and specific location of an investment is known and well defined. In the
case of PSAC the precise nature and specific locations of the potential investment are not known, thus GoR is not expected to
directly seek FPIC at this stage.
98.
FPIC for PSAC will be sought during the implementation phase when:
The project, or some of its component, is likely to affect land access and use rights of local communities, and/or
Communities are not identifiable at project design stage.
Specific investments in specific communities are not predefined during project design phase, but open to communities’
demand during the project implementation period.
11.3 FPIC Implementation Plan
99.
The purpose of the present FPIC Implementation Plan is, among others, to provide information on how the FPIC Process will be
conducted throughout the course of the project and which methods will be used as part of the process; as well as to outline the
responsibilities of MINAGRI AND NAEB.
11.3.1 Decision-Making Institutions and Representatives
100.
The key institutional actors involved with issues of resettlement, property and land rights, access to resources, etc, are the local
government departments both at National level and District level. The implementing agency will be the MINAGRI through the
NAEB.
101.
NAEB’s Environmental and Social Specialists will work very closely with the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority
(REMA), Local Government officials and District Council Officials to facilitate consultations leading to FPIC with concerned
communities /project affected persons (PAPs).
11.3.2 Consultations Leading To FPIC
102.
Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of key decision-making institutions,
consultations will be held with the sub-project communities and plantations Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations during
programme implementation – when site specific ESMPs and designs are being updated or prepared, as the case may be.
Consultations will be conducted by the PSAC Environmental and Social Specialist, or by an independent facilitator/advisor hired
by NAEB.
103.
The use of participatory mapping will be instrumental for the consultation process leading to FPIC. This is because of the
advantages of participatory mapping and accompanying participatory enquiry techniques which allow the assessment of
ownership, occupation and use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (e.g., movements and relationships among
the different social groups) and right holders.
28/42
104.
Given that the sub-projects are initiated by the communities and proposed to the NAEB the consultations will:
Confirm that the sub-project is a community-driven initiative.
Share the objective and scope of the proposed sub-project with the communities/Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations
directly or through their representatives (existing or elected by the communities in the process).
Clearly inform the Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations/communities' representatives on the actors financing and
implementing the project and their respective responsibilities.
Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project.
Share the findings of the socio-cultural, land tenure and environmental assessment and reality check/confirmation of findings.
Engage selected Association/community members or their representatives in the resources and social mapping activities, in
order to assess ownership, occupation and use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (relationships among the
different social groups).
Share the objective and scope of the mapping exercise with the Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations/communities.
Ensure inclusive participation - men, women, young people, the elderly, representatives of different communities present on
the same land and neighbouring villages - and provide for multiple maps by the different Cooperatives /Cooperatives
/Associations/communities.
Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and,
Formalise ownership of the land use maps by the communities that have developed them.
11.3.3  Formalising The Consent Agreement
105.
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPIC agreement are identified, this will be formalised in a written form in
English as well as in Kinyarwanda. The effective time the consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed upon during the
consultation process and needs to be formalised before any investment is made.
106.
The consent agreement will be prepared by the PSAC District Teams. The format for a consent agreement would, among
others, include:
Project activities on which consent is provided,
Respective expectations,
Proposed project duration, expected results and activities,
Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures,
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms,
Terms of withdrawal of consent,
Record of process through means and languages accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved.
107.
The FPIC agreement and record of process will be made available through means and languages that are accessible to all
stakeholders and parties involved.
11.3.4  Disclosure
108.
The FPIC Implementation Plan will be disclosed together with the Programme Design Report (PDR), Environmental, Social and
Climate Management Framework (ESCMF), and other documents to be submitted to the Executive Board (and Evaluation
Committee).
11.3.5  Documenting The FPIC Process
109.
FPIC process will be documented through minutes of consultations, mapping documents prepared by the Cooperatives
/Associations/communities, videos where feasible, and FPIC agreements/formalisation documents.
11.3.6  The FPIC Implementation Plan
110.
The following is a summary of the PSAC FPIC implementation Plan:
Table 7      Summarised PSAC FPIC Implementation Plan
29/42
No.
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY
RESPONSIBLE
TIMEFRAME
1.0
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment:
Identify:
•      Customary laws, informal rules and organizing
practices on land ownership.
•      Institutions and governance systems.
•      Types of livelihoods.
•      Mutual support and solidarity mechanisms.
•      Cooperatives /Associations/Community
stakeholders, land users and assess who has the right to
give or withhold the consent.
Assess:
•     Consequences from the proposed project that may
result in the change of the status of the lands, and
resources
District offices of the NAEB
(who may hire consultants
to carry out the sub-project
specific socio-cultural/land
tenure assessments.
At the beginning of
programme
implementation phase.
This could be part of the
participatory mapping
exercise.
2.0
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives
•       Conduct preliminary consultations with the
Cooperatives /Associations/community and explain the
nature of the proposed project.
•       Allow time for
Cooperatives/Associations/communities to discuss and
decide on their representatives for the consultation
process leading to FPIC
•       Clarify responsibilities of representatives
•       Agree on the process leading to FPIC
•       Identify signatory parties for the consent agreement.
3.0
Capacitate the implementors and the stakeholders
District offices of the NAEB,
possibly through an
independent facilitator,
supported by IFAD as part
of project implementation
support, as required.
At the beginning of
programme
implementation phase
(this could be done in
tandem with the socio-
cultural and land tenure
assessment and
mapping exercise)
No.
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY
30/42
RESPONSIBLE
TIMEFRAME
Conduct various capacity building workshops for both the
implementing partners and the stakeholders so that they
are all on the same page and will make informed
decisions (See Section 5 for Details):
·       Training of implementing partners on
background of project: Environmental and Social Risks
and Impacts of PSAC.
·       Training of Extension staff on background of
project: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of
the Projects:
·        MINAGRI
·       Cascading training to lower levels on
background of project: Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment of the Projects:
·         Training of Stakeholder on Gender, HIV/AIDS
awareness:
·         Training of Stakeholder on land issues:
·        National Aids Council
(NAC)
·        Ministry of
Environment
·        Private Consultant
Programme
implementation phase -
before individual sub-
projects start begins and
throughout the project
cycle
o     Land Tenure and rights
o     Land rights
o     Use of land
o     Pollution and degradation.
4.0
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific component/activities
•       Share objective and scope of the project with the
representatives identified by the communities and identify
project component(s) requiring FPIC.
•       Inform them on the actors financing and
implementing the project and their respective
responsibilities.
•       Provide clear and transparent information on the
benefits and risks of the project.
•       Share the findings of the sociocultural, land tenure
and environmental assessment
•       Formalize consent agreement.
5.0
Formalize the consent agreement
District offices of the NAEB
possibly through an
independent facilitator,
supported by IFAD as part
of project implementation
support, as required.
At the beginning of
programme
implementation phase
and before individual
sub-projects start.
No.
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY
31/42
RESPONSIBLE
TIMEFRAME
Formalize the consent agreement (written or in other
form if so, requested by the community)
The format for a consent agreement would include:
•       Respective expectations
•       Proposed project duration, expected results and
activities
•       Participatory monitoring and verification plan and
procedures
•       Identification of grievances procedures and
mechanisms
•       Terms of withdrawal of consent
Record the process through means and languages
accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved
Annex the FPIC agreement and documented process
to the PDR.
6.0
FPIC implementation
District offices of the NAEB
possibly through an
independent facilitator,
supported by IFAD as part
of project implementation
support, as required.
Programme
implementation phase.
Timing agreed upon
during the consultation
process and before
individual sub-projects
starts.
Implement the FPIC agreements throughout the project
life.
MINAGRI, NAEB, IFAD
implementation support and
joint supervision missions
Programme implementation phase -
before individual sub-projects start
begins and throughout the project
cycle
7.0
Monitoring the FPIC implementation
Assess FPIC implementation as part of the M&E
exercise during the project life.
Appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and
linked with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement
MINAGRI, NAEB, IFAD
implementation support and
joint supervision missions
Programme
implementation phase -
before individual sub-
projects start begins and
throughout the project
cycle
11.4     Timeframes for Seeking FPIC
111.
When the precise nature and specific location of an investment is known and well defined, FPIC must be solicited at design
stage. In the case of PSAC the precise nature and specific locations of the potential investment were not known, thus the
Government of Rwanda was not expected to directly seek FPIC at this stage.
112.
FPIC will be sought at Implementation stage before any of the sub-projects is implemented and the FPIC process will be
implemented throughout the project life cycle with constant monitoring and evaluation.
11.5     FPIC Implementation Arrangements
113.
The following is a description of arrangement responsibilities and mechanisms for seeking FPIC, as well as the role of
independent, impartial entities to monitor the FPIC implementation process.
114.
The lead implementing agency for the project is MINAGRI with the assistance of NAEB. NAEB will be tasked with the day-to-day
coordination, planning and management of select project activities.
115.
Due to the multifaced nature of PSAC, a project steering committee (PSC) will be established and will contribute to the project
oversight.
32/42
116.
The NAEB will spearhead the implementation of the FPIC process and will be assisted by several key implementation ministries
who have staff down to district level. The structure of the implementation is outlined in figure 7-1 below.
117.
NAEB staff with their District teams comprised of the staff from the key implementing partners will be capacitated by undergoing
training as explained in section 5 of this report. The target beneficiaries will similarly be capacitated. All the training will be
conducted by designated Ministries or private consultants. Once capacitated the teams will start the consultation processes
leading to FPIC. This process will also be assisted with private consultants.
11.6     Assess FPIC Implementation
118.
To assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards and/or attainment of agreed terms
will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement. Subsequent workshops and stakeholders’ reviews of the
FPIC plan may also amend the various indicators to be established in the FPIC agreement. Joint supervision missions assessing
project progress will also assess the implementation of FPIC agreements on a regular basis. Whenever possible, supervision and
evaluation missions would include experts of relevance.
11.7     Budget and Financing
33/42
119.
The following is an itemized budget for undertaking the FPIC activities described in this report.
Table 8‑1      Estimated Budget for ESMF Implementation (US$)
No.
ACTIVITY
ESTIMATE (US $)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives
50,000.00
             -
Capacitate the implementors and the stakeholders - Environmental and Social Training
113,000.00
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific component/activities 50,000.00
Formalize the consent agreement
5,000.00
Assess FPIC implementation: - Monitoring and evaluation purposes (R&D, M&E, Field
Visits)
40,000.00
TOTAL (US $)
258,000.00
12. Targeted Adaptation Assessment
SHORT-LISTING OF FEASIBLE ADAPTATION OPTIONS
120.
The first step was to identify a long list of adaptation options to build resilience for the Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export
Competitiveness Project (PSAC). The second step was to categorise the long list of options. This resulted in a shorter list of
feasible options. The third step was to filter the short list of options down to the list of “most feasible adaptation options”.
121.
The filtration process led to the identification of the “most feasible programmatic options.” As Table 8 shows, these options have
different characteristics in terms of the climate hazards they address, and the issues in the agriculture sectors that are critical to
their delivery.
122.
The options were filtered according to a number of criteria:
First criterion.
Does the option pass an initial assessment of relevance and feasibility to be implemented in the local context?
Second criterion.
Does the option provide a positive contribution to reaching the national targets of agricultural productivity levels?
Third criterion.
Does the option help to alleviate the constraints in the Tea, coffee, and horticulture value chains?
Fourth criterion.
Does the option provide significant reductions to the current costs of withstanding weather variability and future climate change?
123.
The following table 8 presents the most feasible adaptation options that were identified in regard to the Tea, Coffee, and
horticulture sector.
34/42
Table 8      Climate change adaptation options.
APPRAISAL OF FEASIBLE OPTIONS
124.
The most feasible options were identified using expert decision making. However, to know which option and when the options
should be implemented, they need to be appraised in more detail. The answer to “where”, is given by a Multi-Criteria Analysis,
(MCA) approach, whilst the answer to “when”, is given by an iterative risk management (IRM) approach[49].
Multi-Criteria Analysis, (MCA) Approach
125.
The Multi-Criteria Analysis, (MCA) approach has been used to determine which “most feasible options” should be implemented.
In appraising the options, the approach takes into consideration a number of criteria including costs, benefits and urgency. The
approach was used to prioritize urgent and immediate adaptation options. It was purely an expert-driven process, using
information gathered from a wide stakeholder engagement.
126.
The MCA method was chosen because there was a clear indication that numerous criteria and indicators, not just monetary
ones, must be considered in the prioritization of the adaptation options[50]. The “most feasible adaptation options” which were
identified above will be prioritized in the current section. The prioritization will follow the following steps:
Step 1: Identify prioritization criteria,
Step 2: Identify outcome and performance of options against the criteria,
Step 3: Assign weights to each criterion.
Step 1: Identify prioritization criteria” The criteria against which the feasible adaptation options were judged and prioritized were
identified. The different criteria used in the MCA were independent of each other, and included the following:
Economic costs and benefits,
Level of climate resilience and robustness,
Synergy with national plans and Multilateral Environmental Agreements,
Urgency,
Complementarity with national plans institutional feasibility.
35/42
Step 2: Identify outcome and performance of each option so that they can be ranked against identified criteria: The
performance of each option was assessed against each criterion on a scale of 0 – 1. This was done by developing a performance
matrix for the adaptation options as depicted in Table 9. Each criterion is ranked on a 0–1 scale and combined based on the criteria
weights to find a combined score for each option, which then was used to rank the options for decision making.
127.
The adaptation option, “Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness training programs)” ranked highest followed by
“The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming, (Improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones).”
and then by “Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and minimized wind damage. (Soil erosion control and water
holding structures)”.
Table 9      Adaptation decision matrix (without criteria weighting), Source: Adapted from RoR, (2006)[51]
36/42
Source: Adapted from RoR, (2006)
Step 3: Assign weights to each criterion to reflect its relative importance and aggregate: Once options were identified and a set
of criteria developed, the next step of an MCA method requires deciding if separate weights need to be assigned to different criteria.
The weights reflected the importance of each criterion in meeting the overall objectives of the decision, including preferences of
stakeholders derived from the consultations. This is illustrated in in Table 10.
128.
This was done by proposing the following weights for the identified criteria:
Table 10      weights for the identified criteria
37/42
129.
This time around, the adaptation option, “Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness training programs)” ranked
highest followed by “The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. (improved coffee varieties and
tested tea clones)” and then by “Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and minimized wind damage. (Soil erosion
control and water holding structures)”. The inclusion of weightings reshuffled the priority of the options, aligning them more to the
preferences of the stakeholders and the political and strategic priorities of the country or sector.
Table 11      Adaptation decision matrix (with criteria weighting)
                              CRITERIA
OPTIONS
ECONOMIC
COSTS AND
BENEFITS
LEVEL OF
CLIMATE
RESILIENCE
AND
ROBUSTNES
S
SYNERGY
WITH
NATIONAL
PLANS AND
MULTILATERA
L
ENVIRONMEN
TAL
AGREEMENTS
URGENCY
COMPLEMENT
ARY WITH
NATIONAL
PLANS
INSTITUTIONA
L FEASIBILITY
FINAL
SCOR
E
RANK
CRITERIA WEGHT
0.20
0.30
0.15
0.20
0.15
Agricultural disaster risk
reduction and management
(DRR/M)
0.50 X 0.20 =
0.1
0.75 X 0.30 =
0.225
0.75 X 0.15 =
0.1125
0.5 X 0.20 =
0.1
0.6 X 0.15 =
0.09
0.6275 11
Shifting cropping calendars;
when to plant, which varieties to
plant and which inputs to use
0.75 X 0.20 =
0.15
0.5 X 0.30
=0.15
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0. 15 0.8
9
The development of knowledge
and decision-support systems
including improved monitoring
and early warning systems.
Implementation of climate
smart agriculture practices and
environmentally sustainable
practices.
0.75 X 0.20 =
0.75 X 0.30 =
0.225
0.60 X 0.15 =
0.09
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0. 15 0.865
8
0.25 X 0.20 =
0.5 X 0.30 =
0.15
0.25 X 0.15 =
0.0375
0.75 X 0.20 =
0.15
0.5 X 0.15 =
0.075
0.6125 12
Off-farm enterprise promotion
like coffee shops etc
0.75 X 0.20 =
0.85 X 0.30 =
0.225
1. X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 0.925
6
                              CRITERIA
OPTIONS
ECONOMIC
COSTS AND
BENEFITS
38/42
LEVEL OF
CLIMATE
RESILIENCE
AND
ROBUSTNES
S
SYNERGY
WITH
NATIONAL
PLANS AND
MULTILATERA
L
ENVIRONMEN
TAL
AGREEMENTS
URGENCY
COMPLEMENT
ARY WITH
NATIONAL
PLANS
INSTITUTIONA
L FEASIBILITY
FINAL
SCOR
E
RANK
The development of new crop
varieties and technologies to
support farming. (improved
coffee varieties and tested tea
clones)
Improved water management
including the development of
water harvesting techniques.
Reduction of soil erosion,
nutrient leaching from soil and
minimized wind damage. (Soil
erosion control and water
holding structures)
Improved net assimilation of
tealeaf and additional organic
matter from leaf litter including
composting and mulching.
1 X 0.20 =
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2 0.90 X 0.15 =
0.985
2
0.135
0.75 X 0.20 =
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2
0.75 X 0.15 =
0.1125
0.9625 4
1 X 0.20 =
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2
0.80 X 0.15 =
0.12
0.97
3
0.75 X 0.20 =
0.75 X 0.30 =
0.225
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 0.925
6
The use of shade trees and
inter-cropping of nitrogen-fixing
plants with staple crops
1 X 0.20 =0.20 1 X 0.30 = 0.3
0.75 X 0.15 =
0.1125
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 0.9625 4
Establishment of farmers'
support (subsidies, awareness
training programs)
Adjustment of spraying
programs and timing of
husbandry activities such as
pruning and fertilizer application
1 X 0.20 = 0.20 1 X 0.30 = 0.30 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1 X 0.20 = 0.2 1 X 0.15 = 0.15 1
1
0.5 X 0.20 =
0.1
0.75 X 0.30 =
0.225
0.75 X 0.15 =
0.1125
1 X 0.20 = 0.2
0.5 X 0.15 =
0.075
0.7125 10
Source: Adapted from Seitz J, (2014)
Iterative Risk Management
130.
Having prioritised the most feasible adaptation options using the MCA, the iterative risk management (IRM) approach was then
used to know when the “most feasible options” should be implemented, i.e., the sequencing of the options. It was used to
sequence the implementation of the identified resilience options. This approach takes care of the uncertainty in future climate
change and is derived from the recommendations of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), whose special
report on extreme events, recommended the use of IRM approaches[52].
131.
The approach uses a monitoring, research, evaluation and learning process (cycle) to improve future management strategies. It
is well suited for decision contexts characterised by high uncertainties and can help decision makers to avoid taking irreversible
decisions and develop plans where decisions can be adjusted appropriately. IRM is based on the idea that current decisions are
essentially constrained by imperfect knowledge and cognitive bias, and cycles of revisions are necessary to improve the
performance of strategies and actions. Thus, IRM incorporates learning at the core of its methodology[53].
132.
IRM has a focus on starting with current climate variability (and the adaptation deficit) and then looking at future climate change
within a framework of decision making under uncertainty. Early steps within IRM have a strong focus on building adaptive
capacity, implementing low and no-regret options, and identifying areas of long-term concern that warrant early investigation or
action. By encouraging the “what if?” question, IRM promotes the development of flexible approaches where decisions are taken
at the right time and can be adjusted later.
39/42
133.
Thus, IRM looks at how to implement options over time, based on current impacts (and the adaptation deficit) and projected future
climate change, against a background of uncertainty (Figure Ann 5-10). The analysis of the Prioritised Options shows that all
should be implemented in some form immediately, though some of the long-term areas might only require initial investigation.
The implementation of the options is depicted in figure Ann 5-10:
Band “A” consists of long-term resilience actions. Initially a few actions and investigations will be implemented to avoid
locking Rwanda into irreversible decisions which may not be needed in the future. These actions are proactive investigations
and implementation of certain long-term issues that need to start immediately. They involve protecting the infrastructure from
structural damages by using natural and man-made approaches to avert impacts from floods and heat. These should be
implemented and integrated into the infrastructural development immediately to make development more effective and
‘climate smart’. In the Prioritised Options for Rwanda Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC)
these include
Agricultural disaster risk reduction and management (DRR/M)
Shifting cropping calendars; when to plant, which varieties to plant and which inputs to use.
Implementation of climate smart agriculture practices and environmentally sustainable practices.
Improved water management including the development of water harvesting techniques.
Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and minimized
Band “B” consists of actions which will result in benefits whether the climate changes or not, and thus provide immediate
benefits for economic growth, as well as enhancing long-term resilience. They involve building capacity to ensure the
institutional frameworks and an enabling environment are created for subsequent resilience mainstreaming and integration. In
the prioritised options for the Rwanda Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), low and no regret
options can include all the listed options but most appropriately the following.
The development of knowledge and decision-support systems
Off-farm enterprise promotion like coffee shops etc
The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. (Improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones)
Improved water management including the development of water harvesting techniques.
Improved net assimilation of tealeaf and additional organic matter from leaf litter including composting and mulching.
The use of shade trees and inter-cropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops
Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness
134.
The experience gained through the implementation of low-regret measures can serve as a basis to start designing and assessing
more costly adaptation actions that could be implemented in the future.
Band “C” consists of Enabling steps, involving building capacity and the enabling steps for the whole programme to take off.
Once the climate resilience actions become rooted into the system, less and less of these actions will be implemented. In the
prioritised options for the Rwanda Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), these include
The development of knowledge and decision-support systems
The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. (Improved coffee varieties and tested tea
clones)
Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness training programs)
Adjustment of spraying programs and timing of husbandry activities such as pruning and fertilizer application
135.
Further the IRM looks at three-time periods in which to sequence options based on these key climate risks: the short term (now),
the medium term (2025) and the long term (2050+). It looks at how to implement options based on current and projected future
climate and the associated risks. Options should be sequenced in a robust and flexible manner given this uncertainty and should
be matched to risk areas and key decision thresholds[54].
(i)      Short term
136.
In the short term, the three bands of adaptation programmes will be implemented simultaneously at different rates as follows:
Band “A”
These include Climate Resilience and Climate-justified actions, which constitutes “early actions for long term change” They will
start with a few actions and investigations to avoid locking Rwanda into irreversible decisions which may not be needed in the future.
The number of the adaptation actions are expected to grow as the programme takes shape.
40/42
Figure Ann 5-10     Iterative sequencing of resilience options (Adapted from FDRE, 2013)
Band “B”
These are the Low- and no-regret actions, which result in social and economic benefit irrespective of the future climatic changes.
They will start in full force as much as is possible.
Band “C”
These are the enabling steps. They have to be implemented in order for the climate resilience programme to take root. The enabling
steps will taper off in the long run as the Climate resilience actions become rooted in the system.
(ii)     Mid Term up to 2025
137.
In the period up to 2025, the low and no regret options will have taken root and Rwanda will be having the institutional and
technical capacity to deliver climate resilient growth. As the low and no regret options (Band B) will continue being implemented,
more focus will now be directed to actions that increase resilience of the agriculture sector (Band A), fully integrating these into
the delivery of development activities to ensure climate resilient growth. The number of band “A” actions in figure Ann 5-10 will
start to increase, whilst Band “C” programmes will be tapering off.
(iii)    Long Term (Post 2025)
138.
In the long term (post 2025) all the portfolios of options will need to be implemented, noting that the specific activities will vary
according to the evolution of climate risks. The implementing agent will need to act iteratively as risks evolve.
139.
The key advantage of such an approach is that it seeks to exploit quick wins, by addressing the existing adaptation deficit at the
same time as building future resilience. It also makes sure irreversible decisions are not taken now, which may or may not be
needed depending on the level of climate change that arises. By doing so it encourages decision makers to ask “what if” and
develop a flexible approach, where decisions are reviewed over time, and plans adjusted as the evidence emerges. This builds in
flexibility, reduces the risk of lock-in or stranded assets, and aims to keep future options open.
41/42
Footnotes
[1] https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.SRV.TOTL.ZS?locations=RW
[2] https://rdb.rw/investment-opportunities/agriculture/
[3] https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/95142451-550D-4C1B-A389-26FD74C6B018QA-
2019/Global_POVEQ_RWA.pdf
[4] NISR, 2020. Demographic Health Survey 2019/20
[5]EICV4,2014
[6]Almost 60% of food insecure households are vulnerable and 30% are extremely vulnerable CFSVA (2018).
[7] Women’s Empowerment Agriculture Index Study (WEAI), 2020, Baseline report, DFID
[8] Ibid.
[9]NpM, 2020, Financial services for women. Case studies on women’s participation in the maize and bean value chains in Rwanda.
[10] MIGEPROF, Revised National Gender Policy, Accelerating the Effectiveness of Gender Mainstreaming and Accountability for
National Transformation 2021
[11]In Rwanda, the land registration policy and the inheritance law favor equal access to and ownership of land. According to the State
of gender equality in Rwanda Report, (2019) women had significant access to land in the country. According to that source, 58.3
percent of land was owned by spouses, 24 percent by only women and 14 by only men (2 percent by others).
[12] MINAGRI, Agriculture Gender Strategy, 2012
[13]WEF. 2019. Global gender gap report 2020. Cologny/Geneva: World Economic Forum
[14] UNDP (2020) Tackling Social Norms - A Game Changer for Gender Inequalities: 2020 Human Development Perspectives
https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hd_perspectives_gsni.pdf
[15] Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20 
[16]Andersson, K., Pettersson, K. & Lodin, J.B.(2022) Window dressing inequalities and constructing women farmers as problematic
—gender in Rwanda’s agriculture policy
[17] Agricultural households survey, 2020
[18] EICV5, 2016/2017, Thematic Report, Youth.
[19]In the Eastern Province of Rwanda, 83% of the rural youth population is literate and more than 90% have attained schools, even
from the poorest quintiles; however, only 1.7% attained tertiary education and 2.8 % has attained technical and vocational schools.
Source: NISR, EICV5, 2016/2017. Education Thematic Report
[20] Source: IFAD, 2019, Creating Employment Opportunities for Rural Youth in Africa: Support to integrated agribusiness hubs,
Grant Design Report.
[21] Minority Rights Group International, African Initiative for Mankind Progress Organization and Women’s Organization for
Promoting Unity: Report on the Status of Inclusion and Involvement of Historically Marginalized People (HMP) in Various
Socioeconomic and Political Programmes and Promotion of their Human Rights in Rwanda (May 2019) – availaible at:
https://minorityrights.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Final-Baseline-Study-Report-AIMPOWOPU-MRG-May-2019.pdf
[22] Goodwin, M (2021) Evaluating the Success of Decentralisation in Facilitating the Inclusion of Rwanda’s Marginalised
[23]https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/43977762/FPIC_HTDN_Final+EN.pdf/d6d4123e-6b9e-5c08-6b40-89f512ef0b8d?
t=1634568016406
[24] Republic of Rwanda, NISR, Fourth Population and Housing Census2012, Thematic Report, Socio-Economic Status of Older
people, January 2014 
[25] Socio-economic characteristics of persons with disabilities
[26] National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) [Rwanda], Ministry of Health (MOH) [Rwanda], and ICF International. 2015.
Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-15. Rockville, Maryland, USA: NISR, MOH, and ICF International.
[27] RDHS, 2015
[28] RDHS 2010; RDHS 2015
[29]  Fink, G., Sudfeld, C.R., Danaei, G., Ezzati, M., and Fawzi, W.W. 2014. “Scaling-Up Access to Family Planning May Improve
Linear Growth and Child Development in Low and Middle-Income Countries.”  
42/42
[30]  WFP, MINAGRI and NISR (2015). Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis Report (CFSVA). Kigali, Rwanda.
[31] GoR, 2015
[32] REMA, 2010
[33] USAID, 2019
[34] Warner et al, 2015; Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2018
[35] Value Chain Analysis for the Coffee Sector in Rwanda, AgriLogic Report for the CBI (2018)
[36] Adaptation of Small-Scale Tea and Coffee Farmers in Kenya to Climate Change African Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation
(2021).
[37] Ethical Tea Partnership 2011; Omondi 2015; Prematilake 2014
[38] Source: Kayonza District, Second District Health Strategic Plan, 2018/19- 2023/24.
[39] The target for youth is realistically kept at 25% given that according to Rwanda’s regulations, the classification as ‘youth’ does not
exceed the age of 30 and does not differentiate between men and women, unlike in other countries were ‘youth’ can involve men up
to the age of 35 and women up to the age of 40
[40]  Black, 2005, “The relationship between Indian Ocean sea surface temperature and East African rainfall”, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.,
A., N 363, 43-47
[41] Marchal et al., 2006; REMA, 2011
[42]  Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future Crop Suitability in Rwanda Funded by ‘Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme’ (ASAP) Phase 2. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Produced by the University of Cape Town
[43] Ibid
[44] The tool is being developed by FAO and should be ready by Q3 2022
[45] IFAD, 2015; How to do Seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD investment projects, Knowledge Management and
Grants Oficer, Policy and Technical Advisory Division, September 2015.
[46] United Nations Development Group (UNDG), Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, 2009:30
[47] Ibid
[48]Consistent with international practice, the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples states that they are characterized
by: “Priority in time, with respect to occupation and use of a specific territory; the voluntary perpetuation of cultural distinctiveness,
which may include the aspects of language, social organization, religion and spiritual values, modes of production, laws and
institutions; self-identification, as well as recognition by other groups, or by state authorities, as a distinct collectivity; and an
experience of subjugation, marginalization, dispossession, exclusion or discrimination.”
[49] FDRE, 2013; Seitz J, 2014
[50] FDRE (2007), Climate change National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) of Ethiopia. The Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia. (2007). Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/eth01.pdf
[51]  RoR, (2006), National Adaptation Programme of Action, Republic of Rwanda. page 44. Available at:
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/rwa01e.pdf
[52]IPCC AR4 (2007); IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007 (AR4), Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/contents.html
[53]IPCC, (2012); International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2012). Managing the Risks of Extreme Eventsand Disasters to
Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker,D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen,
M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.
[54]FDRE, (2013); Ethiopia’s climate resilient green economy. Climate Resilience Strategy, Agriculture and Forestry, Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Environmental and Social Safeguards Classification: Substantial
1/8
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Biodiversity conservation
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
1.1 Could the project potentially involve or lead to conversion or degradation
of biodiversity, habitats (including modified habitat, natural habitat and
critical natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and ecosystem services?
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
Project will
significantly
affect modified
habitat, but will
not impinge on
natural habitat or
critical natural
habitat.
Low
1.2 Could the project involve or potentially lead to activities involving habitats
that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection, or recognized as
protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g.
National Park, Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved
Area, ICCA, etc.)?
No
1.3 Could the project potentially involve or lead to an increase in the chance
of human-wildlife encounters/conflict?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Conflict leads to
some loss of
livelihood or
threat to wildlife,
but this is not
catastrophic
1.4 Could the project potentially involve or lead to risks to endangered
species (e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?
No
Low
1.5 Could the project potentially involve or lead to impacts/risks to migratory
wildlife?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Project or
associated
facilities close to
sites of
importance to
migratory wildlife
sites. No direct
impact, but
possible indirect
impact.
1.6 Could the project potentially involve or lead to introduction or utilization
of any invasive alien species of flora and fauna, whether accidental or
intentional?
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to the handling or utilization of
genetically modified organisms?
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to procurement through primary
suppliers of natural resource materials?
No
No
No
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Environmental and Social Safeguards
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to the release of pollutants to the
environment due to routine or non-routine circumstances with the potential
for adverse local, regional, and/or transboundary impacts?
2/8
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to primary not environmentally
sustainable production of living natural resources? (Note: this includes the
cultivation or rearing of plants or animals, including annual and perennial
crop farming, animal husbandry (including livestock), aquaculture, plantation
forestry, etc )
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Pollutants may
possibly be
released, either
routinely or by
accident, but
treatment
systems are
proven and
verified.
Receiving
environment is
highly senstive.
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Project is fully
dependent on
production of
living natural
resources.
Project is sited in
an existing
agricultural area,
with low
environmental
and/or social
sensitivity.
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to engagement in areas of forestry,
including the harvesting of natural forests, plantation development, and/or
reforestation?
No
Low
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to significant consumption of raw
materials, energy, and/or water?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project will
require
consumption of
raw materias,
energy, and/or
water. This will
be a significant
component of the
project, but
impacts can be
appropriately
managed.
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to significant extraction, diversion or
containment of surface or ground water (e.g. construction of dams,
reservoirs, river basin developments, groundwater extraction)?
No
Low
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents? Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project
requires use of
fertilizers, but
options are
available to
replace polluting
fertilizers with
alternatives.
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or result in
the use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry?
3/8
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Environmental and Social Safeguards
The project
requires use of
pesticides, but
options are
available to
replace
potentially
polluting
pesticides with
alternatives.
2.8 Could the project be located in an area which is being, or has been,
polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, smelter, industry)?
2.9 Could the project involve livestock – extensive and intensive systems and
animal products (dairy, skins, meat, etc.)?
No
No
Cultural Heritage
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
3.1 Could the project be located in areas that are considered to have
archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project is
thought to be
close to an area
that is
considered to
have
archaeological
(prehistoric),
paleontological,
historical,
cultural, artistic,
and religious
values or
contains features
considered as
critical cultural
heritage. The
site has not been
surveyed, and so
the presence of
cultural heritage
is not well
known.
3.2 Could the project directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ rights,
lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge, social fabric,
traditions, governance systems, and culture or heritage (tangible and
intangible)?
No
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to significant excavations, demolitions,
movement of earth, flooding or other environmental changes?
No
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to adverse impacts to sites, structures,
or objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or religious values or
intangible forms of culture (e.g. knowledge, innovations, practices)? (Note:
projects intended to protect and conserve Cultural Heritage may also have
inadvertent adverse impacts)
4/8
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project is
thought to be
close to an area
that is
considered to
have
archaeological
(prehistoric),
paleontological,
historical,
cultural, artistic,
and religious
values or
contains features
considered as
critical cultural
heritage. The
site has not been
surveyed, and so
the presence of
cultural heritage
is not well
known.
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to alterations to landscapes and natural
features with cultural significance?
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to utilization of tangible and/or
intangible forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural Heritage
for commercial or other purposes?
No
No
indigenous peoples
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas where indigenous peoples are
present (including the project area of influence)?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project may
have a moderate
impact on
indigenous
people, because
it is sited within
commuting
distance of
indigenous
communities,
and because it
offers
employment to
indigenous
people.
4.2 Could the project result in activities located on lands and territories
claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.3 Could the project result in impacts on the rights of indigenous peoples or
to the lands, territories and resources claimed by them?
4.4 Could the project result in the utilization and/or commercial development
of natural resources on lands and territories claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on the Cultural Heritage of indigenous
peoples, including through the commercialization or use of their traditional
knowledge and practices?
No
No
No
No
Labour and Working Conditions
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Environmental and Social Safeguards
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors or value chains that are
characterized by working conditions that do not meet national labour laws or
international commitments? (Note: this may include discriminatory practices,
high gender inequality and the lack of equal opportunities, denial of freedom
of association and collective bargaining, labour migrants)
5/8
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
The project
operates in
sectors or value
chains that have,
in the past, not
met national
labour laws, or
international
commitments,
but is now
adequately
nationally
regulated.
However,
international
value chains are
not regularly
audited for
environmental or
social
performance.
Low
Low
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a value chain where there have been
reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of forced labour may be increased for
projects located in remote places or where the status of migrant workers is
uncertain)
5.3 Could the project involve children (a) below the nationally-defined
minimum employment age (usually 15 years old) or (b) above the nationally-
defined minimum employment age but below the age of 18 in supported
activities or in value chains?
No
No
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain where
producers and other agricultural workers are typically exposed to significant
occupational and safety risks, and/or (b) promote or use technologies or
practices that pose occupational safety and health (OSH) risks for farmers,
other rural workers or rural populations in general? (Note: OSH risks in
agriculture might include: dangerous machinery and tools; hazardous
chemicals; toxic or allergenic agents; carcinogenic substances or agents;
parasitic diseases; transmissible animal diseases; confined spaces;
ergonomic hazards; extreme temperatures; and contact with dangerous and
poisonous animals, reptiles and insects. Psychosocial hazards might include
violence and harassment.)
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
The project
operates in a
sector, area, or
value chain
where workers
are occasionally
exposed to
significant OSH
risks, and where
regulation is
known to be
weak or non-
existent.
Community Health, Safety and Security
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
6.1 Could the project be at risk from water-borne or other vector-borne
diseases (e.g. temporary breeding habitats), and/or communicable and non-
communicable diseases?
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended negative impacts on nutrition?
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or losses due to failure of structural
elements of the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to the construction or rehabilitation of
dams?
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to transport, storage, and use and/or
disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and
other chemicals during construction and operation)?
No
No
No
No
No
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem
services relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food, surface water
purification, natural buffers from flooding)?
6/8
6.7 Could the project lead to the potential for gender-based violence,
including sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, as a result of labour
influx, land redistribution, or other actions that alter community dynamics?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project will
only have minor
impacts on
ecosystem
services, and
these can be
mitigated
through standard
environmental
management
planning.
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Minor changes to
community
dynamics.
Resulting serious
recorded cases
of gender-based
violence and/or
sexual
exploitation.
Gender-based
violence
protocols in
place.
6.8 Could the project lead to increases in traffic or alteration in traffic flow?
Yes
Unlikely
Negligible
Low
The project will
not lead to an
increase in
traffic, or
alteration of
traffic flow.
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx of project workers?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project is
partly dependent
on an influx of
project workers,
but the majority
of workers are
local. Risks of
impacts have
been planned
for, and
protocols are in
place
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to the engagement of security
personnel to protect facilities and property or to support project activities?
No
Physical and economic resettlement
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
7.1 Could the project result in temporary or permanent and full or partial
physical displacement (including people without legally recognizable claims
to land)?
7.2 Could the project result in economic displacement (e.g. loss of assets or
access to resources due to land acquisition or access restrictions – even in
the absence of physical relocation)?
No
No
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
7/8
7.3 Could the project present a risk of forced evictions?
7.4 Could the project result in impacts on or changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or community-based property rights/customary rights to
land, territories and/or resources?
No
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Low
The project will
result in
moderate
changes to land
tenure
arrangements
and/or
community-
based property
rights/customary
rights. Legal
recourse and
other forms of
arbitration/conflct
resolution are
available.
Financial intermediaries and direct investments
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
8.1 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
environmental and social policies and an associated environmental and
social management system (ESMS) in place (transparent, publicly
available)?
8.2 Could the investment be granted to an institution with insufficient
capacities (i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES Officer) to implement the
ESMS?
8.3 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
Exclusion List?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The institution
has an ESMS in
place. Reports
are not publicly
available.
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The institution
employs an ES
Officer, and
employs field
staff to
implement the
ESMS.
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
8.4 According to the institution's portfolio classification: Could the institution
have potential high-risk projects in their portfolio?
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the local legal
framework?
No
No
The institution
has an Exclusion
List, but cannot
verify the
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable communication channel with
stakeholders and local communities (e.g. a Grievance Redress
Mechanism)?
8/8
8.7 Does the organization provide auxiliary or capacity building support
services.
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Communities
and stakeholders
can contact the
institution and
and a process is
in place for
institutionalizing
the
communication
channels (e.g.
complaint-
management
system) and
training staff
accordingly.
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The institution
offers basic
training services
to customers
(directly or thrid
party service
providers to
imrpove
business and
livelihood
opportunities.
Climate Risk Classification: Moderate
Step 1: Hazard identification
1/2
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area?
No, Yes, TBD
River flood
Costal Flood
Urban Flood
Landslide
Cyclone
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells)
Extreme Heat
Wildfires
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity
No, Yes, TBD
Change in temperature (increase or decrease)
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease)
Climate variability (larger or smaller)
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate?
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases?
Step 2: Exposure Assessment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, Yes, TBD
No
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands)
Very warm areas (subtropical)
Tropical areas (rainforests)
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts)
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra)
River banks
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related
hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests
and diseases?
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or
diseases?
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface temperature due
to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change?
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, or changes in
temperature?
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables?
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to climate
related hazards?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. Yes
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards?
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts?
No
No
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting their capacity
to address potential weather-related hazards?
2/2
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture?
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) being
exacerbated by climate change?
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6?
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1?
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score?
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) effectively being
delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users?
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs?
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events?
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation?
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in response to
weather related shocks?
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available?
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
PSAC  ACTION PLAN AND BUDGET FOR 18 MONTHS PERIOD (January 2023 -June 2024)
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Component 1 - Investments to enhance climate smart production and productivity of selected export-driven value chains 
Support smallholder farmers production and 
productivity 
Coffee- Replacement and rehabilitation
Women and Youth led Nurseries for production of 
Seedlings for Replacement of 3050Ha  @2500trees/Ha + 
15% for infilling for replacement and 10% infilling for 
rehabilitation of 1082ha
C1
C10
C11
C111
C11101
C11102
C11103
C11104
C11105
C11106
C11107
C11108
C11109
C11110
C11111
C11112
C11113
C11114
C11115
C11116
Acquisition of coffee seeds for seedlings  production
Field for Mobilization of communities for coffee 
seedlings preparation
Conduct meetings for groups formation
Acquisition of tubings
Acqusition of urea
Acquisition of Fungicides
Aquiring watering cans
Maintanance of coffee sedlings in nursries
Formation, capacity building of youth groups to engage 
in Replacement, Rehabilitation and Expansion program 
(2 groups per sector)
Awareness meetings of youth led groups
Trainings of youth led groups
Fields for groups formation and training
Uprooting Old coffee trees and establishment of new 
coffee plantations (Ha) through engagement of youth 
groups
Awarenss Meetings
Identification and mapping of old coffee trees to be 
replaced
Labor for uprooting old coffee trees, Land preparation, 
hole making and seedlings Plantation including manure 
acquisition
Maintenance of Replaced Coffee Plantations (Ha) - 
each lot planted every year shall be maintained
Kgs
Lumpsum
Meetings
Kgs
Kgs
Kgs
Number
Number
Meetings
Training
Lumpsum
Meeting
Lumpsum
Ha
Ha
C112
Rehabilitation & maintenance (1st year) of 1082 Ha of 
coffee trees over 8 years old through engagement of 
youth groups (removal of stems and suckers selection)
C11201
Identification/Mapping of coffee trees to be rehabilitated
Lumpsum
C11202
C11203
C11204
C113
C11301
C11302
C114
Labor for cutting coffee stems
Maintenance of rehabilitated coffee and suckers 
Selection
Rehabilitation & maintenance (2nd year) of 1082 Ha of 
coffee trees over 8 years old through engagement of 
Tools for use in coffee replacement, expansion and 
rehabilitation (4132 Ha) 
Aqusition of pruning saws
Acquisition of pruning shears (secaterurs)
Support with seedlings to encourage intercropping  
coffee with Banana/fruit shade trees to improve food and 
nutrition security, timber production ( in target 4132 Ha)
C11401
Acquisition of tubings
C11402
Maintanance of Agroforestry sedlings in nursries
C11403
Acqusition of Banana suckers
C11404
Sensitization, campaign and selection of early adopters 
for replacement, rehabilitation and Expansion program 
through Local Government in all 58 Sectors (2 Meetings 
Ha
Ha
Number
Number
Kgs
Number
Number
Meetings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,000
1,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
7,000
0
0
940
0
12
0
1,700
1,636
0
1,600
12
0
12
1,600
42
0
0
0
0
0
13,000
20,000
0
0
0
1,700
1,636
940
5
267
3.5
1.4
12
5
0 1,636,250 1,636,250 1,636,250
1,636,250
0.050
10
10
10
0
10
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
29
20
20
20
6
20
0
0
29
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
29
10
18
18
6
18
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
18
10
10
6
10
0
0
0
0
0
58
58
58
18
58
0
0
58
0
0
5,400
5,400
5,400
5,400
0
100
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
29
0
29
0
116
600
600
267
600
267
3,090
2,163
267
2,163
6
7
3.5
0.05
0.8
600
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,000
11,197
0
70,000
2,380
19,635
4,702
57,269
34,800
34,800
15,463
10,800
15,463
0
0
13,000
11,197
0
70,000
2,380
19,635
4,702
57,269
34,800
34,800
15,463
10,800
15,463
0
0
15,463
15,463
0
0
0
0
32,400
37,800
32,400
37,800
350
1,500
0
350
1,500
0
69,600
69,600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,600
0
24,500
0
0
4,702
0
6,000
6,000
2,666
0
2,666
0
0
0
3,199
0
0
2,380
19,635
0
16,363
12,000
12,000
5,332
3,600
5,332
0
0
8,000
3,199
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,199
0
45,500
0
0
0
16,363
24,544
6,000
10,800
4,799
10,800
6,000
2,666
3,600
4,799
3,600
2,666
0
0
3,866
7,731
3,866
0
0
0
0
0
350
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
750
0
17,400
17,400
17,400
17,400
0
0
0
0
0
0
32,400
37,800
0
750
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
C11405
C12
C121
C12101
C12102
C12103
C12104
C12105
C12106
C122
C12201
C12202
C12203
C123
C12301
C12302
C12303
C124
C12401
C12402
C12403
C12404
C12405
C12406
C12407
C12408
C12409
C12410
C12411
C12412
C12413
C12414
C13
C131
C13101
C13102
C132
C13201
C13202
C13203
C13204
C13205
C13206
Support for 2 coffee technical assistants to deliver 
proximity technical assistance for the 86 sectors 
(Annual@150USD per Month)
Total Coffee- Replacement and rehabilitation
Tea Expansion/Infilling
Tea plantations -Expansion 
Community approch farmers teams formation
Purchase of nursery material (tubings and sheetings)
Seedlings preparation and their maintenance
Tea plantation-Infilling 
Fertilizer Revolving Scheme 
Conduct of a performance review
Agroforestry 
Purchase of nursery material (tubings)
Community approch farmers teams formation
Seedlings preparation, maintenance and planting
Total Tea Expansion/Infilling
Horticulture plantation Establishment and 
productivity improvement
Mango -  Plantation (including seedling, manure and 
other inputs)
Avocado - Plantation  
Macadamia - Plantation 
Essential oil - (Plantation and all the inputs/ 
establishement of 1Ha of mother gadern)
Seedlings acquisition (28,000Seedlings/Ha with 30% of 
seedlings ) 
Manure/organic fertiliezer acquisition
Pesticides acquisition (AgroPy product)
Mother gardern establishment(Land 
preparation,planting,mainatanence activities)
Mango - other inputs along with plantation (Manure and 
fertilizer)
Avocado - other inputs along with plantation  (Manure 
and fertilizer)
Macadamia - other inputs along with plantation (Manure 
and fertilizer)
Mango - 30% gap filling in Year 2 of each new 
plantation
Avocado -30% gap filling in Year 2 of each new 
plantation
Macadamia -20% gap filling in Year 2 of each new 
plantation
Mango -  Plantation - Maintenance (manure and other 
inputs)
Avocado - Plantation - Maintenance (manure and other 
inputs)
Macadamia - Plantation - Maintenance  (manure and 
other inputs)
Trials on essential oils (varietal selection)
Total Horticulture plantation Establishment and 
productivity improvement
Improvement of rural Infrastructure activites
Direct support (100% project supported)
Support for soil and water testing kits (Palintest Kits)
Construction of 2 pilot hangars - for Coffee
Eco-friendly coffee drying units (3 units, including 1 
parabolic drying  structure) including demonstration cost 
Build Hangars - for Tea
Investment in avocado grading line at NAEB packhouse - 
for Horticulture
Electronic weighing scales
Green leaf server (software based database of farmers' 
green leaves collection and revenue)  
Pick Up truck for Ferwacothe/cooperative common 
services
Green leaves transportation Trucks 
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
Lumpsum
0
0
0
348
348
348
348
1,392
155
0
215,064
215,064
0
0
53,766
53,766
53,766
53,766
5,000
656,686
661,686
0
5,000
123,516
158,738
133,341
241,091
days
tons
seedlings
consultant
kgs
days
ha
seedling 
seedling 
seedling 
Seedlings
Kg
L
Ha
kg 
kg 
kg 
seedling 
seedling 
seedling 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Ha
hangars
scales
Server
truck
truck
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
32
49.00
32
81.45
7,518,000 7,518,000 7,518,000
64.00
130.45
7,518,000
40
3,200
0.0275
1
1.00
1,500
2.6
40
1.5
1.5
5.0
1.20
0.05
20
400
681
32
32
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
681.00
64.00
0.00
30,000
60,000
102,000
36,400
20,000
24
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26.00
               4,016 
11.00
360.5
3.00
0.00
11
30,042.0
45,176
30,000
60,000
102,000
0
0
0
36,400
0
0
0
20,000
24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26
11
3
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
156,800
1,280
260,640
1,280
68,915
68,915
68,915
1,500
1,771
1,280
1,280
156,800
263,420
70,195
71,966
70,195
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
13,500
27,000
0
43,680
0
0
0
0
0
102,000
9,000
18,000
102,000
22,500
45,000
306,000
0
1,000
480
400
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,560
417,440
206,745
1,500
1,771
2,560
2,560
417,440
206,745
1,500
1,771
2,560
632,576
632,576
45,000
90,000
510,000
43,680
1,000
480
400
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
90,000
510,000
43,680
1,000
480
400
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
690,560
690,560
0
0
84,180
103,880
129,000
373,500
104,415
104,415
3,966
90,126
0
496,934
3,966
90,126
0
496,934
104,415
0
3,966
90,126
0
496,934
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Q3
Sub total Improvement of rural Infrastructure 
activites
Total production & productivity
Investment Grants 
CAT 1 - small-scale investment grants
Protective agriculture at smallholder level (greenhouse, 
walk-in tunnel, shade net…)
Eco-friendly coffee drying structures for CWS led by 
women and youth (<30 years)
Eco friendly coffee drying structures for CWS led by 
men (>30 years)
Sub total  small-scale investment grants
CAT 2 - Medium-scale investment grants for 
cooperatives
Compliance related support (Horticulture) - Basic 
facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification at 
cooperative level 
Protective agriculture at cooperative level (greenhouse, 
walk-in tunnel, shade net…)
Compliance related support (Coffee) -Basic facilities, 
tools and equipment to acquire certification at 
cooperative level 
Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities at 
cooperative level (CWS, loading stations and processing 
plants for the various value chains)
Sub total Medium-scale investment grants for 
cooperatives
CAT 3 - Medium-scale investment grants for 
exporters
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire 
certification at exporter level 
Protective agriculture at exporter level (greenhouse, walk-
in tunnel, shade net…)
Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities at 
exporter level (CWS, loading stations and processing 
plants for the various value chains)
BDF Grant management fee (6.5%)
Sub total Medium-scale investment grants for 
exporters
Sub total A.2.2: Investment Grants
Total Component 1
BDF
facility 
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
BDF
BDF
Coop/farm
facility 
unit
unit
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
5,000
695,441
2,675,262
695,441
2,680,262
5
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
16,000
8,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
80,000
80,000
80,000
8,000
8,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
48,000
48,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
80,000
208,000
80,000
208,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q4
0
Q1
0
Q2
695,441
Q3
0
Q4
0
161,800
471,116
1,028,254
334,307
684,786
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
16,000
32,000
32,000
16,000
32,000
32,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,000
0
0
0
0
40,000
0
0
8,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
16,000
0
40,000
80,000
152,000
5,000
2,883,262
2,888,262
0
161,800
471,116
1,044,254
374,307
836,786
Component 2 - Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains (
Capacity building of producer organisations
Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives and functional groups (coffee)
Capacity building in climate smart agricultural practices 
in coffee for 50 co-operatives (1 training per co-
operative)
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach, strengthened by 
proximity coaching,  targeting 1300 FFS @30farmers
0
Number of 
FFS
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
Capacity building of Proximity coaches (PSAC 
approach, targeting, interventions and role of FFS (For 
FFS Coaches) - For 1300 FFS, about 120 FFS coaches 
@30 per batch
Managing FFS: roles and responsibility, method of 
engagement and problem solving - Training and 
exposure visit (For 2600 Lead Farmers - 2 per FFS and 
120 FFS coaches, 90 batches, 3 days
Training in nursery raising and management (4 women 
per cooperative for 50 co-operatives i.e. 200 women(in 
eight batches) - 1 day
Sub total Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives and functional groups (coffee)
Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives, Ferwacothe and functional groups 
(Tea)
Support Focal Persons(FP) for infilling activities-FP
Training
Training
Training
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
20
1
5
4
20
2
10
0
40
1
5
0
80
4
20
6
876
824
1,030
412
0
0
0
0
70,040
70,040
3,296
3,296
20,600
20,600
2,472
2,472
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17,510
17,510
35,020
824
1,648
824
5,150
10,300
5,150
824
1,648
0
0
0
96,408
96,408
0
0
824
25,132
29,458
40,994
C14
C141
C14101
C14102
C14103
C142
C14201
C14202
C14203
C14204
C143
C14301
C14302
C14303
C14304
C2
C21
C211
C21101
C21102
C21103
C21104
C21105
C212
C21201
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Appoint & train Field Production Assistants -FPA
Train  & deploy Common Services Champions -CSC
Train leadership & management on Common Services 
Indicators -CSI
Train Common Services Champions Committee through 
local benchmarking
Appoint/Elect, induct & deploy the Fertilizer 
Management Committee (FMC) for RFS
Contract a common Services Delivery Expert/Service 
Provider based at Ferwacothe
Sub total Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives, Ferwacothe and functional groups 
(Tea)
Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives and functional groups  (Horticulture)
Capacity building of Proximity coaches/lead farmers 
(PSAC approach, targeting, interventions and role of 
FFS (For FFS Coaches)
Communication and transport allowances for lead farmer 
to undertake the proximity extension 
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach, strengthened by 
proximity extension services at each beneficiary farm 
(2,500 farmers) coaching,  targeting 225 FFS 
@30farmers
Training in nursery raising and management (2, 3, 1 
training) - 3 days
Training to grafting technicians (1, 1 training) - 2 days
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
NAEB
Person 
Person 
Farmer
Farmer (ToTs)
Farmer (ToTs)
NAEB
farmer
Farmer
Managing FFS: roles and responsibility, method of 
engagement and problem solving - Training and 
exposure visit (For Lead Farmers and FFS coaches - 700 
persons, 25 batches, 3 days
Capacity Building in strategies for Social inclusion - 
Targeting for PSAC, Gender and Youth in Horticulture 
value chain (Lead Farmers and FFS Coaches) - 750 
persons, 25 batches, 3 days
Capacity building of in a)certification processes and 
compliance, b) climate smart agricultural practices  (lead 
farmers and FFS coaches) - 700 persons, 25batches,  3 
days, 
Organization of Private sector led innovative training (for 
Farmers)
Organization of Private sector led innovative training (for 
lead farmers and FFS coaches) Regular training in Yr. 1 
&2 with refresher training in 3 &4
Engagement with the Horticulture Centre of Excellence 
(HCoE) for training of lead farmers and operators 
(Protective agriculture) and internship to young 
entrepreneurs 
Sub total Organizational Capacity  development for  
Cooperatives and functional groups  (Horticulture)
Enhanced GALS through FFS
Contracting service provider for enhanced GALS
Training of the FFS coaches
Training of the FFS lead farmers
Upscaling GALS into FFS groups
Sub total Enhanced GALS through FFS
C21202
C21203
C21204
C21205
C21206
C21207
C213
C21301
C21302
C21303
C21304
C21305
C21306
C21307
C21308
C21309
C21310
C21311
C214
C21401
C21402
C21403
C21404
C215
C2151
C215101
C215102
NAEB
Farmer/Internee
0
0
0
50
50
50
50
200
200
Capacity building of producer organisations through 
CORDAID on Cross-cutting issues (governance, 
financial management, Farming as a business, BDS 
provision, gender and youth)
Cooperative strengthening​
Identification, capacity gap assessment, development of 
capacity development plan
Developing capacity development plan
Cordaid
25
25
25
25
50
50
464
464
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
15
10
15
10
15
30
45
250
30
100
200
200
250
750
46.35
60
0
0
0
0
60
0
0
60
60
150
100
150
200
200
200
750
150
200
200
200
750
40
40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,500
1,350
7,500
1,350
34,763
34,763
9,000
6,000
9,000
6,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
40,000
40,000
158,613
158,613
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4,635
9,000
0
0
0
2,500
450
2,500
450
2,500
450
9,270
9,270
11,588
0
0
6,000
0
6,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
6,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
10,000
35,635
10,000
10,000
10,000
38,220
44,220
40,538
0
0
0
0
23,175
23,175
23,175
23,175
11,588
11,588
11,588
11,588
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Internal management (governance,  membership 
management, business planning, internal organization) 
trainings
Operations  (Production, storage, post-harvest handling, 
logistics, quality management) + Internal control manual
Formation of new cooperatives, coop principles, law , 
policies, relations with external stakeholders in 
horticulture value chain in
Sub total Cooperative strengthening​
Financial management
Financial administration ( accounting system, accounting 
policies, cash handling,
Financial planning ( budgeting, external finance, finance 
strategy, membership contribution, savings )
Financial reporting and monitoring (financial reporting, 
costs & sales price, cash flow, income, expenditure, 
liquidity, transaction recording/record and bookkeeping, 
access and use of financial information) 
Sub total  Financial management
Innovative trainings​ & Interventions
a) ​Sustainable Business Development Service (BDS) 
provision 
Developing business development services 
provision business model 
Identifying, selecting  youth for to become  fee 
based business development service provider 
Identify potential services for BDS providers 
within value chains
Coaching and mentoring BDS providers to ensure 
they provide value for money & demand driven  
BDS
Facilitating BDS provision, create linkage with 
value chain actors to develop paid for services
Develop sustainable training/service  delivering 
model for BDS providers 
b) Farming as a Business 
Developing  farming as business  module/curricular 
(FaaB)
Incorporate FaaB into FFS approach & training and 
coaching FFS coaches on  Farming as business module 
Training and coaching of farmers  on FFS curricular 
through FFS groups
Training smallholders on farming enterprise profitability 
& management for smallholders 
Financial Education - Farm business management-book 
keeping, etc
c) Mobilising youth for equipment maintenance 
Developing curricula & practical education trajectories 
around equipment maintenance 
Training trainers for youth as services providers on 
equipment maintenance 
Developing fee-based services model/paid for services 
for equipment maintenance 
Market sensitization farmers on the use of equipment / 
mechanization 
Advocate and implement adapted curriculum in 
vocational schools 
Sub total Innovative trainings​ & Interventions
Gender & youth in value chains and financial 
inclusion
Identify service categories oriented on youth and 
women 
Promoting women / youth participation in VCs / farming 
as a business / business creation /link to challenge fund 
C215103
C215104
C215105
C2152
C215201
C215202
C215203
C2153
C21531
C2153101
C2153102
C2153103
C2153104
C2153105
C2153106
C21532
C2153201
C2153202
C2153203
C2153204
C2153205
C21533
C2153301
C2153302
C2153303
C2153304
C2153305
C216
C21601
C21602
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
10
10
20
464
9,270
9,270
4,635
4,635
0
0
0
55,620
55,620
0
0
0
27,810
27,810
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
C21603
C21604
C217
C21701
C21702
C21703
C218
C2181
C218101
C218102
C218103
C218104
C218105
C218106
C218107
C218108
C218109
C2182
C218201
C218202
C218203
C218204
C218205
C218206
C218207
C218208
C219
C2191
C21901
Women / youth inclusion in leadership roles (Govt, FO, 
Pvt sector, ...) 
Promoting access to finance for women / youth (through 
FI) 
Sub total Gender & youth in value chains and 
financial inclusion
Access to markets 
Develop access to market model 
Linking farmer organizations to market ( Supply 
contract)
Support/strengthen/train producer organization on quality 
improvement (aflatoxin control, proper post-harvest 
handling) 
Sub total Access to markets 
Sub total Skills improvement B.1.5
Total B1 Capacity building of producer organizations
Backward and forward market linkages
Backward and Forward linkages for Coffee 
development
Catalyse the private owned CWS to embrace Newly 
Created Coffee Zones by entering into MOUs with the 
farmers in the zones they operate in (Women and Youth 
Led)
Support for completion of coffee appellation activities: 
Patenting, Branding and designing of packaging 
materials (Lumpsum)
Hiring service provider for the appellation, patenting and 
promotion activities
Support for development of promotional materials, 
Preparation of appellate coffee samples for promotion in 
diplomatic mission trade attach'es, and International 
trade fairs (Lumpsum)
Prorata support for implementation of E-Market Platform 
for all commodities
Regional and International Coffee events  and 
Competitions                               
Support exporters with Booth payment and Airflight to 
participate in coffee exhibitions (SCAJ and SCA)
Support coffee stake holders to attend under AFCA 
airticket and attandence costs
Participation into coffee cupping events and auction
Sub total Backward and Forward linkages for 
Coffee development
Backward and Forward market linkages for 
Horticulture development
Capacity building of exporters in the international 
business, quality control and client req.
Participation in international horticultural promotional 
events 
Support exporters to participate in horticulture events 
and exhibitions(World of perishables and Fruit logistica) 
with Air flight cost and booth payments
Support exporters of Essential oils to attend Intenational 
exhibitions(Vivanes)
Cost of market agents/facilitators based in a key 
diplomatic missions
Hiring Market facilitators for twelve months for middle 
East and Europe
Additional investment to HEGF hosted by BRD
Technical Assistance for increased uptake of HEGF
Sub total Backward and Forward market linkages 
for Horticulture development
Support to Quality control and Market driven 
certifications
Support to producers / Cooperatives / exporters for 
Market driven certifications
Support for cost of market driven certifications (for 
Horticulture)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
310,641
310,641
0
0
36,459
91,162
101,488
81,532
L/S
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
20,600
0
20,600
20,600
0
0
0
6,180
8,240
6,180
#Persons 
0
0
0
1
0
3
1
1
1
3
1
1
2
3
2
2
1
9
2
1
4
10,000
10,000
20,600
20,000
20,000
10,000
0
0
10,000
185,400
10,000
185,400
236,000
236,000
0
0
0
0
0
61,800
10,000
10,000
61,800
61,800
10,000
67,980
90,040
67,980
18,000
20,000
36,000
20,000
36,000
20,000
18,000
18,000
20,000
75,000
300,000
300,000
150,000
150,000
0
356,000
356,000
0
0
0
168,000
188,000
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
C2190101
C2190102
C2190103
C21902
C2190201
C2190202
C2190203
C21903
C2192
C219201
C219202
C219203
C219204
Support in gap assessment, system design and 
documentation development for mrket standard 
implementation, training and coaching for internal 
auditors, inspections, root cause anlysis and corrective 
action towards readiness for certification (service 
provider)
Support costs of labortory tests for products and 
environmental inspections by accredited Labs for 
certification (accredited Laboratories)
Support certification audit costs (accredited CBs)
Support for cost of market driven certifications (for 
Coffee) 
Support in gap assessment, system design and 
documentation development for market standard 
implementation, training and coaching for internal 
auditors, inspections, root cause anlysis and corrective 
action towards readiness for certification (service 
provider)
Support labortory tests for products and environmental 
inspections by accredited Labs for certification 
(accredited Laboratories)
Support certification audit costs (accredited CBs)
Cost of facilitation (identification of niche, identification 
of certification requirements, coaching exporters)
Sub total Support to producers / Cooperatives / 
exporters for Market driven certifications
Creation of pool of internal inspectors / Accredited 
auditors /Quality specialist and Accreditation of 
laboratory
Training to selected youth on quality certification and 
internal audit (for 30 youth, 4 weeks)
Support for internship of selected 20 youth , for 2 
months
Support for examination fees for graduation as 
accredited auditors (for 10 persons)
Training of coffee liquorers and quality analysts/Q-
graders- 1 from each of progressive cooperatives 
(Capacity Building for local coffee quality , barrister, 
coffee grading quality specialists
Support to Agro-export quality specialized facility 
and services accreditation and international 
recognition (Technical Assistance and upgrading 
the observed gaps for compliance as per scoped 
accreditation) 
C21920502
C219205
C21920501 Hiring service provider for accrediation
hiring service provider (for supply and 
commissioning. Maintenance ) 
Sub total Creation of pool of internal inspectors / 
Accredited auditors /Quality specialist and 
Accreditation of laboratory
Sub total B.2.3
HEIFER
Extension services for tomato, carrots, garlic and 
onions (partnership with HEIFER International) 
C220
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
#Certificates
#Certificates
#Certificates
#persons
#persons
#persons
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
20
20
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
0
10,300
5,150
5,150
10,300
5,150
5,150
41,200
0
40
824
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0.50
0.50
0
0
-
0
0
0
0
0.20
0
0
0
103,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,600
20,600
10,300
20,600
10,300
10,300
20,600
20,600
10,300
10,300
20,600
10,300
82,400
82,400
41,200
41,200
0
0
32,960
32,960
0
20,600
0
20,600
94,760
94,760
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,300
10,300
0
0
0
5,150
5,150
5,150
5,150
10,300
10,300
0
0
0
5,150
5,150
5,150
5,150
20,600
41,200
20,600
0
0
16,480
16,480
0
0
0
0
16,480
16,480
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,600
0
0
0
20,600
41,200
C2201
C220101
C220102
C220103
Sustainable increase in quality production for 
domestic market
Identify and provide support to resource poor households 
to access quality inputs 
Mobilize and provide specialized training to smallholder 
farmers to engage in improved sustainable farming 
practices (irrigation, green houses and integrated 
farming)
Raise awareness and increase adoption of relevant 
technologies (post-harvest handling, All-year round 
production techniques, climate risk management)
Sub total Sustainable increase in quality production 
for domestic market
Lumpsum
8,368
8,368
8,368
8,368
33,472
1.03
0
33,472
33,472
8,368
8,368
8,368
8,368
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
7,173
7,173
7,173
7,173
28,690
1.03
28,690
28,690
7,173
7,173
7,173
7,173
4,782
4,782
4,782
4,782
19,127
1.03
19,127
81,289
19,127
81,289
0
4,782
4,782
4,782
4,782
0
0
20,322
20,322
20,322
20,322
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Building capacity of co-operatives and increasing 
investment in value chain development 
Organize into horticulture cooperatives and provide 
training/capacity building on good governance, business 
plans development, input supply, marketing and access 
to finance.
Develop and/or strengthen farmer’s social capital 
through Heifer's “VBHCD” combining the Heifer’s 12 
Cornerstones for just and sustainable development and 
the community-led Participatory Self-Review and 
Planning.
Provide investments support to cooperatives aimed at 
increased mechanization at farm level and infrastructure 
development for processing, transport logistics and 
warehousing in order to reduce post-harvest losses.
Sub total Building capacity of co-operatives and 
increasing investment in value chain development 
Improving competitiveness of smallholders through 
product diversification and increased access to 
markets 
 Train smallholder farmers on post-harvest handling, 
preservation and value addition for horticulture products 
and create market linkage services.
Provide capital investments to youth engaged in value 
addition, marketing and horticulture product aggregation 
services to acquire processing equipment, packaging 
materials, compliance and certification for the domestic 
market.
 Facilitate the establishment of Youth Agribusiness Hubs 
at identified central locations to improve farmer’s access 
to inputs and relevant Business Development Services.
Sub total Improving competitiveness of smallholders 
through product diversification and increased access 
to markets 
Project Management and Co-ordination (HEIFER)
Sub total 2.4.4
Sub total 2.4 (Heifer)
Range of diversified financial products​ - CORDAID
Financial literacy​ and savings for resilience
Financial education - introduction to financial  education 
services and products
Financial Education - Awareness on  Climate change and 
agri-insurance 
Savings mobilization (VSLA) and linking to MFIs 
Sub total Financial literacy​ and savings for resilience
Leasing product development (asset loans) - 
CORDAID
Developing the asset finance model 
Assist MFIs in developing the asset finance product 
Develop the official documents like MoU, Service level 
agreement for the parties agreements, etc. 
Introduction of equipment to Farmer Organizations 
(FOs) (e.g. field demonstrations) 
Linkage workshop and roundtable discussion between 
equipment supplier and FOs 
Connecting FOs to MFIs for equipment financing 
Sub total Leasing product development (asset loans) - 
CORDAID
Access to agricultural finance MFIs (agri-assessment 
tool coffee, tea, horti) - CORDAID
Agri- financing through the introduction of the digital 
credit assessment tool (Simbuka+) 
Institutionalization of agri-assessment tool
C2202
C220201
C220202
C220203
C2203
C220301
C220302
C220303
C223
C2231
C2232
C2233
C223301
C223302
Lumpsum
8,368
8,368
8,368
8,368
33,472
1.03
Lumpsum
22,713
22,713
22,713
22,713
90,853
1.03
Lumpsum
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
40,000
1.03
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
33,472
33,472
8,368
8,368
8,368
8,368
90,853
90,853
22,713
22,713
22,713
22,713
40,000
40,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
164,325
164,325
0
0
41,081
41,081
41,081
41,081
0
0
0
0
245,614
245,614
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
61,404
61,404
61,404
61,404
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
C223303
C223304
C223305
C223306
C223307
C2234
C223401
C223402
C223403
C223404
C224
C2241
C224101
C224102
C224103
C224104
C2242
C224201
C224202
C224203
C224204
C2243
C224301
C224302
C224303
C224304
C224305
C224306
C2244
Training MFIs loan officers on the use of Simbuka+/agri-
credit assessment tool 
Capacity building needs assessment through ratings and 
microscore 
Implementation of capacity building (Risk management, 
product development
Agri-product developments, digital payments 
Capital mobilisation; grow savings and broker 
international refinancing for agri loans 
Sub total Access to agricultural finance MFIs (agri-
assessment tool coffee, tea, horti) - CORDAID
Access to agricultural finance (Umurenge) SACCOs - 
in partnership with AMIR - CORDAID
Align with national Umurenge SACCO restructuring 
 plan (product offering, client orientation, loan 
assessment and automation (Ingabo CBS)
Intake assessment of (Umurenge) SACCO partners and 
repeat annual
TA plan with (Umurenge) SACCOs
Replicate Ingabo CBS implementation to other SACCOs  
Sub total Access to agricultural finance (Umurenge) 
SACCOs - in partnership with AMIR - CORDAID
Sub total 2.5
Climate resilience financial services - CORDAID
Capacity strengthening of FIs on climate resilient 
finance
Training of FI staff on climate resilience
Development of climate policies / frameworks 
(environmental policy, risk management strategy, etc.)
Assessment of opportunities / risk for FIs in relation to 
CSA(climate smart agriculture)
Linking FIs and impact investors for refinancing of CSA 
services / products
Sub total 2.6.1
Integration of climate indicators in credit assessment
Selection of climate risks, indicators and data sources
Include indicators in credit assessment 
Establish monitoring system to verify indicators 
Digitalisation of climate sensitive credit assessment
Sub total 2.6.2
Adaptation / development of financial products for 
climate-smart agriculture (CSA)
Screening products and services on climate risks / 
opportunities
Design products and services climate-smart agriculture
Approval of products and services CSA
Pilot testing and monitoring products CSA
Evaluation of financial CSA products and services
Upscaling of financial CSA  products and services
Sub total 2.6.3
ICT4D for value chain development and financial 
services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Piloting & scaling ICT for processors - creating Create 
comprehensive farmer profiles, (access to credit status of 
individual farmers, field data, supply contracts, GPS 
location) 
Connecting FOs to ICT solutions - digital market inf, 
weather inf, digital market platform, supply mgt 
solutions, product traceability, mobile payments, etc 
Connecting farmers data to Simbuka+ & MFIs 
Sub total CT4D for value chain development and 
financial services
Sub total 2.6
Program Embedded Reflection & Learning (M&E) - 
CORDAID
Deep-dive case studies 
Knowledge exchange (learning visits, development 
knowledge products such as factsheets, blogs, and 
documentary video, participation in webinar, 
conference) 
Monitoring activities (field visit, quality data audits, 
quick assessments, human interest stories) 
Maintaining MIS (management information system) 
Quantified regular output monitoring 
MFI annual microscore and one rating
Sub total Program Embedded Reflection & Learning 
(M&E) - CORDAID
Sub total Backward and forward linkages
Total component 2
Component 3 - Policy support and coordination 
Investment costs
Enabling Policy Environment
Enabling policy environment - Coffee
Support for Public-Private Sector Roundtables to engage 
in coffee value chain policy research and development 
Sub total Enabling policy environment - Coffee
Enabling policy environment - Tea
Tea value addition policy & strategy (Develop and 
improve national tea marketing strategy in collaboration 
with RDB) 
Cooperatives Common Services Policy & Strategy 
Sub total Enabling policy environment - Tea
Enabling policy environment - Horticulture
Development of policy briefs for advocacy  on a) 
intercropping in coffee (banana, essential oil plants), b) 
packaging material and c) increasing airfreight capacity 
and maintaining affordable rates d) supply contact 
business models
Support to Rwanda Horticulture Working group for 
organization of annual multistakeholder meeting  on 
addressing policy issues in horticulture Value chain and 
developing action plan
Sub total Enabling policy environment - Horticulture
Specific support to VC platforms
Specific support to VC platforms - Coffee
Capacity building for CEPAR in Public/private dialogue 
approach in advocacy
Sub total Specific support to VC platforms - Coffee
Specific support to VC platforms - Tea
Review and completion of E-commerce platform
Review and completion of National tea register
Review and completion of Tea census
Support to National tea brand program 
C224401
C224402
C224403
C2245
C224501
C224502
C224503
C224504
C224505
C224506
C3
C30
C31
C311
C31101
C312
C31201
C31202
C313
C31301
C31302
C32
C321
C32101
C322
C32201
C32202
C32203
C32204
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,014,774
1,014,774
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
87,884
334,464
380,644
191,184
0
1,325,415
1,325,415
0
0
124,343
425,626
482,132
272,715
Meeting
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
Lumpsum
Meeting
0
0
0
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
0
1
4
5,150
32,136
5,150
2,575
103,000
0
103,000
7,725
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,300
10,300
10,300
10,300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,150
5,150
0
0
5,150
5,150
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,300
10,300
5,150
5,150
103,000
0
103,000
30,900
10,300
5,150
5,150
10,300
0
0
5,150
5,150
0
0
5,150
5,150
103,000
0
103,000
30,900
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,575
2,575
0
0
2,575
2,575
20,600
41,200
41,200
7,725
20,600
7,725
41,200
7,725
41,200
7,725
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
C323
C32301
C32302
C32303
C33
C3301
C3302
C3303
C34
C3401
C3402
C35
C3501
Meeting
Sub total Specific support to VC platforms - Tea
Specific support to VC platforms - Horticulture
Platforms
Cost of establishment of District level plaform (one time office cost for PC and a table-chair-rack)
Cost of platform facilitator and contact person (local youth) - Honorarium and allowancePlatforms
Biannual meetings of district level VC platforms 
Sub total Specific support to VC platforms - Horticulture
Sub total Specific support to VC platforms
Monitoring and Evaluation
Baseline survey
Set-up of electronic participatory M&E system and MIS
Knowledge management activities 
Sub total Monitoring and Evaluation
Vehicles and motorcycles
Vehicles pick-up 4x4 for VCs (3)
Motorbikes for NAEB focal persons (14)
Sub total C.4: Vehicles and Motorcycles
Launching of Project
Recruitment of Project (Job postion published in the 
newspapers, written & oral results conducted)
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Number
Lumpsum
C3502
Organize a worskshop for project startup
C3503
Organize a worskshop for official launching of project
C3504
Worskshop for Project launching  at District levels
Total Lauching of Projects
C36
Office Furnitures and Equipments
SPIU-IFAD 
/NAEB
SPIU-IFAD 
/NAEB
SPIU-IFAD 
/NAEB
SPIU-IFAD 
/NAEB
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
C3601
C3602
C3603
C3604
C37
C371
C37101
C37102
C37103
C37104
C37105
C37106
C37107
C37108
C37109
C37110
C37111
C37112
C37113
C37114
C372
C3721
C372101
C372102
C372103
C372104
C372105
C372106
C372107
C372108
C372109
Office equipment and furniture for NAEB Staff at HQ
Office equipment and furniture for NAEB  Staff/Focal 
Points at District level
SPIU-IFAD 
Lumpsum
SPIU-IFAD 
Lumpsum
IT Equipments (Computers,Printer,Photocopier,Projector 
and Scanner) for NAEB Staff at HQ
SPIU-IFAD 
Lumpsum
IT Equipments (Computers and Printer)for NAEB  
Staff/Focal Points at District level
SPIU-IFAD 
Lumpsum
Subtotal
Total Investment costs
Recurrent costs
Staff salaries
Operations Manager
M&E Specialist
Gender & Social Inclusion Specialist
KM Specialist
Environment and Natural Resources Specialist
Coffee Specialist
Tea Specialist
Horticulture Specialist
Access to Finance Specialist
Procurement Officer
Accountant (2)
Administrative Assistant
Drivers (3)
Focal persons at district (14)
Sub total Staff Salaries
Operational costs
Districts
Transport & com Director of Agriculture
Transport & com Cash Crop Officer
Transport & com District Agronomist
Transport & com Forest & Nat. Res. 
Transport & com Coop Officer
Transport & com SEDO
Transport & com Sector Agronomist
Transport & com Village leaders
District meetings 
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Pers.month
Meetings
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Unit Price Frw 
'000
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
0
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
236,900
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
236,900
4
4
8
1
4
4
8
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
13
14
13
14
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
3
9
42
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
3
9
42
4
4
8
1
1
3
14
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
3
9
42
2
2
4
0
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6
3
9
42
14
14
28
1
2
4
3
14
0
0
0
2
13
14
13
14
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
36
168
168
168
168
168
168
168
1,260
2,520
14
168
168
168
168
168
168
1,260
2,520
168
168
168
168
168
168
1,260
2,520
14
168
168
168
168
168
168
1,260
2,520
672
672
672
672
672
672
5,040
10,080
28
10
7
7
7
7
7
5
5
1,000
721
824
618
40,000
5,000
5,000
55,000
4,960
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
30,000
30,000
6,000
1,000
1,000
2,177
1,600
6,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
10,094
11,536
17,304
10,094
11,536
17,304
38,934
38,934
40,000
10,000
20,000
70,000
165,000
69,446
234,446
0
0
0
12,000
12,000
13,000
14,000
40,000
10,000
20,000
70,000
165,000
69,446
234,446
2,000
2,000
30,000
18,000
52,000
13,000
14,000
28,300
28,300
22,400
77,700
22,400
77,700
2,338
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,844
1,653
1,263
665
326
1,375
40,000
695,730
735,730
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
28,054
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
19,837
30,320
7,980
11,737
231,007
500,036
6,720
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
25,200
50,400
28,000
28,054
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
19,837
30,320
7,980
11,737
231,007
500,036
6,720
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
25,200
50,400
28,000
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
0
0
0
0
7,725
48,925
90,125
90,125
2,884
3,296
4,944
2,884
3,296
4,944
2,884
3,296
4,944
1,442
1,648
2,472
11,124
11,124
11,124
5,562
0
0
5,000
5,000
8,000
5,000
5,000
18,000
16,000
5,000
21,000
16,000
5,000
5,000
26,000
165,000
69,446
0
0
0
0
234,446
0
2,000
2,000
30,000
6,000
6,000
6,000
0
40,000
6,000
6,000
0
0
13,000
14,000
28,300
22,400
0
0
0
0
77,700
0
0
40,000
34,999
174,624
361,695
124,412
7,013
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
4,959
7,580
1,995
2,934
57,752
125,009
1,680
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
6,300
12,600
7,000
7,013
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
4,959
7,580
1,995
2,934
57,752
125,009
1,680
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
6,300
12,600
7,000
7,013
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
4,959
7,580
1,995
2,934
57,752
125,009
1,680
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
6,300
12,600
7,000
7,013
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
5,532
4,959
7,580
1,995
2,934
57,752
125,009
1,680
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
1,176
6,300
12,600
7,000
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Activity No
Activity per component &  sub-component
C372110
C372111
C3722
C372201
C372202
C372203
C372204
C372205
C372206
C372207
C372208
C3723
C372301
C372302
C372303
C372304
C372305
C3724
C372401
C372402
C372403
C372404
C372405
C372406
Promotion materials (District)
Districts annual competition
Sub total Districts
NAEB 
Office running costs
Steering/technical committee meetings
Communication fees 
Promotion materials
Tender committee sitting allowance
Advertisement, publication, awareness campaign, 
mobilization  through media including radio, TV
Refreshment service (different meetings& workshops) 
Hiring a vehicle for field visits
Subtotal
Vehicles and motorcycle operation & Maintenance
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups  
Maintenance fees for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Maintenance fees for  motorcycles
Tyre purchasing
Subtotal Vehicle Operation & Maintenance
Bank charges and commission
(cid:9)Bank charges
(cid:9)Purchase of Cheque and Op books
(cid:9)Bank statement fees
(cid:9)Money transfer fees
(cid:9)Loss on currency exchange and translations
(cid:9)Other commissions
Subtotal
Sub total  Recurrent Costs
Total component 3
Total costs
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD 
Cat
Unit
Quantity 
January 2023-
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 
2022/23 
Q1
Quantity July 2023-June 2024
Amount (January 2023- June 2024) Frw'000
Q3
Q4
 Total 
Quantity 
FY 2023/24 
Unit Price Frw 
'000
1,000
10,000
Total costs 
Jan 2023-
June 2023  
Frw '000
0
0
0
Total costs July 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
14,000
10,000
157,840
Total costs Jan 
2023-June 2024  
Frw '000
14,000
10,000
157,840
Q3
Q4
0
0
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Q2
14
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
14
6
14
1
12
2
12
4
4
4
4
4
3
6
3
14
6
4
2
16
4
4
2
              1 
              1 
              4 
              1 
              1 
1
1
4
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
1,500
500
850
600
1,061
1,000
2,000
3,000
1,744
2,000
1,300
150
330
42
11
4
250
7,290
265
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18,000
1,000
10,200
2,400
4,245
4,000
8,000
12,000
59,845
5,232
12,000
3,900
2,100
1,980
25,212
169
21
61
1,000
29,161
529
30,941
18,000
1,000
10,200
2,400
4,245
4,000
8,000
12,000
59,845
5,232
12,000
3,900
2,100
1,980
25,212
169
21
61
1,000
29,161
529
30,941
773,875
773,875
40,000
1,469,605
1,509,605
45,000
5,678,281
5,723,281
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Q1
7,000
2,500
42,960
4,500
500
2,550
600
1,061
1,000
2,000
3,000
15,211
0
42
5
15
250
7,290
132
7,735
Q2
2,500
35,960
4,500
2,550
600
1,061
1,000
2,000
3,000
14,711
0
42
5
15
250
7,290
132
7,735
Q3
7,000
2,500
42,960
4,500
500
2,550
600
1,061
1,000
2,000
3,000
15,211
5,232
6,000
1,950
1,050
990
15,222
42
5
15
250
7,290
132
7,735
Q4
2,500
35,960
4,500
2,550
600
1,061
1,000
2,000
3,000
14,711
6,000
1,950
1,050
990
9,990
42
5
15
250
7,290
132
7,735
190,916
183,416
206,138
193,406
40,000
225,915
358,040
567,833
317,818
201,800
821,373
1,827,919
1,424,271
1,427,319
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Exchange rate 1 USD =
1,024.83
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
1,025.00
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
13,000
11,197
0
70,000
2,380
19,635
4,702
57,269
34,800
34,800
15,463
10,800
15,463
0
0
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
12.68
10.92
0.00
68.29
2.32
19.16
4.59
55.87
0.00
33.95
33.95
15.09
0.00
10.54
15.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
15,463
15.09
0
0
0
32,400
37,800
350
1,500
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
31.61
36.88
0.00
0.34
1.46
0.00
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
69,600
67.90
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
13,000
11,197
0
70,000
2,380
19,635
4,702
57,269
0
34,800
34,800
15,463
0
10,800
15,463
0
15,463
0
0
0
0
32,400
37,800
0
350
1,500
0
69,600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12.68
10.92
0.00
68.29
2.32
19.16
4.59
55.87
0.00
33.95
33.95
15.09
0.00
10.54
15.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
31.61
36.88
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.34
1.46
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
67.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
215,064
209.82
661,686
646
2,560
417,440
206,745
1,500
1,771
2,560
0
2.50
407.26
201.70
0.00
0.00
1.46
0.00
1.73
2.50
0.00
632,576
617
100%
29
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
10
45,000
90,000
510,000
43.90
87.80
497.56
100%
100%
100%
0.00
100%
42.61
0.98
0.47
100%
100%
100%
43,680
1,000
480
400
0.39
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
0.00
100%
100%
690,560
674
18
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
104,415
101.87
0
3,966
3.87
90,126
87.93
100%
0
496,934
0.00
484.81
100%
100%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
215,064
661,686
2,560
417,440
206,745
0
0
1,500
0
1,771
2,560
0
632,576
45,000
90,000
510,000
0
43,680
1,000
480
400
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
690,560
0
0
0
104,415
0
3,966
90,126
0
496,934
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
209.82
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
646
0
0
0
0
0
2.50
407.26
201.70
0.00
0.00
1.46
0.00
1.73
2.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
617
0
0
0
0
0
43.90
87.80
497.56
0.00
42.61
0.98
0.47
0.39
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
674
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
101.87
0.00
3.87
87.93
0.00
484.81
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
695,441
2,680,262
678
2,615
9
66
80,000
78.05
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
3
80,000
78
8,000
7.80
100%
40,000
39.02
100%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0.00
100%
48,000
47
4
40,000
39.02
100%
40,000
39.02
100%
0
0
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
80,000
208,000
78
203
2,888,262
2,818
4
77
11
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
695,441
2,680,262
80,000
0
0
80,000
8,000
40,000
0
0
48,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
80,000
208,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,888,262
0
0
0
0
70,040
68.33
3,296
3.22
20,600
20.10
2,472
2.41
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
70,040
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
3,296
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
20,600
2,472
96,408
96,408
94
4
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
678
2,615
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
78.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
78
0
0
0
0
0
7.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
39.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
47
0
0
0
0
0
39.02
39.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
78
203
2,818
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
68.33
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.41
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
94
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
100%
0.00
0.00
HPI
0%
0%
CORDAID
0%
0%
Benef.
0%
0%
IFAD Loan
0
0
GoS Loan
0
0
GOR
0
0
HPI
0
0
CORDAID
0
0
Benef.
0
0
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7,500
1,350
7.32
100%
1.32
100%
34,763
33.91
100%
9,000
6,000
8.78
100%
5.85
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
7,500
1,350
34,763
9,000
6,000
0
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
30,000
29.27
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
30,000
30,000
29.27
100%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
30,000
0
0
40,000
39.02
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
40,000
158,613
154.74
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
23,175
23,175
22.61
100%
22.61
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
23,175
23,175
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GoS Loan
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GOR
HPI
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CORDAID
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Benef.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
33.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
8.78
5.85
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
29.27
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
29.27
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
39.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
22.61
22.61
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
9,270
9.04
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
55,620
0.00
54
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
5
0
0
0
0
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
100%
0.00
0.00
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
100%
0.00
0
0.00
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
16
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
9,270
55,620
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
9.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
54
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
100%
100%
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
0.00
29
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
310,641
0.00
0.00
0.00
303
0.00
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0.00
100%
20,600
20.10
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
20,000
19.51
100%
10,000
185,400
9.76
180.88
100%
100%
236,000
230
9
0
0
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
36,000
35.12
100%
20,000
19.51
100%
0
0.00
100%
300,000
0
0
292.68
0.00
0.00
100%
100%
100%
356,000
347
8
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
152,028
0
0
20,600
0
0
0
20,000
10,000
185,400
236,000
0
0
36,000
20,000
0
300,000
0
0
356,000
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
0.00
0.00
0
0
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
148
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
19.51
9.76
180.88
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
230
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
35.12
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
19.51
0.00
292.68
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
347
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
20,600
20.10
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10,300
10.05
100%
0%
0%
0%
10,300
10.05
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
20,600
20.10
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10,300
10.05
100%
10,300
10.05
100%
82,400
0
0
0.00
100%
80
8
0.00
100%
20,600
20.10
100%
0
0.00
100%
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
20,600
10,300
10,300
20,600
10,300
10,300
0
82,400
0
20,600
0
0
32,960
32.16
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
32,960
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
20,600
74,160
52
6
0
0
0
0
0
53,560
33,472
32.66
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
0%
25,104
28,690
27.99
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
19,127
18.66
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
81,289
79
0%
0%
21,518
14,345
60,967
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,368
7,173
4,782
20,322
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
80
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
32.16
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
52
0
0
0
0
0
24.49
0.00
0.00
8.16
0.00
0.00
20.99
0.00
0.00
7.00
0.00
0.00
14.00
0.00
0.00
4.67
0.00
0.00
59
0
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
0
33,472
32.66
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
0%
25,104
90,853
88.64
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
0%
68,140
40,000
39.02
75%
0%
0%
25%
0%
0%
30,000
164,325
160
123,244
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
245,614
240
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
3
0
3
100%
100%
100%
0
3
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0
6
100%
100%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
184,211
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,368
22,713
10,000
41,081
0
0
0
0
0
61,404
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
24.49
0.00
0.00
8.16
0.00
0.00
66.48
0.00
0.00
22.16
0.00
0.00
29.27
0.00
0.00
9.76
0.00
0.00
120
0
0
40
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
180
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
7
0
0
0
0
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
4
0
0
0
0
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
4
0
0
0
0
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
IFAD 
Loan
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
994,174
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
950
6
77
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
912,171
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
61,404
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.00
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
890
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
1,304,815
1,253
106
0
0
0
0
0
1,064,199
0
0
61,404
0
0
1,038
0
0
60
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
10,300
10,300
10.05
10
100%
1
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0.00
100%
100%
0.00
0
0.00
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10,300
10,300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,300
10.05
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10,300
10,300
0
0
5,150
2
0
0
0
0
0
10,300
10
0.00
0.00
5.02
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
5,150
5,150
5
0
103,000
0
103,000
30,900
0.00
100.49
0.00
100.49
30.15
82%
82%
82%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
18%
18%
18%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
84,460
0
84,460
30,900
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18,540
0
18,540
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
5.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
82.40
0.00
82.40
30.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
18.09
0.00
18.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Comments
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD Loan
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
236,900
10,094
11,536
17,304
38,934
0
40,000
10,000
20,000
231
9.85
11.25
16.88
38
100%
100%
100%
39.02
9.76
19.51
82%
100%
100%
70,000
68
0
165,000
69,446
234,446
2,000
2,000
0.00
160.98
67.75
229
82%
82%
1.95
100%
1.95
100%
30,000
29.27
100%
18,000
17.56
100%
52,000
51
4
13,000
12.68
82%
14,000
13.66
82%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
18%
0%
0%
18%
18%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
18%
0%
18%
0%
28,300
27.61
82%
0%
18%
0%
22,400
21.85
82%
0%
18%
0%
77,700
76
735,730
718
28,054
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
19,837
30,320
7,980
11,737
231,007
27.37
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
19.35
29.58
7.78
11.45
225.37
500,036
488
0
0
6,720
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
25,200
50,400
28,000
0.00
0.00
6.56
4.59
4.59
4.59
4.59
4.59
24.59
49.17
27.32
3
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10,094
11,536
17,304
32,800
10,000
20,000
135,300
56,946
2,000
2,000
30,000
18,000
52,000
10,660
11,480
23,206
18,368
63,714
136,314
28,054
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
22,128
19,837
30,320
7,980
11,737
231,007
500,036
6,720
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
4,704
25,200
50,400
28,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
0
0
29,700
12,500
0
0
0
0
0
2,340
2,520
5,094
4,032
13,986
13,986
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
GoS Loan
GOR
HPI
CORDAID
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
9.85
11.25
16.88
32.00
9.76
19.51
132.00
55.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.95
0.00
1.95
0.00
29.27
0.00
17.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.02
0.00
0.00
28.98
12.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
51
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10.40
0.00
11.20
0.00
2.28
2.46
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
22.64
0.00
4.97
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
17.92
0.00
3.93
0.00
0.00
0.00
62
133
27.37
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
21.59
19.35
29.58
7.78
11.45
225.37
488
6.56
4.59
4.59
4.59
4.59
4.59
24.59
49.17
27.32
0
0
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
 % Financing
Financiers Frw '000
Equivalent Financing in USD '000
Total Frw '000
Total USD 
'000
14,000
10,000
13.66
9.76
157,840
154
IFAD 
Loan GoS Loan GOR
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
100%
HPI
0%
0%
CORDAID
0%
0%
Benef.
0%
0%
IFAD Loan
14,000
10,000
157,840
GoS Loan
0
0
0
GOR
0
0
0
HPI
0
0
0
CORDAID
0
0
0
Benef.
0
0
0
0
18,000
1,000
10,200
2,400
4,245
0.00
17.56
0.98
9.95
2.34
4.14
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
4,000
3.90
100%
8,000
12,000
7.80
11.71
82%
82%
59,845
58
5,232
12,000
3,900
2,100
1,980
25,212
25
169
21
61
1,000
29,161
529
5.10
11.71
3.80
2.05
1.93
0.16
0.02
0.06
0.98
28.45
0.52
82%
82%
82%
82%
82%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
30,941
773,875
30
755
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
18%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
18,000
1,000
10,200
2,400
4,245
4,000
6,560
9,840
56,245
4,290
9,840
3,198
1,722
1,624
20,674
169
21
61
1,000
29,161
529
30,941
765,736
1,509,605
1,473
10
0
0
0
0
0
902,050
5,702,681
5,543
4,854,511
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,440
2,160
3,600
942
2,160
702
378
356
4,538
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,138
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
22,124
0
22,124
61,404
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Comments
Benef.
IFAD 
Loan
13.66
9.76
GoS Loan
0.00
0.00
GOR
HPI
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CORDAID
0.00
0.00
154
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
17.56
0.98
9.95
2.34
4.14
3.90
6.40
9.60
55
0
4.19
9.60
3.12
1.68
1.58
20
0
0.16
0.02
0.06
0.98
28.45
0.52
30
747
880
4,736
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.40
2.11
0.92
2.11
0.68
0.37
0.35
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4
4
0
8
22
22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
 PSAC  Action Plan and Budget for 18 months (Jan 2023-June 2024)
July  2022
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Guidance Note
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
Rwanda
Project Name:
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  
(PSAC)
Project ID:
2000003934
Version
1.0
Version Date
11-Jul-22
Prepared by:
Murwanashyaka Janvier
Approved by:
Rwamulangwa Stephen
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
-
-
-
2,592,131,700.00 
104,415,000.00 
577,547,000.00 
-
3,274,093,700.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Prior Review Thresholds
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Non-Consulting 
Services
Prior Review
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook).
> US$ 100.000
> US$ 200.000
> US$100.000
Firms - 
Consulting 
Services
> US$ 100.000
Individuals - 
Consulting 
Services
> US$ 100.000
Procurement Method Thresholds
Shopping
Goods
Works 
Non-Consulting 
Services
Individuals
Firms
< US$ 100.000
< US$ 200.000
< US$ 200.000
NCB
ICB
> US$ 100.000 to 
< US$ 250.000
> US$ 200.000 to 
< US$ 1.000.000
> US$ 100.000 to 
< US$ 200.000
> US$ 250.000
> US$ 1.000.000
> US$ 200.000
ICS/CQS
LCS
QCBS
< US$ 100.000
< US$ 100.000
> US$ 100.000 to 
< US$ 200.000
> US$ 100.000 to 
< US$ 200.000
> US$ 200.000
> US$ 200.000
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID: …........
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Prepared by: Murwanashyaka Janvier
Total Amount
USD
0.00
0.00
LCU
577,547,000
Plan
0.00
Actual
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
AWPB/Component Ref № Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding Project Area
Plan vs. Actual Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU) 
Plan vs. Actual Submission of 
C11115                                      
C11201
1
Recruitment of an individual consultant for the identification 
and mapping of old coffee trees to be replaced and coffee 
trees to be rehabilitated
Actual
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
30,926,000
Plan
REOI
N/A
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch 
Date
EOI 
Submission 
Deadline
Submission 
of Shortlist 
Report
No 
Objection 
Date
Submission 
of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ 
Launch Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Apr-23
N/A
17-Apr-23
8-May-23
22-May-23
N/A
C12106
2
Recruitment of an individual consultant to conduct of a 
performance review on fertilizer Revolving Scheme 
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
Actual
3
C21102                               
C21103                      
C21104                    
C21105
4
C21301                                 
C21302                        
C21303                                    
C21304                     
C21305                       
C21306                          
C21307                             
C21308                              
C21309                      
C21310                          
C21311
C218103
C32201
C32203
5
6
7
Recruitment of a consulting company to provide qualified 
Farmer Field School master trainers specialized in coffee
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Post Review
QCBS
Actual
Recruitment of a consulting company to provide qualified 
Farmer Field School master trainers specialized in horticulture
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Prior Review QCBS
Actual
Recruitment of an individual consultant  for the appellation, 
patenting and promotion activities
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
Actual
Recruitment of a consulting firm for  review and completion of 
E-commerce platform
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Prior Review QCBS
Actual
Recruitment of a consulting firm for review and completion of 
Tea census
IFAD
Plan
Yes
Prior Review QCBS
Actual
C3301
8
Recruitment of a consulting firm for PSAC baseline survey
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
QCBS
Actual
C218103
9
Recruitment of an individual consultant  for setting-up the 
electronic participatory M&E system and MIS
IFAD
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
15,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Apr-23
N/A
24-Apr-23
15-May-23
29-May-23
N/A
Actual
96,408,000
Plan
14-Apr-23
N/A
16-Apr-23
7-May-23
28-May-23
N/A
1-Jun-23
N/A
3-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
N/A
Actual
158,613,000
Plan
14-Jan-23
28-Jan-23
30-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
13-Mar-23
27-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
7-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
9-May-23
30-May-23
6-Jun-23
Actual
20,600,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-Apr-23
N/A
29-Apr-23
20-May-23
3-Jun-23
N/A
Actual
103,000,000
Plan
1-Mar-23
15-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
7-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
12-May-23
16-May-23
23-May-23
25-May-23
24-Jun-23
15-Jul-23
22-Jul-23
Actual
103,000,000
Plan
23-Feb-23
9-Mar-23
11-Mar-23
1-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
6-May-23
10-May-23
17-May-23
19-May-23
18-Jun-23
9-Jul-23
16-Jul-23
-
Actual
40,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-23
N/A
7-Jun-23
7-Jul-23
28-Jul-23
N/A
Actual
10,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-Jul-23
N/A
29-Jul-23
19-Aug-23
2-Sep-23
N/A
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 2
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID: …........
Approved by:Rwamulangwa Stephen
Prepared by: Murwanashyaka Janvier
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref № Description*
C11115                                      
C11201
1
Recruitment of an individual consultant for the identification 
and mapping of old coffee trees to be replaced and coffee 
trees to be rehabilitated
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' 
Qualifications 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Contract Award & Signature
Submission 
of CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract 
and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No. Vendor Name/ID Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
N/A
N/A
Plan
3-Jun-23
17-Jun-23
21-Jun-23
N/A
23-Jun-23
30-Jun-23
-
30,926,000
20-Jun-24
Actual
C12106
2
Recruitment of an individual consultant to conduct of a 
performance review on fertilizer Revolving Scheme 
N/A
N/A
Plan
10-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
28-Jun-23
N/A
30-Jun-23
7-Jul-23
-
15,000,000
3-Oct-23
Actual
3
C21102                               
C21103                      
C21104                    
C21105
Recruitment of a consulting company to provide qualified 
Farmer Field School master trainers specialized in coffee
7-Aug-23
N/A
Plan
21-Aug-23
4-Sep-23
8-Sep-23
N/A
10-Sep-23
17-Sep-23
-
96,408,000
17-Sep-24
Actual
4
C21301                                 
C21302                        
C21303                                    
C21304                     
C21305                       
C21306                          
C21307                             
C21308                              
C21309                      
C21310                          
C21311
C218103
C32201
C32203
5
6
7
Recruitment of a consulting company to provide qualified 
Farmer Field School master trainers specialized in horticulture
20-Jun-23
4-Jul-23
Plan
18-Jul-23
1-Aug-23
5-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
21-Aug-23
28-Aug-23
-
158,613,000
28-Aug-24
Actual
Recruitment of an individual consultant  for the appellation, 
patenting and promotion activities
N/A
N/A
Plan
15-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
5-Jul-23
12-Jul-23
-
20,600,000
12-Oct-23
Actual
Recruitment of a consulting firm for  review and completion of 
E-commerce platform
5-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
Plan
2-Sep-23
16-Sep-23
20-Sep-23
4-Oct-23
6-Oct-23
13-Oct-23
-
103,000,000
13-Jan-24
Actual
Recruitment of a consulting firm for review and completion of 
Tea census
30-Jul-23
13-Aug-23
Plan
27-Aug-23
10-Sep-23
14-Sep-23
28-Sep-23
30-Sep-23
7-Oct-23
-
103,000,000
7-Oct-24
Actual
C3301
8
Recruitment of a consulting firm for PSAC baseline survey
11-Aug-23
N/A
Plan
25-Aug-23
8-Sep-23
12-Sep-23
N/A
14-Sep-23
21-Sep-23
-
40,000,000
21-Dec-23
Actual
C218103
9
Recruitment of an individual consultant  for setting-up the 
electronic participatory M&E system and MIS
N/A
N/A
Plan
14-Sep-23
28-Sep-23
2-Oct-23
N/A
4-Oct-23
11-Oct-23
-
10,000,000
11-Mar-24
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 2
Printed on: 04/08/2022
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Bid Evaluation
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
3-Apr-23
5-Apr-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
Plan
1-Jul-23
Date
Contract
Award
15-Jul-23
Date
Contract
Signature
20-Jul-23
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
-
587,588,200
Date
Contract
Completion
20-Jul-24
Remarks
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive 
Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Contract Award & Signature
Procurement Plan - Goods
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID: …...........
Prepared by:Murwanashyaka Janvier
Approved by: Rwamulangwa Stephen
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
Acquisition of tubings,urea, fungicides,watering cans,pruning 
saws,pruning shears (secaterurs), tubings for coffee replacement 
and rehabilitation; nursery material (tubings and sheetings) for tea 
plantation;manure/organic fertiliezer and pesticides  (AgroPy 
product) for essential oil 
1
C11104                      
C11105                  
C11106                            
C11107                          
C11301                      
C11302                    
C11401                           
C12102                               
C12201                            
C12402                   
C12402
Actual
C11108
2
Maintanance of coffee sedlings in nursries
N/A
23-Jul-23
30-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
6-Aug-23
N/A
Plan
20-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
2-Sep-23
Actual
C11402
3
Maintanance of agroforestry seedlings in nursries
N/A
30-Oct-23
6-Nov-23
N/A
N/A
13-Nov-23
N/A
Plan
27-Nov-23
2-Dec-23
9-Dec-23
Actual
C12103
4
Preparation and their maintenance of tea seedlings 
N/A
16-Oct-23
23-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
30-Oct-23
N/A
Plan
14-Nov-23
27-Nov-23
2-Dec-23
Actual
C12301                  
C12302
5
Mango and avocado plantation
N/A
16-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
30-Apr-23
N/A
Plan
14-May-23
27-May-23
2-Jun-23
Actual
2-Sep-24
9-Dec-24
2-Dec-24
2-Jun-24
C12303
6
Macadamia plantation
N/A
22-Mar-23
6-May-23
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
N/A
Plan
3-Jun-23
17-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
-
510,000,000
22-Jun-24
C13203
7
Acquisition of electronic weighing scales
N/A
21-Aug-23
4-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
4-Sep-23
N/A
Plan
4-Sep-23
6-Sep-23
8-Sep-23
-
3,966,000
8-Oct-23
Actual
C13204
C13205                        
C13206                        
C3401
8
9
Acquisition of Green leaf server (software based database of 
farmers' green leaves collection and revenue)  
N/A
22-May-23
21-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
12-Jul-23
N/A
Plan
19-Jul-23
2-Aug-23
7-Aug-23
-
90,126,000
7-Oct-23
Actual
Acquisition of 1 pick up truck for Ferwacothe/cooperative common 
services, 11 green leaves transportation trucks, and 3 vehicles 
pick-up 4x4 for VCs 
N/A
22-Apr-23
6-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
27-Jun-23
N/A
Plan
4-Jul-23
18-Jul-23
23-Jul-23
-
700,559,000
23-Oct-23
Actual
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 4
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU) 
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-Qualification
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date PreQual Closing Date Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
Bidding Process
C3402
10
Acquisition of 14 motorbikes for NAEB focal persons 
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
Actual
Acquisition of promotional materials
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
11
C3502                                             
C3503                              
C3504                        
C372110                      
C372204 
Actual
C3601                           
C3602
12
Office equipment and furniture for NAEB Staff at HQ
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
Actual
1
1
1
C3603                               
C3604
13
IT Equipments (Computers,Printer,Photocopier,Projector and 
Scanner) for NAEB Staff at HQ and for NAEB  Staff/Focal Points 
at District level
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review Use of RISA framework contracts upon 
1
request
Refreshment service (different meetings& workshops) 
Yes
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
Actual
14
C11110                                   
C11111                             
C11112                    
C32301                                     
C32302                                 
C32303                              
C3502                                             
C3503                              
C3504                           
C372207
C372301
15
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NS
Actual
C372302
16
Supply of fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups  
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
C372304
17
Maintenance of   motorcyles
Yes
Yes
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NS
Actual
Actual
C372305
18
Supply of tyres
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NS
Actual
1
1
1
1
1
69,466,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-23
Actual
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Sep-23
Actual
32,900,500
-
-
27,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
29-Jun-23
Actual
50,700,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
-
Actual
69,500,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-May-23
Actual
5,232,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-Jun-23
-
Actual
12,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2-Aug-23
-
Actual
2,100,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-23
-
Actual
1,980,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Oct-23
-
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 4
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Bid Evaluation
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Contract Award & Signature
C11104                      
C3402
1
10
Acquisition of tubings,urea, fungicides,watering cans,pruning 
Acquisition of 14 motorbikes for NAEB focal persons 
N/A
22-Jul-23
21-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
11-Sep-23
N/A
Plan
18-Sep-23
Actual
Date
Contract
Award
2-Oct-23
Date
Contract
Signature
7-Oct-23
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
-
69,466,000
7-Jan-24
Acquisition of promotional materials
N/A
22-Sep-23
22-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
12-Nov-23
N/A
Plan
19-Nov-23
3-Dec-23
8-Dec-23
-
32,900,500
8-Dec-24
11
C3502                                             
C3503                              
C3504                        
C372110                      
C372204 
Actual
C3601                           
C3602
12
Office equipment and furniture for NAEB Staff at HQ
N/A
1-Jul-23
31-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
21-Aug-23
N/A
Plan
28-Aug-23
11-Sep-23
16-Sep-23
-
27,000,000
16-Sep-24
Actual
C3603                               
C3604
13
IT Equipments (Computers,Printer,Photocopier,Projector and 
Scanner) for NAEB Staff at HQ and for NAEB  Staff/Focal Points 
at District level
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
-
50,700,000
Actual
Refreshment service (different meetings& workshops) 
N/A
12-May-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
21-May-23
N/A
Plan
28-May-23
11-Jun-23
16-Jun-23
-
69,500,000
16-Jun-24
14
C11110                                   
C11111                             
C11112                    
C32301                                     
C32302                                 
C32303                              
C3502                                             
C3503                              
C3504                           
C372207
Actual
C372301
15
Insurance for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups 
N/A
28-Jun-23
12-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
N/A
Plan
19-Jul-23
21-Jul-23
23-Jul-23
-
5,232,000
23-Jul-24
Actual
C372302
16
Supply of fuel for 4 WD Twin Cab pickups  
N/A
4-Aug-23
18-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
2-Oct-23
N/A
Plan
14-Oct-23
21-Oct-23
23-Oct-23
-
12,000,000
23-Oct-24
C372304
17
Maintenance of   motorcyles
N/A
21-Jul-23
4-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
4-Aug-23
N/A
Plan
4-Aug-23
6-Aug-23
8-Aug-23
-
2,100,000
8-Aug-24
Actual
C372305
18
Supply of tyres
N/A
21-Oct-23
4-Nov-23
N/A
N/A
4-Nov-23
N/A
Plan
4-Nov-23
6-Nov-23
8-Nov-23
-
1,980,000
8-Nov-24
Actual
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 4 of 4
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Procurement Plan - Goods
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID: …...........
Prepared by:Murwanashyaka Janvier
Approved by: Rwamulangwa Stephen
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
Basic Data
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU) 
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-Qualification
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date PreQual Closing Date Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
Bidding Process
Total Amount
USD
0.00
0.00
LCU
2,592,131,700 Plan
0.00 Actual
Acquisition of tubings,urea, fungicides,watering cans,pruning 
saws,pruning shears (secaterurs), tubings for coffee replacement 
and rehabilitation; nursery material (tubings and sheetings) for tea 
plantation;manure/organic fertiliezer and pesticides  (AgroPy 
product) for essential oil 
1
C11104                      
C11105                  
C11106                            
C11107                          
C11301                      
C11302                    
C11401                           
C12102                               
C12201                            
C12402                   
C12402
IFAD
Plan
Lot 1: Tubings,urea, fungicides,watering 
cans,pruning saws,pruning shears 
(secaterurs), tubings for coffee replacement 
and rehabilitation                                          Lot 
2:Nursery material (tubings and sheetings) for 
tea plantation                                                                                                      
Lot 3;manure/organic fertiliezer and pesticides  
(AgroPy product) for agroforesty and fruit 
plantation
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review ICB
C11108
2
Maintanance of coffee sedlings in nursries
C11402
3
Maintanance of agroforestry seedlings in nursries
C12103
4
Preparation and their maintenance of tea seedlings 
C12301                  
C12302
5
Mango and avocado plantation
C12303
6
Macadamia plantation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review Community Participation Approach
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review Community Participation Approach
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review Community Participation Approach
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review Community Participation Approach
Actual
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review ICB
Actual
C13203
7
Acquisition of electronic weighing scales
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NS
Actual
C13204
C13205                        
C13206                        
C3401
8
9
Acquisition of Green leaf server (software based database of 
farmers' green leaves collection and revenue)  
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review NCB
Acquisition of 1 pick up truck for Ferwacothe/cooperative common 
services, 11 green leaves transportation trucks, and 3 vehicles 
pick-up 4x4 for VCs 
IFAD
N/A
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review ICB
Actual
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
587,588,200
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Mar-23
Actual
-
57,269,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
30,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
206,745,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
135,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
510,000,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Mar-23
Actual
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Aug-23
Actual
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-May-23
Actual
3,966,000
90,126,000
-
-
-
700,559,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Apr-23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 4
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Procurement Plan -Works
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID:….................
Approved by: Rwamulangwa Stephen
Prepared by:Murwanashyaka Janvier
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
Total Amount
USD
0.00
0.00
LCU
104,415,000
0.00
Plan
Actual
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Plan vs. Actual Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection 
Date
PreQual 
Invitation Date
PreQual 
Closing Date
Submission 
of PreQual 
Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
BD
C13201
1
Construction of hangars for Tea
IFAD
Plan
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
1
104,415,000
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-May-23
Actual
-
-
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 2
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Procurement Plan -Works
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness  (PSAC)
Project ID:….................
Approved by: Rwamulangwa Stephen
Prepared by:Murwanashyaka Janvier
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive 
Bidding 
ICB: International 
Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) 
Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
1.0
11-Jul-22
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Component Ref №
Description
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation 
Date
Bid Closing-
Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval 
Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No. Vendor 
Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
C13201
1
Construction of hangars for Tea
N/A
22-May-23
21-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
12-Jul-23
N/A
Plan
19-Jul-23
2-Aug-23
7-Aug-23
Date
Contract
Completion
7-Nov-23
Remarks
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 2
Printed on: 04/08/2022
Day Ranges These tables provide estimated timelines by procurement methods, based on experience and guidance in the Procurement Handbook where specified.
The approximate number of days are used in the default Procurement Plan Formulas. Timelines in the Approx fields/Formulas  are not prescriptive, and may be modified by the project.
Approx figures entered will be highlighted/flagged, if below the Minimun number of days. Zero indicates steps that are not applicable to the method, and are indicated as N/A in the Formulas.
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
7
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
7
7
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
3
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
21
21
10
21
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
14
14
7
7
7
7
14
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
21
30
45
21
30
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
30
45
70
30
45
70
14
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
30
45
45
45
45
45
7
45
45
45
45
45
45
0
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
CQS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
5
5
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
4
N/A- Start Date
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
30
45
45
21
14
14
30
14
21
21
14
14
7
45
60
60
60
30
30
45
30
30
60
30
30
30
30
45
45
45
21
30
30
21
25
45
21
21
30
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
0
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
0
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
3
0
0
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
21
0
0
21
14
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
21
21
21
0
0
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
10
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
14
14
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
11
7
7
11
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
7
7
15
7
7
15
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
7
7
12
12
12
12
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
1
7
7
7
7
7
1
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
3
15
15
14
15
15
5
14
14
14
14
5
5
5
2
14
14
7
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
5
3
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
16
59
68
83
45
54
123
34
78
93
93
120
135
135
43
128
143
155
86
97
231
73
147
172
172
223
247
247
26
149
164
103
83
90
171
48
99
117
117
178
185
185
Approx 
Months/Days
0m 26d 
4m 28d 
5m 12d 
3m 12d 
2m 23d 
2m 30d 
5m 19d 
1m 17d 
3m 8d 
3m 26d 
3m 26d 
5m 26d 
6m 3d 
6m 3d 
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date Contract Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx Min Max Approx Min Max Approx
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
21
14
14
14
14
14
21
14
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
14
14
14
0
0
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
21
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
14
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
14
12
12
12
12
14
14
12
12
12
12
14
0
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
14
7
7
7
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
14
21
21
21
14
14
14
21
21
21
14
14
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
14
7
7
7
7
0
14
7
7
7
7
0
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
155
170
170
132
118
118
111
88
95
88
74
74
49
268
283
283
259
220
234
190
173
175
181
142
142
136
226
204
204
183
152
128
147
125
129
128
97
82
101
Approx 
Months/Days
7m 13d 
6m 22d 
6m 22d 
6m 1d 
4m 31d 
4m 7d 
4m 26d 
4m 4d 
4m 8d 
4m 7d 
3m 6d 
2m 22d 
3m 10d 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table of Contents 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES .................................................................. 2 
I.1: DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................... 2 
I.2: TARGETING STRATEGIES ....................................................................................... 3 
I.3: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES ........................................... 23 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES ............................................ 33 
II.1: COMPONENT A: INVESTMENT TO ENHANCE CLIMATE SMART PRODUCTION AND 
PRODUCTIVITY OF SELECTED EXPORT-DRIVEN VALUE CHAIN ............................................ 33 
II.2: COMPONENT B: ENABLING BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT ALONG SELECTED EXPORT-DRIVEN 
VALUE CHAINS ....................................................................................................... 78 
II.3: COMPONENT C: PROJECT SUPPORT AND COORDINATION ....................................... 124 
PART III: PROJECT PROCEDURES AND PLANNING ............................................. 134 
III.1: PLANNING AND SUPERVISION ........................................................................ 134 
III.2: MONITORING AND EVALUATION, KM, AND COMMUNICATION ................................ 137 
III.3: FINANCIAL MANGAMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS .............................. 144 
III.4: PROCUREMENT ............................................................................................ 150 
PART IV: ANNEXES ............................................................................................. 162 
ANNEX 1: DRAFT TORS OF PROJECT STAFF ................................................................. 162 
ANNEX 2: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR RECRUITMENT OF THE SERVICE PROVIDERS TO 
IMPELMENT ENCHANCED GALS+ IN PSAC ................................................................. 179 
ANNEX 3: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE BASELINE SURVEY ................................ 186 
ANNEX 4: PROCUREMENT SUPERVISION PLAN ............................................................. 195 
ANNEX 5: PROCUREMENT RISK MATRIX ..................................................................... 202 
ANNEX 6: REFERENCE OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU) TEMPLATE ............... 208 
0 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.1: DEFINITIONS  
1. 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) comprises the actions needed to transform and 
reorient  agricultural  systems  to  effectively  support  development  and  ensure  food  security 
under  a  changing  climate.  It  aims  at  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity  and 
incomes and adapting and building resilience to climate change. The term  covers practices 
such as Conservation Agriculture, water and soil management, integrated production systems 
with efficient use of resources and less external inputs, diversification to increase resilience, 
etc. 
Cooperative1 is an autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their 
2. 
common  economic,  social,  and  cultural  needs  and  aspirations  through  a  jointly-owned  and 
democratically-controlled  enterprise,  according  to  internationally  recognized  co-operative 
values and principles. A cooperative: 
• 
fulfils a social or environmental objective, or is formed to fulfil its members’ 
needs; 
•  has democratic ownership and control; 
•  has a different way of working and unique legal structure that differentiates 
it from a conventional business. 
3. 
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach is a methodology originally developed by the 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO)  as  a  participatory  approach  for  people-centered 
leading.  Practical  field  exercises  using  direct  observation,  discussion  and  decision  making 
encourage  learning-by-doing  and  participants  can  exchange  knowledge  in  a  risk-free 
environment.  Local  knowledge  and  outside  scientific  insights  are  tested,  validated  and 
integrated directly in farmers’ gardens, under their localized ecosystems and socio-economic 
settings. 
Food  insecurity  is  the  inability  to  obtain  sufficient  food  (in  terms  of  calories)  and 
4. 
other essential goods and services to lead a healthy life. 
5. 
Partners of the Project are strategic agencies, entities or organizations who support 
the achievement of Project objectives, either national, regional or international. While these 
may be paid for undertaking specific activities or supplying specific services, they differ from 
implementing agencies in the modalities in which these activities are planned and executed. 
Financing may not be involved at all. 
6. 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) is an annex to the Project Design Report 
(PDR) provides practical guidance to Project implementers on key implementation aspects. It 
describes  in  detail  how  the  programme  components  and  activities  outlined  in  the  PDR  are 
intended  to  be  implemented.  The  PIM  outlines  the  detailed  mechanisms,  processes  and 
procedures,  formats,  eligibility  criteria  etc.  which  will  ensure  efficient  programme 
implementation  and  achievement  of  the  envisaged  programme  results.  The  PIM  is  a  living 
document and may be updated at any time, as needs arise, during implementation. 
1 Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) definition. 
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
7. 
Time  and  Labor  Saving  Technologies  (TLST)  are  tools  and  equipment  which 
reduce the drudgery and/or improve the  efficiency  of performing various farming, off-farm 
and household activities, such as the use of draught animals for land preparation, planting, 
weeding  and  rural  transport,  cooking  on  fuel  efficient  stoves,  harvesting  roof  water  for 
domestic purposes, agro processing and value addition. 
8. 
Performance  based  grant  facility  (PBGF)  is  the  facility  aimed  at  increasing  the 
availability  of  term  funding  to  finance  agriculture  investments.  This  model  will  involve  the 
compulsory  matching  of  the  grant  to  a  loan.  The  beneficiary  avails  the  grant  benefit  after 
complete repayment of loan along with interest on full amount (loan + grant component).   
I.2: TARGETING STRATEGIES  
Project’s goal and outreach. The overall project goal is ‘to increase incomes of the 
9. 
rural  poor,  by  supporting  inclusive  and  sustainable  agri-exports’  value  chains’.  The  project 
development objective is ‘to support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-driven value 
chains, by increasing their climate resilient productive capacity and market access’. 
10. 
Targeting approach. PSAC will use a variety of targeting mechanisms to implement 
the project in a manner that is sensitive to the various needs and constraints of smallholder 
women and men farmers, as well as youth and specific vulnerable groups.  
Geographical  targeting.  The  project  will  target  a  total  of  fourteen  (14)  districts 
11. 
distributed across Rwanda, with a particular emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, 
that  are  also  including  some  of  the  most  vulnerable  rural  population.  These  will  be: 
Nyamasheke,  Rutsiro,  Karongi,  Nyabihu  and  Rusizi in  Western  Province;  Huye,  Nyaruguru, 
Nyamagabe, Ruhango and Nyanza in Southern  Province; Rulindo and Musanze in Northern 
Province and Rwamagana and Bugesera in Eastern Province. In addition to these, Kayonza 
district will be targeted solely for the purpose of conducting trials on new improved essential 
oils varieties. 
The final selection of the districts and their respective sectors has been based on the 
12. 
following  criteria:  (i)  high  poverty  rates  and  high  rates  of  food  insecurity;  (ii)  comparative 
advantage for the development of targeted export-driven value chains, such as the existence 
of  a  traditional  production  basin,  the  proximity  of  a  strong  market,  and  favourable  agro-
climatic conditions; and (iii) alignment and development of strategic partnerships with other 
development  partners  in  Rwanda  to  avoid  the  duplication  of  investments  and  to  seek 
complementarity among the proposed interventions. 
The fifteen targeted districts, including Kayonza for essential oil trials, account for a 
13. 
total of 1,405,814 households, of which 32 per cent are women-headed. Youth (between 16 
and 30 years old) represent around 29 per cent of the population in the Project intervention 
area2 as presented in Table 1.   
2 Source: Rwanda SPIU  
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 1 Targeted households in the Project districts 
Of the total households in the project districts, around 18 percent are categorised as 
14. 
Ubudehe Category 1, around 42 percent as category 2 and 40 percent are category 33.  
Table 2 Targeted households in the Project districts, Ubudehe categorization  
15. 
Description of the target groups. In the selection of beneficiaries, PSAC will adopt 
eligibility  criteria,  already  in  use  by  other  IFAD-funded  projects  in  Rwanda,  that  take  into 
account both social and economic profile of the target groups. The revised estimation indicates 
that the main direct beneficiary group will be composed of 56,695 households (approximately 
255,128  household  members 4 ).  Beneficiaries  are  distributed  over  three  value  chains  as 
follows:  
•  Coffee: 37,570 households 
•  Tea: 11,625 households  
•  Horticulture: 7,500 households 
3 Ibid. 
4 Current ratio is 1 household has average 4.5 members 
4 
District Number of households  Number of households headed by Female  % households headed by Female  Total Population  Total Number of Female  % of Female  Young people aged from 16 up to 30 years old % of young people aged from 16 up to 30 years oldBUGESERA119 842      39 308            33%487 711      255 561      52%131 200          27%KAYONZA92 889        30 189            33%404 585      211 193      52%94 468           23%RWAMAGANA97 673        32 330            33%394 956      207 747      53%108 993          28%MUSANZE108 645      30 747            28%441 393      232 173      53%135 825          31%RULINDO86 414        26 529            31%357 902      187 899      53%82 832           23%HUYE93 668        36 624            39%378 836      201 920      53%106 849          28%NYAMAGABE92 221        29 234            32%376 864      198 230      53%118 246          31%NYANZA86 932        32 860            38%358 282      189 173      53%103 406          29%NYARUGURU75 491        24 535            33%343 927      179 530      52%107 064          31%RUHANGO89 422        31 208            35%366 456      192 756      53%106 150          29%KARONGI87 690        28 762            33%376 524      197 675      53%113 582          30%NYABIHU82 779        26 489            32%339 801      179 755      53%107 542          32%NYAMASHEKE98 698        30 004            30%473 279      248 471      53%137 120          29%RUSIZI103 542      29 924            29%489 022      254 291      52%142 518          29%RUTSIRO89 908        26 972            30%385 972      203 021      53%121 993          32%Total1 405 814     455 715            32%5 975 510      3 139 395      53%1 717 788         29%District Number of households  Number of households under Ubudehe category 1  Percentage  Number of households under Ubudehe category 2  Percentage  Number of households under Ubudehe category 3  Percentage BUGESERA119 842            20 538       17%52 176        44%47 128        39%KAYONZA92 889             12 648       14%40 074        43%40 167        43%RWAMAGANA97 673             10 062       10%43 330        44%44 281        46%MUSANZE108 645            15 640       14%52 365        48%40 640        38%RULINDO86 414             13 908       16%35 403        41%37 103        43%HUYE93 668             16 828       18%26 914        29%49 926        53%NYAMAGABE92 221             17 112       19%39 042        42%36 067        39%NYANZA86 932             15 412       18%35 414        41%36 106        41%NYARUGURU75 491             22 698       30%35 004        46%17 789        24%RUHANGO89 422             17 817       20%39 537        44%32 068        36%KARONGI87 690             14 205       16%32 182        37%41 303        47%NYABIHU82 779             11 823       14%42 792        52%28 164        34%NYAMASHEKE98 698             35 523       36%36 294        37%26 881        27%RUSIZI103 542            13 211       13%41 315        40%49 016        47%RUTSIRO89 908             18 368       20%38 448        43%33 092        37%Total1 405 814           255 793     18%590 290       42%559 731      40% 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
16.  When  looking  at  the  distribution  of  consumption  quintiles  and  ubudehe  categories 
amongst  tea/coffee  producers  and  total  rural  population  (see  Figure  1),  the  tea/coffee 
producers are slightly more likely to be in better-off quintiles, and the same with Ubudehe 
category.  
Figure 1 Distribution of consumption quintiles and ubudehe categories amongst tea/coffee producers and total rural population5 
Furthermore, those participating from poorer quintiles tend to have much larger asset 
17. 
bases than those who do not produce tea or coffee (see Figure 2)  
Figure 2 % of rural households with any cultivation who are producing tea/coffee, by land size (areas) and consumption quintile6 
5 The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 
6 Ibid. 
5 
16.117.134.436.746.941.50.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.090.0100.0Tea/CoffeeTotalDon?t knowCategory 4Category 3Category 2Category 116.118.618.720.822.522.325.623.017.115.30.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.090.0100.0Tea/CoffeeTotalQ5Q4Q3Q2Q1Consumption quintileUbudehecategory 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
18. 
Direct  and  self-targeting.  Consistent  with  the  national  wealth  ranking  system 
(Ubudehe) 7  PSAC  will  directly  target  three  different  categories  of  beneficiaries,  applying 
complementary  approaches  aimed  at  enabling  poor  farmers  to  graduate  from  poverty.  For 
HHs in Ubudehe category 1 and with less than 0.3 ha land, PSAC will identify employment 
opportunities under the horticulture component (e.g. pit digging for plantation, aggregation 
of  produce  and  nursery-raising  activities).  In  addition,  through  the  support  of  Heifer 
International 2,000 farmers targeted from Ubudehe categories 1 and 2 will be involved in the 
cultivation of tomato, onion, garlic and carrot, etc., mainly focusing on domestic and regional 
(cross border) market. PSAC will also develop specific interventions to support elderly in the 
rejuvenation processes of plantations8 and strive to work with persons with disabilities who 
have  the  potential  to  take  advantage  of  improved  access  to  assets  and  opportunities  for 
agricultural production and income generating activities.  
19. 
In line with Ubudehe category 2, PSAC will specifically target small-scale farmers who 
are subsistence and  vulnerable poor, have limited access to resources, less than 0.5 ha  of 
land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support. Specific products 
(such  as  small-scale  investments  for  climate-resilient  technologies)  and  activities  (FFS 
training) are developed for the targeted HHs.  
Ubudehe category 3 includes market-oriented producers, who have on average 0.5 ha 
20. 
or more, and have moved beyond subsistence farming, or are owners of small and medium-
scale enterprises. PSAC will engage with these groups to promote entrepreneurship.  
21. 
At start-up, PSAC will further identify activities to ensure also the participation by the 
poorest  tea/coffee  producers.  This  will  require  addressing  their  barriers  to  participation  in 
value  chains  and  adapting  the  programme  to  their  smaller  land  size  and  asset  bases. 
Furthermore,  special  attention  will  be  given  to  outreach  to  poorer  households  with  both 
younger  and  older  heads  and  women-headed  households.  Those  groups  are  likely  to  have 
higher  care  burdens  and  therefore  participation  (e.g.  community  meetings,  trainings,  etc) 
must  accommodate  timing  and,  ideally,  childcare  needs.  Older  producers  and  those  with 
disabilities may have mobility issues that will need to be considered.  
22. 
In  terms  of  access  to  financing,  instruments,  such  as  waiving  of  co-financing 
requirements  subsidising  any  inputs  required,  and  addressing  risk  through  fall-back 
mechanisms,  for  example  an  index-based  insurance,  if  profits  decrease,  to  protect  the 
incomes of the poorest farmers will be considered.  
Furthermore,  the  PSAC  targeting  strategy  will  describe  mechanisms  for  monitoring 
23. 
targeting effectiveness and for engaging target groups and key stakeholders in the monitoring 
of intervention outcomes, including forms of organization that will facilitate the participation 
of  different  target  groups  in  the  monitoring  process.  To  avoid  elite  capture  and  to  foster 
inclusive participation, PSAC will involve Umudugudu committees in the beneficiary selection 
whenever  appropriate.  Individual  farmers  may  also  be  considered  on  a  case-by-case  basis 
according  to  their  role  in  the  target  value  chains  and  the  services  they  can  offer  to  the 
community.  
Empowering  measures.  PSAC  will  adopt  empowering  measures  to  encourage 
24. 
targeted  households  to  participate  actively  in  the  planning,  implementation,  and  decision-
making processes of the project initiatives by: i) utilizing gender-sensitive and participatory 
appraisal  methodologies  in  the  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  project 
7 In June 2020, the Ubudehe categorization underwent a reform with new suggested categories Category A, B, C, D & E (Special 
Category). As the full implementation of this categorization has not yet been completed, PSAC will rely on the old categories 1-4.   
8 E.g., by mobilizing youth groups in the process of uprooting coffee trees and replanting new ones 
6 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
interventions  to  ensure  that  the  differential  experiences  and  intersecting  vulnerabilities  of 
both women and men are captured; ii) setting up a formal stakeholder feedback mechanism; 
(iii) using minimum participation quotas to ensure women (at least 40% and 20% women-
headed households) and youth (at least 30%) participation; and (iv) using quotas to ensure 
minimum  levels  of  women's  representation  in  consultation  and  decision-making  processes 
related to the project. 
Enabling measures. PSAC will adopt enabling measures to help create and sustain a 
25. 
policy and operational environment favourable to poverty targeting, gender equality, women’s 
and youth’s empowerment. This will include: (i) discussing targeting and gender issues at the 
launch  seminars/workshops;  (ii)  building  the  capacity  of  PSAC  project  management  and 
service  providers;  (iii)  building  the  capacity  of  those  involved  in  the  community  social 
mobilization  and  other  service  providers  through  trainings,  and  integrating  GEWE 
considerations into this training; and iv) including targeting and social inclusion aspects in the 
ToRs of the PSAC project management team.  
26. 
Embedding  social  inclusion  in  PMU.  A  strong  emphasis  should  be  put  on  the 
capacity of the SPIU to deliver gender-and youth-sensitive programming. The SPIU will also 
benefit from gender parity among staff. The M&E system will be gender responsive and sex-
and  age-disaggregated  to  track  progress  and  provide  nuanced  insights  into  the  project 
impacts  on  women,  youth,  and  vulnerable  groups.  A  dedicated  officer  in  NAEB  will  be 
responsible for implementation of the project’s targeting and social inclusion strategy, which 
will address all targeting, youth and GEWE considerations. 
I.2.1: GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT  
27. 
The latest Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based inequalities in 
health,  empowerment  and  economic  dimensions,  ranks  Rwanda  92nd  out  of  162  countries. 
According to the national Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index Study from 2020, the 
largest  contributor  to  women’s  disempowerment  in  Rwanda  is  workloads.  Access  to  credit, 
decisions  on  credit,  and  difficulty  speaking  publicly  also  are  important  contributors  to 
disempowerment. Among the three PSAC target provinces (Southern, Western and Eastern), 
additional constraints to empowerment for women include also the purchase, sale and transfer 
of assets9. 
9 As rural women are not a homogenous group, all the issues and constrains mentioned also have varying impacts on different 
social groups depending on intersecting forms of marginalization that go beyond gender (e.g. age, race, disability, sexual 
orientation, wealth and/or class). 
7 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 3 Percentage of disempowered rural women and men who have inadequate achievement by indicator, by 
province10 
In terms of economic opportunities, both men and women in Rwanda face constraints 
28. 
in  accessing  markets  and  finance.  However,  men  have  more  access  and  control  over 
agriculture  resources  at  household  level  compared  with  women 11.  The  Revised  National 
Gender  Policy  from  202112,  notes  that  women  remain  present  at  the  subsistence  level  of 
agricultural  value  chain-production  due  to  inadequate  access  to  agricultural  inputs  and 
extension services among others.  When looking at the PSAC VCs (see Table 4), tea/coffee 
producers are older on average, and less likely to be female-headed households, reflecting 
barriers to entry amongst younger households and women.  
Table 4 Average age and gender of coffee/tea farmers13 
10 Ibid.  
11 NpM, 2020, Financial services for women. Case studies on women’s participation in the maize and bean value chains in Rwanda. 
12MIGEPROF, Revised National Gender Policy, Accelerating the Effectiveness of Gender Mainstreaming and Accountability for 
National Transformation 2021 
13 The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey  
8 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
In addition, while women have equal access to and ownership of land as men14, this 
29. 
does not necessarily translate into equal access to assets, decision making and control over 
income resulting from the agricultural production. Gender disparities are also evident in the 
value addition and marketing of agricultural commodities where more economic commodities 
are controlled by men. In general, women are associated with marketing small quantities of 
production while larger quantities are marketed by men who also control the income from the 
sales. 
30.  With low education level and lack of financial literacy, women have also less access to 
financial  services,  which,  in  turn,  limits  their  opportunity  to  engage  in  income-generating 
activities. Lack of assets challenges women to access financial services and products, as they 
are often not able to satisfy collateral requirements needed, for example, to receive a loan 
and start a new business.  
31. 
In terms of unequal workloads, gender disparities exist at household level in time use 
for  domestic  and  care  activities.  In  male-headed  households,  women  work  for  more  hours 
(15.5 hours) than men (7 hours), spending over three hours more on farming activities than 
the  seven  hours  worked  by  men,  in  addition  to  five  hours  on  unpaid  reproductive  and 
household work15. In addition, men report having between 50 and 75 percent more leisure 
time than women16. 
32.  Women are also under-represented in leadership positions in cooperatives and other 
decision-making bodies and they tend to take up subordinate and stereotyped posts such as 
the  vice  presidency,  secretariat  and  treasury,  which  have  limited  advantages  in  terms  of 
decision-making and access to opportunities, information and training17.  
33.  While  Rwanda  is  internationally  recognized  for  its  achievements  in  gender-equal 
parliamentary representation, health, and education18, persisting discriminatory social norms, 
which  negatively  affect  women’s  decision-making  power  and  opportunities  for  economic 
participation, remain in place. The 2020 UN gender social norms index19, which looks at four 
dimensions (political, educational, economic and physical integrity) and captures how social 
beliefs can obstruct gender equality notes that in Rwanda almost 90% of people hold some 
kind of bias against women. These biases are especially related to physical integrity including 
intimate partner violence and reproductive rights. This is particularly significant given that in 
Rwanda,  among  women  age  15-49,  37%  have  experienced  physical  violence  since  age  15 
and 23% have ever experienced sexual violence. The corresponding proportions among men 
are 30% and 6%20. 
34. 
Furthermore, the Rwandan agricultural sector and its related policies often construct 
gendered  inequality  as  an  ‘add-on  problem’  to  key  action  areas  such  as  farmers’  market 
integration,  agricultural  productivity,  technology  adoption,  and  innovation21 and  notions  of 
14 In Rwanda, the land registration policy and the inheritance law favor equal access to and ownership of land. According to the State 
of gender equality in Rwanda Report, (2019) women had significant access to land in the country. According to that source, 58.3 
percent of land was owned by spouses, 24 percent by only women and 14 by only men (2 percent by others). 
15 MINAGRI, Agriculture Gender Strategy, 2012 
16 FAO (2016) Research on rural women’s economic empowerment and social protection - The impacts of Rwanda’s Vision 2020 
Umurenge Programme (VUP) 
17 MINAGRI (2019) Gender and youth mainstreaming strategy 
18WEF. 2019. Global gender gap report 2020. Cologny/Geneva: World Economic Forum 
19 UNDP (2020) Tackling Social Norms - A Game Changer for Gender Inequalities: 2020 Human Development Perspectives 
https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hd_perspectives_gsni.pdf  
20 Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20  
21Andersson, K., Pettersson, K. & Lodin, J.B.(2022) Window dressing inequalities and constructing women farmers as problematic—
gender in Rwanda’s agriculture policy 
9 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
gender as a system of power relations that form specific norms and practices in agriculture 
remain silent.  
35. 
Gender  strategy.  PSAC  has  a  clear  theory  of  change  (see  Figure  3)  for  promoting 
gender equality and women’s empowerment and addressing systemic inequities through the 
enhanced  inclusion  of  women  into  the  selected  value  chains.  Generating  gender 
transformative  change  requires  a  focus  on  a  broader  set  of  factors  with  direct  or  indirect 
influence on women’s opportunities to engage in and benefit from value chains. Five different 
pathways  for  women’s  empowerment  and  gender  transformative  outcomes  are  included  in 
the PSAC ToC. Firstly, the project will create economic opportunities (e.g. community-based 
nurseries),  expand  plantation  areas  dedicated  specifically  to  women  and  improve  women’s 
access  to  finance.  These  interventions  will  improve  women’s  access  to  and  control  over 
productive assets, inputs, produce, financing and capacity building opportunities. Secondly, 
PSAC  will  enhance  women’s  professional  confidence  through  trainings,  create  spaces  for 
collective  agency  and  strengthen  business  management  capacity  of  Rural  Producer 
Organizations, all of which are expected to improve women’s positioning and bargaining power 
within the selected value chains and increase their representation and leadership in producer 
organizations.  Thirdly,  the  introduction  of  gender  sensitive  and  climate  smart  productivity 
enhancing  technologies  will  address  women’s  time  poverty  and  enable  their  enhanced 
participation in productive activities. Fourthly, the enhanced Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS+) will be implemented to tackle discriminatory social norms and to generate gender 
transformative changes and improved intra-household gender relations. GALS+ will be also 
used to strengthen the agency of youth (especially young women), with a particular focus on 
aspirations,  influencing  household  decision-making,  rights  awareness,  self-esteem,  group 
membership  and  leadership  skills  as  well  as  to  address  livelihood  challenges  related  to 
nutrition  and  climate  adaptation.  Lastly,  promoting  an  inclusive  policy  environment  in 
cooperation  with  MIGEPROF  in  the  coffee,  tea,  and  horticulture  sector  will  aim  to  tackle 
structural gender inequality on an institutional level.   
10 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 3 The Theory of Change (ToC) for gender transformative programming under PSAC 
Table 5 Example of how GEWE issues are addressed throughout the project.  
N.b. This needs to be complemented by gender value chain assessments in the start-up phase   
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
Issue: Low outreach to women in PRICE 
Number of women receiving services 
promoted or supported by the project 
To ensure 40% women are targeted as direct 
beneficiaries the project will:  
11 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
1.  Set quotas for women’s access to 
services and activities supported by 
actions that facilitate their participation 
such as reserving a percentage of 
leadership position to women 
2.  Create separate women’s association and 
mobilise actively women to become 
members of the cooperatives22 
Issue: Women have low access and 
control over productive assets and credit 
Indicators: 
Component A - Investments to enhance 
climate smart production and 
productivity of selected export-driven 
value chains  
Women-Headed households that report an 
increase in income as a result of PSAC 
assistance number 
This component will support the 
intensification and improve the 
competitiveness of the production levels of 
the selected export-driven value chains 
through support to smallholder farmers’ 
production and productivity and through the 
improvement of rural infrastructure facilities. 
The component A will address women’s low 
access and control over productive assets 
and credit through: 
Women-headed households reporting an 
increase in production 
Women-headed households reporting 
improved physical access to markets, 
processing and storage facilities 
Women in rural areas accessing financial 
services 
• 
The expansion and rehabilitation of coffee 
plantation areas dedicated to specifically 
to women or where the cooperatives 
have bought land for women groups  
22 Under PRICE the cooperative KOPAKAKI Dutegere, who participated in the TAP created a separate women’s association, mobilised 
actively women to become members of the cooperative, and also reduced the membership fees for women to encourage them to 
join the cooperative 
12 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
• 
Exploring the possibility of engaging 
women in tree crops with the 
establishment of new farms. The project 
will encourage their access to land 
through community based sensitization 
and, where communal / state land is 
available, requiring that small adequate 
plots be attributed to these groups. 
Women headed households with proved 
lack of male labour power will be 
supported in clearing their plots. 
•  Under the coffee value chain, the 
Performance Based Grant Facility (PBGF) 
will be provided with an improved benefit 
package for women (70% compared to 
50% men) 
• 
•  Use of community-based nurseries to 
create employment opportunities for 
women  
Increased access to fertilizer through the 
Revolving Fertilizer Scheme (RFS) 
Ensuring additional VC-specific studies 
undertaken at project inception are 
gender responsive (value chain risk 
assessment, coffee study etc.) 
• 
•  Utilize best practices and south-south 
learning from the first phase of the Joint 
Programme on Accelerating Progress 
towards the Economic Empowerment of 
Rural Women (JP RWEE), which was 
implemented in Rwanda, Ethiopia, 
Guatemala, Kyrgystan, Liberia, Nepal, 
and Niger (e.g. addressing gender-
specific constraints that rural women face 
in accessing resources) 
Component B - Enabling business 
environment along selected export-
driven value chains) 
13 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
This component will enhance the 
competitiveness and sustainability of the 
targeted value chains by improving 
smallholder value chain actors’ access to 
advisory services, sustainable markets and 
financial services. Component B will address 
women’s low access and control over 
productive assets and credit through: 
•  Strengthening the financial literacy skills 
of women through a FFS module for 
financial literacy for smallholder 
households 
•  Developing a cross-cutting women and 
youth inclusivity approach with Coraid to 
ensure their participation in the value 
chains and in accessing finance. Coraid 
will identify new opportunities for women 
and youth in agricultural services, 
develop tailored financial products and 
impart appropriate trainings. The efforts 
will help women and youth to emerge as 
proximity business service providers (e.g. 
equipment maintenance, business 
planning, market linkages, filing taxes 
etc.) and entrepreneurs (see further 
details in section B.1.5.4) 
Issue: Unequal workloads  
Component A will promote the more 
equitable balance in workloads among men 
and women through: 
• 
Promotion of gender sensitive and 
climate-resilient innovations and 
practices as well as energy and resources 
efficiency along the selected value 
chains. 
Women-Headed households reporting 
adoption of environmentally sustainable 
and climate-resilient technologies and 
practices 
Women trained in production practices 
and/or technologies 
14 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
Individuals demonstrating an improvement 
in empowerment (IFAD empowerment 
index) 
Women-headed households reporting they 
can influence decision-making of local 
authorities and project-supported service 
providers  
Women trained in production practices 
and/or technologies 
Individuals demonstrating an improvement 
in empowerment (IFAD empowerment 
index) 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Component B will address this gender gap 
through 
• 
Implementation of GALS+ 
Issue: Lack of representation and equal 
role in decision-making 
Component A will address this gender gap 
through: 
• 
Enhancing women’s professional 
confidence through trainings. PSAC will 
focus on capacity building of women and 
through specific skills and knowledge-
based trainings so that they can play a 
key role in VC development. PSAC will 
engage with experienced agencies / SPs 
to avail the required services. The 
specific interventions include - i) Training 
of selected lead farmers and operators of 
protective agriculture units through the 
Horticulture Center of Excellence 
(HCoE)23; ii) Training women in nursery 
raising and grafting techniques to ensure 
access to good quality seedlings locally 
through RAB and district teams; and c)  
Component B will address this gender gap 
through: 
• 
Promoting women’s leadership and 
collective agency through facilitating 
spaces for sharing information and 
building collective agency in the 
23 HCoE shares the technical know-how about modern technologies related to irrigation, green houses and high yielding fruits and 
vegetable seedlings. It is established through collaboration between MINAGRI and the MASHAV, Israel’s Agency for International 
Development cooperation 
15 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
cooperatives and FFS groups. Each FFS 
will have 2 lead farmers of which at least 
1 will be a woman 
Increasing women’s representation in 
decision-making bodies, coordination and 
steering committees created by the 
project through setting up quotas  
Implementation of GALS+ 
• 
• 
Component C will address this gender gap 
through: 
• 
Involving women and youth 
representatives in the district level 
horticulture value chain platforms  
Issue: Discriminatory social norms, 
attitudes and behaviors  
Component A will address this gender gap 
through: 
• 
• 
Identifying opportunities and capacitating 
women to take on non-traditional roles in 
the value chains (e.g. nursery operators, 
grafting of fruit trees) 
Implementation of Heifer International’s 
Value Based Holistic Community 
Development (VBHCD) model, which 
includes a focus on joint decision-making, 
animal ownership, labor and benefits as 
well as emphasis on women’s 
empowerment and leadership  
Component B will address this gender gap 
through 
•  Cooperative training on GEWE.  
Individuals demonstrating an improvement 
in empowerment (IFAD empowerment 
index) 
16 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Gender issues and their integration in 
project components 
Actions to close the gender gap, and 
indicators Note: Some of the indicators listed 
here are captured (directly/indirectly) in the 
main results framework for the project, whereas 
others (the majority) are not integrated in the 
framework, as they refer exclusively to 
activity/output-based indicators to monitor 
gender-specific actions 
• 
Implementation of GALS+ 
Component C will address this gender gap 
through 
• 
• 
Involving MIGEPROF to identify possible 
entry points for engagement in-country 
policy frameworks related to gender 
equality in the agricultural sector (e.g. 
support in GBV mitigation, ensuring new 
agro-export policies are gender 
responsive based on lessons learned from 
PSAC and other projects) 
Involving local government authorities 
and in particular, the Gender and Family 
Promotion Officers to synchronise PACT 
activities with on-going activities on  
carried out at the district levels 
36. 
Enhanced  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS+).  IFAD  has  supported  the 
implementation  of  the  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  in  Rwanda  since  2011  and 
currently two projects, the dairy development project (RDDP) and the Kayonza Irrigation and 
Integrated Watershed Management - Phase II (KIIWP2) have included GALS in their activities. 
In addition, GALS is being promoted by IFAD in Rwanda in the context of the Joint Programme 
on Accelerating Progress towards the Economic Empowerment of Rural Women (JP-RWEE).   
37. 
GALS is a behavioural change methodology, which offers a framework to implement a 
gender transformative approach (GTA) by: challenging the root causes of inequalities between 
women  and  men;  promoting  positions  of  social  and  political  influence  for  women  in 
communities; and addressing power inequities between women and men. In addition, under 
the Joint Programme on Accelerating Progress Towards the Economic Empowerment of Rural 
Women  (JP  RWEE)  in  Rwanda,  aspects  of  youth  inclusion,  improved  nutrition  outcomes  as 
well  as  climate  adaptation  have  been  incorporated  into  the  methodology.  This  ‘Enhanced 
Gender Action Learning System (GALS+)’ has been also recently implemented under RDDP.  
38. 
Use of the enhanced GALS in PSAC will be rolled out through the FFS model and used 
to  tackle  discriminatory  social  norms  and  to  generate  gender  transformative  changes  and 
improved intra-household gender relations (see annex 1 for the full TORs). GALS+ will also 
be used to address livelihood  challenges  related to nutrition, climate adaptation and youth 
inclusion. Recommendation and lessons learned from a recent Outcome Assessment of the 
GALS+ in the JPRWEE will be used to inform the implementation of GALS+ for PSAC.  
17 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 6 Gender activities implementation flowchart 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Start-up phase: 
recruitment 
processes, setup 
of technical 
assistance and 
roll-out plan 
NAEB, SPIU 
x 
Kick-off GALS+ 
activities 
(year 2 and 3) 
NAEB, service 
provider 
x 
x 
Replication and 
scaling up  
(year 3 and 4) 
NAEB, Service 
provider 
x 
x 
Service provider for 
enhanced GALS 
contracted 
Roll-out plan revised and 
finalised 
Inception meeting held 
Induction and 
introduction workshop to 
the facilitators and the 
core team held 
Identification of FFS 
groups and GALS 
champions finalised 
100 FFS coaches trained 
750 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (4000 HHs) 
finalised 
150 FFS coaches trained 
3000 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (17000 HHs) 
finalised 
849 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
Consolidation and 
sustainability 
phase, with 
GALS+ 
 (year 5 and 6) 
NAEB, Service 
provider 
x 
x 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (3490 HHs) 
finalised 
Sustainability plan, exit 
strategy finalised 
18 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
I.2.2: YOUTH AND NUTRITION STRATEGY 
Youth target group information. Rwanda is a youthful country, where working age 
39. 
youth (16 to 30 years old) represent 77 percent of the rural population. Yet, the involvement 
of youth in agriculture is low, only a quarter of farmers (26.6%) are between 16 and 30 years 
old. Young people are also amongst the most vulnerable sectors of the population: in Rwanda, 
almost 30 per cent of young people live in households that are below the poverty line. Gender 
disparities also exist, with more young women extremely poor (12 per cent) compared to men 
(10.4 per cent) in 2016/2017. 
Young  rural  people  are  mostly  literate  (83  per  cent,  with  no  significant  difference 
40. 
between males and females); however, the level of education is low and the percentage of 
young  people  attending  tertiary  education  and  technical  or  vocational  schools  is  extremely 
limited (only 2.8 per cent of the rural youth population) which challenges their involvement 
in the formal labour market. Indeed, precarious forms of employment with low level of earning 
is the main employment problem for the youth.  
41. 
Root causes of rural youth unemployment in agriculture are mostly related to lack of 
access to productive assets and natural resources, goods and services; lack of knowledge and 
technical and business skills; a negative perception of agriculture among youth and a non-
conducive  environment  for  youth  involvement  in  agriculture  and  agribusinesses.  Youth 
perceive agriculture as associated to mere subsistence and poverty and seek other options; 
however, these are not accessible for them due to lack of skills, assets and services. 
42. 
Youth strategy. Providing the right incentives and support to rural youth to engage 
in  commercially  oriented  agricultures  will  be  critical  to  spearhead  youth  entrepreneurship, 
accelerate adoption of new technologies and provide the labour market with the skilled youth 
it requires to drive Rwanda´s agri-export capacity. The project will ensure that at least 30% 
of  the  beneficiaries  are  youth.  Key  areas  for  the  PSAC  youth  engagement  include:  i) 
developing youth entrepreneurs and supporting existing youth enterprises; ii) fostering access 
for young people to wage employment opportunities; iii) targeting youth groups to engage in 
specific opportunities suited for them across target value chains; iv) creating more favourable 
conditions for youth in order to alleviate the usual barriers they are facing when seeking loans, 
and v) ensuring that youth voices are captured and considered in all relevant spaces across 
the project cycle. 
43. 
During  the  project  start-up,  the  specific  challenges  of  the  different  age  sub-groups 
(their  level  of  education,  past  work  experience,  collaterals,  members  of  producers 
groups/cooperatives, etc.) will be further analysed. This is  particularly relevant since i) the 
project is also targeting young people aged 16-18, which is a particularly vulnerable age group 
that will require specific attention and complemented activities for their full socio-economic 
empowerment; ii) the project target group includes youth up to 30 years old, with therefore 
higher level of heterogeneity. Further assessment of youth socio-economic traits to take into 
duly consideration their heterogeneity and ensure that equal attention is provided to younger 
youth (16-18 / 19-24) and older youth (25-30) will be conducted design skill enhancement 
and  financial  packages  that  are  tailored  to  the  socio-economic  profiles,  challenges,  and 
aspirations of the different age sub-groups within the youth project cohort.  
19 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
44. 
The  project  will  capitalize  on  the  youth  employment  ecosystem  created  by  IFAD´s 
agribusiness  hub  grants  in  Rwanda  by  engaging  with  the  stakeholders  involved  in  that 
programme  to  upgrade  youth  skills  to  meet  the  development  of  the  coffee,  tea  and 
horticulture value chains. PASC will tap into the agribusiness hubs dual training (on irrigation, 
horticulture, mechanization, etc.); “matching services” (matching skilled unemployed youth 
with potential employers) and entrepreneurship supportive interventions. In these cases, the 
project  will  finance  youth  participation  in  these  ecosystem  services.  The  project  will  utilize 
existing labour market assessments (or undertake new ones if necessary for coffee and tea 
commodities,  as  necessary),  to  understand  the  job  opportunities  available  to  youth  of 
different ages and gender. If necessary, it will also develop specific courses to be administered 
in TVETs and / or IPRCs specifically catered for the coffee and tea value chains.  
Specific activities to be developed into a full youth strategy and action plan at start-
45. 
up include: 
a.  Investing in both youth agripreneurship (start-ups and business acceleration) 
and youth access to wage employment;  
b.  Capitalizing  on  the  youth  employment  ecosystem  created  by  IFAD´s 
agribusiness hub grant in Rwanda;  
c.  Tapping  into  the  agribusiness  hubs  dual  training  (on  irrigation,  horticulture, 
mechanisation,  etc.)  and  “matching  services”  (matching  skilled  unemployed 
youth with potential employers). 
d.  Facilitating  young  enterpreneurs´  access  to  financial  products  through 
partnership with BDF as part of the existing agribusiness hub ecosystem. 
e.  Promoting inclusion of youth indirectly by making their participation a criterion 
of  granting  priority  access  project  support,  closely  monitoring  of  group 
memberships  and  the  quality  of  young  members'  involvement,  both  as 
members (attendance at meetings) and as leaders (positions occupied) 
f.  Among the capacity building modules for the cooperatives, including training 
targeting older members to sensitise them to the fact that younger farmers (in 
some cases also their children) will take over family farms and that membership 
can provide their family members with support - the expected outcome would 
be  to  create  more  space  and  opportunities  for  young  people  and  to  better 
understand  the  mechanisms  that  come  into  play  in  the  early  stages  of  non-
traditional intergenerational collaboration. 
g.  Including  youth 
in  activities 
require  expansion  of  new 
cultivations/varieties  (such  as  in  the  case  of  the  macadamia  orchards  or  the 
essential  oils  plantations)  on  land  offered  by  the  government  or  other 
institutions provided that relevant approaches and methodologies are adopted 
(with particular regard to youth access to land) 
that  will 
46. 
Key  partners  will  include  Kilimo  Trust,  the  Rwanda  Youth  in  Agribusiness  Forum 
(RYAF), Rwanda Polytechnic (RP) with its Integrated Polytechnic  Regional Colleges (IPRCs) 
and  Rwanda  TVET  Board  (RTB)  with  its  Technical,  Vocational,  Education  and  Training 
Institutes  (TVETs),  together  with  Rwanda’s  Skills  Development  Fund  (SDF),  Business 
Development  Fund  (BDF)  and  FONERWA  Rwanda  Green  Fund  (RGF),  among  others. 
20 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Furthermore, additional partnerships will be explored with multiple employers from the private 
sector, particularly with companies in select VCs that are growth oriented and short of labour 
demand. In addition, potential entry points for rural youth groups may include community-
based nurseries, organized groups of pluckers and certification trainers. PSAC will also provide 
internship opportunities for youth (72 students during the project period) to learn about value 
chains,  follow-up  with  farmers,  quality  control  aspects  for  international  markets,  role  of 
financial institutions etc. while engaging value chain actors. Finally, the project intends to hire 
young women and men graduates for the positions of NAEB focal persons in each district.  
47. 
Nutrition strategy. Despite impressive economic growth, the progress on reducing 
the  level  of  stunting  in  smallholder  rural  children  continues  to  be  a  serious  concern.  The 
country  face  triple  burden  of  malnutrition  (undernutrition,  micronutrient  deficiencies  and 
overweight/obesity).  Making  value  chains  more  nutrition-sensitive  can  help  improve  the 
quality, variety and more diversity of the foods that are available, affordable and acceptable 
and  can  contribute  to  dietary  diversity.  The  introduction  of  improved  processing  and 
packaging  of  horticulture  produce  will  help  in  addressing  the  access,  acceptability  and 
nutritional  quality  of  what  the  consumer  eats.  A  substantial  part  of  value  chain  actors 
(producers,  processors,  retailors  and  etc.)  lack  knowledge  of  nutritional  value  of  produce, 
importance of quality and safety of different products, including choosing products that are 
safe and nutritious, at the same time environmentally sustainable and eco-friendly, including 
proper food preparation and waste management. 
Eighty  percent  of  all  households  are  food  secure,  which  corresponds  to  about 
48. 
1,963,975  households.  However,  979,045  (40%)  of  these  households  are  considered 
marginally  food  secure,  meaning  they  are  at  high  risk  of  becoming  food  insecure.  Of  the 
473,847  (17%)  households  considered  food  insecure,  63,696  (3%)  are  severely  food 
insecure.  The level of food insecurity is particularly high in the western and northern parts of 
the country, especially in the livelihood zones of Western Congo Nile Crest Tea Zone (49%), 
Lake Kivu Coffee Zone (37%), and the Northern Highland Beans and Wheat Zone (32%). At 
the provincial level, the Western Province is most concerning, with over 35% of its households 
considered  food  insecure.  Although  the  Western  Province  holds  22%  of  the  country’s 
households, 42% of all severely food insecure households in Rwanda are found there. At the 
district level, Rutsiro (57%), Nyamagabe (42%), Nyabihu (39%), Nyaruguru (37%), Rusizi 
(36%), Karongi (35%), and Nyamasheke (35%) have the highest percentages of households 
classified as food insecure24.  
49. 
PSAC will mainstream three specific nutrition related approaches into the value chain 
activities. PSAC has selected districts from Southern and Western province which constitute 
50.4% food insecure population as against Northern and Southern provinces having 34% food 
insecure  population.  The  smallholders  in  selected  districts  are  predominantly  cultivating 
selected export VC crops. Thus, PSAC is not promoting change in the cultivation of main crops 
of the smallholders but will focus on strengthening the productive capacity and quality so that 
they increase their income to meet households’ needs. Therefore, the first approach builds on 
increased income to be associated with nutrition education and Social and Behaviour Change 
Communication (SBCC) activities implement through for example through GALS+. In addition, 
along  with  selected  horticulture  VC  crops,  PSAC’s  partner  agency  Heifer  International  will 
24 WFP, MINAGRI and NISR (2015). Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis Report (CFSVA). Kigali, Rwanda. 
21 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
focus on tomato, onion, carrot and garlic as complementary crops to enhance food security 
and nutrition. These crops have good local and regional market demand, can be cultivated as 
intercrops in orchards as well as are useful for crop rotation. The second approach relates to 
women’s empowerment in ways that improve nutrition. This consists of different interrelated 
elements, such as women's use of income for food and non-food expenditures (e.g. education 
and health expenditures), the ability of women to care for themselves and their families, and 
women's energy expenditure. 
50. 
Lastly,  PSAC  plans  to  establish linkages  between  horticulture  cooperatives  and  WFP 
HGSF  programme.  Partnership  with  WFP  is  expected  to  address  nutrition  enhancement  in 
project target districts and catchment areas, but also to create  stable markets, boost local 
agriculture, impact rural transformation and strengthen local food systems.  
I.2.3: SOCIAL INCLUSION 
51.  Other  vulnerable  groups.  Vulnerable  groups  targeted  by  the  project  include 
households with older people aged above 65 years and persons with disabilities (PWD).  
52. 
Households with older people aged above 65 years, have a poverty rate 5.7 percent 
higher than the national average with 79.1 percent regarded as poor or vulnerable to falling 
into poverty. There are 511,738 older persons (60 and above) living in Rwanda out of a total 
population of 10,515,973 inhabitants. The older Persons are composed of 207,239 older men 
and  304,499  older  women.  Thus,  older  Persons  represent  4.9%  of  the  total  resident 
population. Around 7.4% of the older persons receive formal pension from the Social Security 
Fund for Rwanda (SSFR), since in the context of high levels of poverty and the lack of formal 
employment,  only  a  fraction  of  older  people  will  have  contributed  to  a  pension 25 .  The 
households  with  older  people  are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of  assistance  from 
Government.  
Inclusion  of persons  with disabilities. According to the National Census, among 
53. 
those  aged  over  5  years,  there  were  almost  450,000  persons  with  disabilities  in  Rwanda, 
which corresponds to around 4.3 percent of the total population above the age of 526. 
Persons with disabilities in Rwanda face significant challenges across the lifecycle. An 
54. 
estimated  41  percent  of  persons  with  disabilities  have  had  no  education  and  around  52 
percent of persons disabilities aged over 16 years are in employment compared to 71 percent 
of the national population. 
55. 
In line with IFAD targeting guidelines, PSAC has to ensure that persons with disabilities 
who have the potential to take advantage of improved access to assets and opportunities for 
agricultural production and income generating activities are targeted by the project.  Actions 
to improve accessibility of the services promoted or supported by the project to persons with 
25  Republic of Rwanda, NISR, Fourth Population and Housing Census 2012, Thematic Report, Socio-Economic Status of Older 
people, January 2014   
26 Between October 2015 and September 2016, Rwanda undertook a large-scale national categorization of persons with disabilities, 
under the leadership of the National Council for Persons with Disability (NCPD), an organ of MINALOC. The disability classification 
comprised the following categories: 1) physically disabled persons; 2) sight-impaired persons; 3) deaf-and-dumb persons or 
persons with either of these disabilities; 4) mentally disabled persons; and 5) persons with disabilities not specified in the above 
categories approved by the medical committee 
22 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
disabilities will be explored.  Before setting a quota for persons with disabilities, the project 
will include the Washington Group Short Set on Functioning in the COI to determine a baseline 
for the targeting of PWD and after that determine an appropriate percentage. The project will 
also build on the just released GESI Assessment and Strategy that informed integration of 
GESI perspectives into the USAID-funded “Kungahara Wagura Amasoko” interventions and 
will help to ensure that women, youth, and persons with disabilities have equal opportunities 
and are empowered to participate in export of high-value agricultural products27. In addition, 
engagement with organizations of persons with disabilities (OPDs) and support the IFAD grant 
programme “Sparking Disability Inclusive Rural Transformation” (SPARK) can be utilized to 
further strengthen the inclusion of persons with disabilities in PSAC.   
56. 
Indigenous peoples.  
The “Twa” are the  only minority group in Rwanda classified as historically marginalized 
people.  It is hard to get exact data and figures on the economic-situation faced by the 
Twa due to the lack of disaggregate data in the country. However in 2019, a large-scale 
assessment was carried out by Twa-supporting organizations African Initiative for Mankind 
Progress  (AIMPO),  Women’s  Organization  for  Promoting  Unity  (WOPU),  and  Minority 
Rights  Group  International  (MRG),  with  funding  from  the  European  Union,  in  order  to 
understand the inclusion and involvement of Twa in various socio-economic and political 
programs  and  to  gauge  their  understanding  of  human  rights.  In  the  event  that  during 
implementation, the Twa communities are identified in the PSAC project area, the project 
should follow the steps to seek their free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) outlined in 
Section 11 of the SECAP review Note. Furthermore, the project will include Twa as part of 
a target group under the social inclusion strategy. Several entry points are identified based 
on the previous Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility (IPAF) projects in Rwanda. These 
include  targeting  the  Twa  as  part  of  the  vulnerable  households  and  especially  ensuring 
that Twa women can benefit from the interventions focused on empowerment. PSAC will 
also strive to account for the local traditional knowledge of the Twa where relevant, and 
specifically  engage  the  Twa  on  their  food  systems  (recognizing  if  they  make  use  of 
indigenous seeds for instance, traditional practices that can be blended according to their 
needs and aspirations). Lastly, if deemed relevant, agro-forestry systems within the Twas 
can be identified, which improve biodiversity and food security and that offer opportunities 
to shape food systems to be more nutrition-sensitive, and ensure that nutritious, diverse 
and safe foods are accessible to consumers. 
I.3: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.3.1: CONTEXT AND RATIONALE 
The 
institutional  arrangements 
57. 
the  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export 
Competitiveness Project (PSAC) are fully aligned with the current implementation framework 
of  IFAD-funded  projects  in  Rwanda.  This  framework  rests  upon  the  below  principles  and 
operational modalities. 
for 
58. 
Single Project Implementation Units (SPIU) were created in every line Ministry 
and Public Agency, with the overall objective of creating an effective institutional framework, 
whichwill  guide  the  process  of  designing  and implementing  projects  that  are  earmarked  to 
27 https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z8HC.pdf 
23 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
fast track realization of development targets envisaged in the various sector strategic plans, 
the  Seven  Year  Government  Program  and  the  EDPRS,  all  drawn  from  the  Rwanda’s  Vision 
2020. 
59. 
The SPIUs are strategically positioned to manage the ongoing and planned as well as 
future projects identified in the course of translating sector strategic plans into development 
results. It further serves as repository of knowledge on lessons of experience accumulated in 
the course of implementing and closing the completed projects. The benefits to be derived 
from the established SPIUs include among others: (i) realization of economies of scale and 
reduction  of  transaction  costs;  (ii)  improved  coordination  and  creation  of  synergy;  (iii) 
efficiency and effectiveness in project implementation oversight through improved M&E; (iv) 
improved  staff  retention  leading  to  reduction  in  staff  turnover  and  increase  in  institutional 
memory,  and  (v)  increased  knowledge  and  expertise  as  well  as  best  practices  in  project 
management. 
From the previous project (PRICE) lesson learned, the Lead Project Agency28 has been 
60. 
shifted  from  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI)  to  Rwanda 
Agriculture Board (RAB) under the supervision of MINAGRI for the implementation of RDDP 
and  PASP,  and  to  National  Agricultural  and  Export  Development  Board  (NAEB)  for  the 
implementation  of  PRICE.  Effective  from  July  2017  and  following  the  official  letter  from 
MINECOFIN to IFAD dated 27 March 2017, it was decided that the MINAGRI will have the role 
of  making  policies  while  implementation,  management  and  monitoring  of  projects  and 
programs will be transferred to the implementation agencies such as RAB and NAEB. 
The  Rwanda  Agriculture  Board  (RAB)  is  an  autonomous  body  established  by  LAW 
61. 
N°38/2010  of  25/11/2010.  The  law  specifies  that:  RAB  has  the  general  mission  of 
championing the agriculture sector development into a knowledge-based; technology-driven 
and market-oriented industry, using modern methods in crop, animal, fisheries, forestry and 
soil and water management in food, fibre and fuel wood production and processing. 
62. 
The  National Agricultural Export Development  Board (NAEB) is registered under the 
MINAGRI.  Rwanda  Tea  Development  Authority  (OCIR  THE),  Rwanda  Coffee  Development 
Authority  (OCIR  CAFE)  and  Rwanda  Horticulture  Development  Authority  (RHODA)  were 
merged in 2011 to form NAEB. The  formation of the  NAEB  aims to improve the balance  of 
payment  of  the  Rwandan  economy,  through  increased  agricultural  exports  and  import 
substitution. NAEB was set up by bringing together three government agencies responsible 
for the entire Agriculture Export and cash crop base under one management as a commercial 
public institution established by the law N°13/2017 of 14/04/2017. 
I.3.2: LEAD AGENCY AND PROJECT COORDINATION 
The PSAC implementation arrangements are expected to ensure optimal use of human 
63. 
resources and smooth coordination between MINAGRI’s institutions29.  
NAEB. The Lead Implementation Agency will be NAEB, under the responsibility of its 
64. 
Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO) 30.  NAEB  will  host  the  following  key  positions,  that  will  be 
recruited on a competitive basis:  
28 Lead Project Agency means the entity designated as such in an Agreement, which has overall responsibility for the execution of a 
Project 
29 See also PSAC organigram in figure 1 
30 NAEB is the Government authority that is in charge of developing and implementing policies and strategies for expanding exports 
of agricultural products meeting international market requirements. NAEB has the appropriate structure to implement PSAC 
24 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  1 Project Operation Manager; 
•  3 Value Chain Specialists (coffee, tea, horticulture);  
•  1 Access to Finance (A2F) Specialist;  
•  1 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist;  
•  1 Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist;  
•  1 Environmental Specialist;  
•  1 Knowledge Management (KM) & Communication Specialist;  
•  1 Administrative Assistant;  
•  2 Accountants (reporting to Financial Manager of SPIU for IFAD-funded projects);  
•  1  Procurement  Officer  (reporting  to  Sr.  Procurement  Officer  of  SPIU  for  IFAD-
funded projects);  
•  3 drivers (one for each value chain); 
•  1 NAEB Focal Person (young graduates, men and women) will be posted in each 
target district to ensure smooth coordination at field level. 
65. 
SPIU  for  IFAD-funded  projects.  Under  the  overall  supervision  of  the  SPIU 
Coordinator,  the  SPIU  will  retain  the  core  functions  of  financial  management,  procurement 
and Management Information System (MIS), for which, and it has a long-standing experience 
with IFAD, as they have been key element contributing to the good performance of the IFAD 
portfolio in Rwanda. 
66. 
District Authorities. In addition, the project acknowledges the key role of the district 
authorities  and  will  allocate  necessary  resources  to  ensure  smooth  implementation, 
monitoring and coordination of PSAC interventions at field level31. Bringing in the district and 
sector agriculture staff under the authority of MINALOC will be particularly important to ensure 
continuous  and  sustainable  extension  services  that  will  further  protect  the  project’s 
investments. 
SPIU level 
(crosscutting 
functions) 
NAEB level 
(implementing 
agency) 
SPIU Coordinator 
FM 
Procurement 
MIS 
NAEB CEO 
Project Operation Manager 
M&E 
Specialist 
Gender & 
Social 
Inclusion 
Specialist 
Environmental 
Specialist 
KM 
Specialist 
interventions through its Traditional Commodities Division (for tea and coffee), Emerging Commodities Division (for horticulture), 
Quality Assurance and Regulatory Division and Export Services Division. NAEB has also gained relevant expertise and capacity to 
lead the implementation of large projects and programmes, including the 9-year IFAD-funded PRICE project. 
31 One of the lessons learned in PRICE is that agricultural extension services are difficult to mobilize when they are not placed under 
the mandate of the Ministry that is implementing IFAD projects. In Rwanda the district and sector agronomists are not employed by 
MINAGRI: all of them are put on the payroll of the district authorities, themselves depending on the MINALOC 
25 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Coffee 
Specialist 
Tea 
Specialist 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
A2F 
Specialist 
Admin. 
Assistant 
2 Accountants 
Procurement 
Officer 
3 drivers (1 per VC) 
1 NAEB Focal Person in each district 
District Vice-Mayor 
Socio-
Economic 
Dev. 
Officer 
(SEDO) 
DISTRICT level 
(on-site 
coordination) 
Figure 4 Project Organigram 
Director of 
Agriculture 
Forest & Nat. 
Resources 
Officer 
Coop 
Officer 
Cash 
Crop 
Officer 
District 
Agronomist 
Sector 
Agronomist 
Village Leaders 
I.3.3: PROJECT GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE 
67. 
The Project Steering Committee (PSC). In line with the practice for IFAD-funded 
projects in Rwanda, a PSC will be established for PSAC. The Committee will be made up of 
representatives  of  MINAGRI  and  other  relevant  ministries  such  as  MINALOC,  MINAFFET, 
MIGEPROF  etc;  relevant  government  institutions  RAB,  BDF,  RCA,  BRD  etc;  as  well  as 
representatives  of  the  target  District  Councils,  members  representing  the  POs  and  local 
institutions from the public and private sectors participating in the Project. It will be chaired 
by  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources.  The 
Committee is due to meet at least twice yearly, once to review the draft Annual Work Plan 
and Budget (AWPB) and again at mid-year to review the implementation progress. It will be 
responsible  for  the  technical  oversight  of  the  implementation  of  the  AWPB,  as  well  as  will 
approve the AWPB before sending it to IFAD for the No-Objection. 
68. 
The  PSC  will  be  also  active  during  the  year  and  will  invite  members  of  the  District 
Council,  members  representing  the  farmers,  cooperatives,  Producers’  Organizations  (POs), 
and local institutions from the public and private sectors’ participating. The committee will be 
responsible for the technical oversight of the Project’s integration into the district structure, 
as well as ensuring also sectoral and implementation coordination.  
I.3.4: POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTING ENTITIES AND SERVICE PROVIDERS 
26 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
69.  MINAGRI  will  maintain  an  oversight  role  and  lead  the  policy  interventions  and 
dialogue for the sector in general and for PSAC implementation in particular. The Permanent 
secretary in MINAGRI will maintain the role of Chair within the steering committee of PSAC. 
70. 
The  NAEB  will  establish  partnerships  and  service  provision  agreements  trough 
Memorandums  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with  partners  that  will  include  budget  allocations, 
activities and responsibilities on the project of each entity. 
71. 
Different  types  of  partnerships  to  facilitate  PSAC  project  are  categorized  as  pre-
identified (see I.3.5.) partners during the design stage, partners for synergizing PSAC efforts, 
potential  service  providers  and  further  partnerships  to  be  explored  during  the  project 
implementation.  
I.3.5: PARTNERSHIPS  
72. 
Cordaid. A partnership with Cordaid, as a co-financier of PSAC, would mainly engage 
in implementation of Component B. The key areas of PSAC collaboration with Cordaid are -a) 
A  Farming  as  a  Business  (FaaB)  training  module  to  be  incorporated  in  FFS  curriculum, 
including financial literacy for smallholder HH across all three sectors and b) Support PFIs to 
develop  and  strengthen  innovative  client-oriented  agri-finance  products  for  MSMEs  and 
smallholders, also to access existing credit lines for on-lending to PSAC targeted value chains.  
73. 
Cordaid has participated in the design of PSAC with their proposed interventions - (i) 
value chain development, including capacity building of producers’ organizations and business 
development service; (ii) mobilizing youth for equipment  maintenance; (iii) development of 
range of financial products considering smallholder needs and FIs constraints; (iv) access to 
agricultural finance with a focus on digital agri-credit assessment   tool and capacity building 
of  financial  institutions;    (v)  digital  solutions  for  agriculture;  (vi)  programme    embedded 
reflection and learning to influence policies and practices. Cordaid has confirmed to co-finance 
PSAC for an amount of USD 750,000 
74. 
Heifer International (HI). HI plans to work with smallholder farmers, women and 
youth to engage them in horticultural interventions such as vegetable cultivation (e.g. tomato, 
garlic, onion, carrot, etc.) linked with domestic and regional markets. It aims to improve food 
security, nutrition, income for farmers and aid to create local jobs. Heifer believes in capacity 
building  of  smallholder  farmers  to  graduate  them to  commercial  agriculture.  While  PSAC 
focusing on export driven value chains, some resource poor farmers and smallholders may 
get  left  out,  PSAC’s  engagement  with  HI  will  ensure  participation  of  smallholders  under 
Ubudehe 1, 2. The major interventions proposed by Heifer are – (i) Climate Smart and resilient 
horticulture  production  (ii)  Capacity  building  for  smallholder  farmers  (Value  based  holistic 
community  development  model  to  be  adopted)  (iii)  Product  diversification  and  access  to 
markets  (iv)  To  mobilize  funds  (approx.  1  million  USD)  through  impact  capital  facility  to 
provide access to affordable finance (v) influence policies and practices of government and 
institutions to support smallholders. HI has confirmed that it will co-finance PSAC with USD 
1.25 million, in addition to its capital investment fund of USD 1 million.  
27 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
75. 
  Business  Development  Fund  (BDF).  Established  in  2011  as  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary  of  the  Development  Bank  of  Rwanda  (BRD),  BDF  has  the  objective  of  assisting 
SMEs to access finance, particularly those without sufficient collateral to obtain credit from 
traditional financial institutions at reasonable rates. For PSAC implementation, collaboration 
with BDF will be established for the Guarantee Fund and matching grant schemes, given its 
thorough  experience  (of  managing  the  similar  funds  financed  by  PASP,  PRICE  and  RDDP), 
outreach capacity (through district offices) and recently digitalized application process.  
76. 
Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD). It is a development bank in Rwanda. Since 
2001, the bank has increased its focus on financing rural development projects. BRD has been 
managing HEGF initiated through PRICE. It has made it as a part of its product range. Recently 
it has undertaken review of lower uptake of funds through survey  of  exporters engaged in 
Horticulture and initiated a  capacity-building programme. through its own resources. PSAC 
plans to work with BRD further on expanding HEGF fund (with an additional USD 500,000) to 
incorporate  CAPEX  requirements  also  and  complement  exporters  capacity  building  process 
initiated by BRD by helping them in developing better market linkages.  
77. 
Commercialization  and  De-risking  for  Agricultural  Transformation  (CDAT). 
The proposed World Bank supported project, CDAT will be implemented for a period of 5 years 
starting  from  2022/23.  Its  objectives  are  to  increase  the  use  of  irrigation  and 
commercialization among producers and agribusiness firms in supported value chains and to 
increase  access  to  agriculture  finance.  The  project  has  initially  prioritized  six  value  chains: 
horticulture,  beans,  maize,  cassava,  Irish  potatoes  and  rice  and  will  invest  in  other  value 
chains  based  on  clear  evidence.  Its  target  beneficiaries  will  be  farmers’  cooperatives, 
commercial  farmers  and  small  and  medium  sized  agri-enterprises  (agri-SMEs).  While 
designing  the  PSAC  project,  proposed  interventions  of  CDAT  have  been  taken  into 
consideration  to  develop  synergies  between  the  projects.  Accordingly,  NAEB  will  ensure 
support  of  CDAT  activities  viz.  irrigation,  post-harvest  equipment  (solar  chili  dryers,  small 
cold storage units, protective agriculture units etc.) for PSAC participants, thus the PSAC has 
left  out  some  of  the  budget  allocation  to  avoid  duplications.  So,  if  both  the  projects  are 
operated in tandem (as alliance partners at implementation level), it is envisaged to maximize 
the synergies and the impacts.   
Rwanda  Cooperative  Agency  (RCA)  promotes,  regulates  and  supervises  the 
78. 
grouping of a large number of smallholders into more effective market-oriented cooperative 
organizations.  RCA  was  created  through  Law  n°  16/2008  of  11.06.2008,  which  is  strongly 
related  with  Law  n°  50/2007  of  18.09.2007,  adopted  by  the  Parliament,  to  determine  the 
establishment, organization and functioning of Cooperative Organizations in Rwanda. RCA is 
in  charge  of  several  activities  connected  with  the  creation  and  supervision  of  cooperatives 
including:  registering,  regulating  and  supervising  cooperatives;  setting  standards  and 
formulating  professional  ethics  for  prudent  management;  assisting  with  capacity  building 
through training and seminars; encouraging the cooperative movement to take advantage of 
investment opportunities at national, regional and international levels; carrying out research 
and studies; advising the Government; and developing good relations and collaborating with 
other agencies carrying out similar missions. 
28 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
79.  With respect to PSAC implementation, the RCA will be responsible for several activities 
connected with the creation and supervision of cooperatives including: registering, regulating 
and supervising cooperatives; assisting with capacity building through training and seminars.  
80. 
Partnership for synergies. Synergies will be sought with other ongoing or upcoming 
programmes such as the just launched USAID KWA project, the upcoming project from the 
Belgian  Development  Agency  (ENABEL),  and  the  ‘Smart  Food  Value  Chain  Management 
Project (SFVCM) funded by KOICA’, etc. Also, PSAC should explore the access to credit lines 
of  ABC  Fund,  BRD,  ARCAFIM,  etc.  to  strengthen  investment  opportunities  in  PSAC  Value 
Chains during the implementation.  
81.  World  Food  Program  (WFP).  A  partnership  with  WFP  will  be  explored  under  the 
ongoing Project ‘Sustainable Market Alliance and Assets creation for  Resilient Communities 
and  Gender  Transformation  (SMART)’.  Over  180,000  people  will  benefit  from  the  project 
throughout  2020-2023  in  Karongi,  Rutsiro,  Nyamagabe,  Nyaruguru  and  Kayonza  districts. 
Except Kayonza, other districts are common in PSAC and SMART, thus a partnership with WFP 
can  be  explored  in  relation  to  access  to  savings,  credit  and  insurance,  as  well  as  capacity 
building  of  cooperatives,  post-harvest  capacity,  linkages  with  buyers/financial  sector. 
Potential  synergies  could  be  linking  financial  products  of  MFIs  and  SACCOs  with  Village 
Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) within the targeted cooperatives, facilitated by WFP, 
as  well  as  creating links  between  SMEs  crowded  into  the  Farm-to-Market-Alliance  (FtMA)32 
and matching-grants under PSAC. Other possible partnership areas include Nutrition sensitive 
and climate smart practices, promotion of nutritious foods and market linkages through the 
HGSFP. However, it is to be noted that SMART project is expected to end by 2023. 
82. 
Access  to  Finance  Rwanda  (AFR).  AFR  has  the  core  objective  of  stimulating  the 
development  of  the  financial  sector  in  Rwanda.  AFR’s  intention  is  to  remove  the  systemic 
barriers that hinder access to financial services by putting the low-income people particularly 
the rural poor and women at the center of its interventions. AFR supports the development 
and  provision  of  financial  services  including  savings,  credit,  insurance,  payments  and 
remittances. AFR is funded by FCO, Sweden, USAID, the MasterCard Foundation and KfW. For 
PSAC  implementation,  collaboration  with  AFR  would  be  explored  in  policy  dialogue  in  rural 
finance and for specific instruments that are relevant for PSAC implementation. 
83. 
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). AGRA works with partners and 
the  Government  of  Rwanda  to  increase  incentives  for  private  sector  participation  and 
investment into the sector while also enhancing access to finance and markets; the adoption 
of  climate  smart  technologies  and  use  of  inputs  (seeds  and  fertilizer).  AGRA  has  also 
supported policy development on seed sector as well as capacity building. Possible areas of 
partnership are on capacity building on government staff, farmers’ linkages with markets and 
the private sector, as well as access to inputs and financial services. 
84. 
Kilimo Trust. Partnership with Kilimo Trust Rwanda (KTR) will catalyse involvement 
of youth across the different segments of selected value chains. KT experience in Rwanda and 
in the EAC region will contribute greatly in increasing farmer professionalisation, value chain 
coordination and efficiency, youth and women employment, innovative approaches to private 
sector  engagement,  establishment  of  sustainable  market  linkages,  and  adoption  of 
regenerative agricultural practices that are climate resilient in nature. KT will build on gains 
32 FtMA promotes the growth of viable smallholder facing business models through strategic partnerships and catalyses farmer-
friendly investments into crop value chains.  
29 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
achieved and lessons learnt from implementation of past and on-going projects such as the 
Regional East Africa Community Trade in Staples (REACTS) – Phase I funded by IFAD to link 
smallholder farmers and agribusinesses to regional (especially urban) food markets in East 
Africa & Phase  II  funded by AGRA to strengthen access to inclusive markets and improved 
value  chain  coordination;  the  Beans  Enterprises  and  Structured  Trade  in  EAC  (BEST  EAC) 
which supported consumer driven markets and structured regional markets through lead firm 
models; the Kigali Wholesale Market for Fresh Produce which targeted to commercialize fresh 
fruits  and  vegetables  in  Rwanda;  the  Rural  Youth  Employment  Support  (R-YES)  funded  by 
IFAD & BMZ to create new opportunities for rural youth in agribusiness as wage earners or 
commercial providers of services and products; and the Good Food for Cities Project which 
focuses  on  professionalization  of  smallholder  farmers  to  increase  production,  post-harvest 
handling and market access for horticultural crops through regenerative agricultural practices 
that are climate resilient in nature. 
85. 
South South and Triangualr Cooperation (SSTC). Under the strategic partnership 
with  implementing  partners,  Cordaid,  Heifer  International,  and  Kilimo  Trust,  PSAC  will 
maximize  the  opportunities  for  knowledge  sharing  and  south-south  triangular  cooperation. 
One  of  the  implementing  partners,  Cordaid,  for  example,  is  the  recipient  of  a  SSTC  grant 
covering  Rwanda  and  Kenya  on  access  to  financial  services  and  market  linkages.  Heifer 
International has operations in several African countries as well as in Asia and Latin America 
Countries.  Whereas  Kilimo  Trust  will  create  and  strengthen  linkages  between  smallholder 
farmers  and  consumer  driven  markets  both  national  and  export  to  the  neighbouring  East 
Africa  countries  to  ensure  value  chain  coordination  building  on  its  network  from 
implementation of past projects of IFAD in Rwanda and East Africa countries, notably REACTS, 
PASP,  MIVARF,  VODP2,  KCEP.  In  addition,  the  linkages  with  the  CACHET  project  will  allow 
PSAC cooperatives to learn from other countries’ experiences in price risk management. PSAC 
will have the opportunity to tap into this wide range of expertise and knowledge, leveraging 
South-South knowledge exchanges through learning events and peer-to-peer exchanges. 
I.3.6: POTENTIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS  
Horticulture Centre of Excellence (HCoE). The HCoE shares the technical know-
86. 
how  about  modern  technologies  related  to  irrigation,  green  houses  and  high  yielding  fruits 
and  vegetable  seedlings.  It  has  developed  mother  orchards  of  mango,  citrus  and  avocado 
comprising of export suitable varieties.   It is also producing grafted seedlings of these fruit 
crops.  It  has  developed  the  training  facilities  on  greenhouse  management  and  detailed 
training  manual  for  Chili  is  prepared  in  Kinyarawanda.  The  green  house  technology 
demonstration for chili, tomato, cucumber, okra etc. is established at the centre.  The centre 
offers training to farmers, lead farmers / FFS facilitators,  staff from different organizations 
etc.  
87. 
Considering the above well-established facilities, PSAC can engage with HCoE to avail 
services such as scions for grafting of mango and Avocado, procuring seedlings for vegetables 
30 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
such  as  chilli,  procurement  of  grafts  (to  fill  the  gap  in  seedling  production  if  occurs)  and 
training to selected lead farmers and green house operators in green house management as 
per arising needs.  
88. 
The Rwanda Nuts Ltd. It is private sector company dedicated to support Macadamia 
VC  in  Rwanda.  It  has  been  involved  in  Macadamia  seedlings  production,  guiding  farmers, 
purchase of Macadamia. Processing as well as marketing. The Company has processing unit 
in Rwamagana district and is exporting Macadamia nuts to the USA and Europe. It has interest 
in working with smallholder macadamia farmers. For PSAC project, the company has shown 
interest  in  partnership  GoR  (through  MoU)  to  provide  the  advisory  services  free33 for  the 
development  and  follow  up  (including  post-harvest  handling  and  marketing)  of  250ha  of 
smallholder  macadamia  plantation  at  least  until  the  4th  year  after  plantation).  For  this 
purpose, NAEB needs to enter into an MoU in the first year of the programme to recognize 
Rwanda Nuts contribution (indicating approximate value of advisory services it will provide) 
and  ensure  the  services  to  the  target  group  with  clear  timelines  and  deliverables.  Rwanda 
nuts is expecting NAEB and respective district authorities to mobilize communities, organize 
them  in  groups  and  facilitate  consolidated  land  availability  for  smallholder  macadamia 
plantation.  On  the  other  hand,  Rwanda  Nuts  will  ensure  continuous  support  to  macadamia 
farmers on the 250 ha (exact locations to be defined once the macadamia plantation plans 
have been developed). 
89. 
Partnership  with  Private  sector  as  services  providers  for  Macadamia  plantation: 
Macadamia is grown as an export potential crop. The linkage of producers with aggregators / 
processors/exporters  who  have  capacity  to  guide  small  producers  in  development  of 
plantation and advice on agronomical practices is key for development of the supply chain. 
This is an important step with reference to Kenya and Malawi where illegal trade of macadamia 
is a cause of concern for development of a strong macadamia value chain. There are some 
private players like FDINDA Ltd, Rwanda Nuts, Norlega, etc. who are well experienced and 
have strong technical capacity to provide guidance on grafted seedling production, orchard 
management,  post-harvest  handling  as  well  as  processing  and  marketing.  Considering  the 
nascent stage of the macadamia value chain in Rwanda which has problems of accessing good 
planting material, limited technical know-how, unorganized chain, limited local market etc., 
it is opportune time to create space for such experienced private sector players as technical 
service providers.   
PSAC  will  engage  private  sector  companies  such  as  Sunripe  Farms  Rwanda  Ltd, 
90. 
Rwanda Best Ltd, Pride Farms and others that are already included in the network created by 
Kilimo Trust under the Rwanda Agri-Hub of R-YES project to create decent jobs for youth in 
horticultural production, processing and marketing and other value chain nodes to close the 
gap between the demand and supply of skills. 
I.3.7: COOPERATION AND LINKAGES WITH OTHER IFAD PROGRAMMES IN THE AREA  
33 E-mail communication from Rwanda Nuts during the PSAC design mission in Rwanda (9th-20th May 2022).  
31 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
91. 
Recently closed  IFAD-funded “Climate Resilient Post-Harvest and Agribusiness 
Support Project” (PASP) has been formulated as an instrument for implementation of the 
National Post-harvest Staple Crop Strategy (PHSCS) with the Post-harvest and Handling Task 
Force  (PHHTF)  as  key  counterpart.  It  is  being  implemented  in  11  districts  with  a  focus  on 
dairy,  maize  and  bean  value  chains.  The  lessons  of  PASP  Value  chain  development  will  be 
adopted to the PSAC implementation.  
92. 
The IFAD-funded Rwanda Dairy Development Program (RDDP) is operational in 
12 districts of four Provinces of Rwanda: East (Nyagatare, Rwamagana, and Kayonza), North 
(Gicumbi, Burera, and Musanze), West (Nyabihu, Rubavu and Rutsiro) and South (Nyanza, 
Huye, and Ruhango). It focuses on developing the dairy value chain through improving cattle 
productivity, milk quality and processing capacity of the dairy industry, and strengthening the 
policy  and  institutional  framework  for  the  sector.  Synergies  can  be  explored,  especially  in 
dairy development and nutrition enhancement at district level wherein district authorities can 
be directly involved.  
93. 
Kayonza  Irrigation  and  Integrated  Watershed  Management  Project  (KIIWP 
II). The Project’s goal and objective of KIIWP II are to “Contribute to poverty reduction in 
the drought-prone Eastern Province of Rwanda” and to “Improve food security and incomes 
of at least 40,000 rural households on a sustainable basis and build their climate resilience”. 
The  Project  intervention  area  comprises  9  drought-prone  of  the  twelve  sectors  in  Kayonza 
District. Its  key interventions include strengthening resilience to droughts, support to farm 
business  development  and  institutional  development.  Learnings  around  FFS  approach, 
selected VC development interventions, Climate smart technologies, PBFG etc. can be useful 
for the PSAC project.   
The  IFAD-funded  Project  for  Rural  Income  through  Exports  (PRICE)  is  a 
94. 
country-wide  project  focusing  on  the  establishment  of  pro-poor  cash  crop  value  chains 
involving  smallholder  production  and  early  transformation  in  partnership  with  private 
operators. PSAC builds on the lesson learned from PRICE, thus synergies will be established 
under the development of horticulture value chains for both domestic and export markets. 
95. 
IFAD  grants with Kilimo Trust.  The  R-YES  project  is  coordinated  by  Kilimo  Trust 
and  implemented  by  a  consortium  of  institutions  including  RYAF,  the  African  Agribusiness 
Incubators Network, the Rwanda Polytechnic (RP) with affiliated vocational Training Centres 
(VTCs),  Integrated  Polytechnic  Regional  Colleges  (IPRCs)  and  Business  Incubation  Centres 
(BICs) among others. Overall, the    grant intends to target 1,200 youth, of which 50 per cent 
women.  The  project  will  identify  opportunities  for  youth  employment  along  selected  value 
chains and provide capacity building (through VTC and colleges) to enable young women and 
men  to  join  employment  opportunities  and  will  identify  strategic  partners  to  link  youth 
graduated with agribusiness enterprises and BDFs. A network of sub-Hubs will be established 
at the provincial level to facilitate these linkages.  PSAC will liaise with the grant to identify 
job opportunities for young people for the supported value chains and the provision of capacity 
building and trainings and link to financial services. Graduate youth would be also employed 
by the Project as service providers. 
32 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
II.1: COMPONENT A: INVESTMENT TO ENHANCE CLIMATE SMART PRODUCTION AND 
PRODUCTIVITY OF SELECTED EXPORT-DRIVEN VALUE CHAIN 
A.1.1 Coffee Replacement and Rehabilitation 
a) Coffee Replacement 
96. 
3,050  Ha  of  coffee  bushes  that  are  more  than  30  years  old  are  targeted  for 
replacement  in  the  six  target  districts  that  include  Karongi,  Nyamasheke  and  Rusizi  in  the 
Western  Region  along  the  Kivu  Belt,  and  Nyamagabe,  Huye  and  Ruhango  in  the  Southern 
Region.  200  Ha  out  of  the  3050  Ha  earmarked  for  replacement  shall  be  dedicated  to  the 
women  and  youth  who  have  been  allocated  land  by  their  families  (husbands  and  parents 
respectively) to cultivate the crop or households headed by women and have the old coffee 
trees. The cost of replacement is estimated at USD 3,000 per ha during the first year which 
includes uprooting, land and planting holes preparation, purchase and transport of seedlings, 
inputs  (including  Fertilizers  and  manure),  planting,  etc.  A  further  USD  2,100  has  been 
reserved to take care of the young shoots maintenance during the second year to cater for 
labour to select the suckers, prune and inputs.  
Selection  of  beneficiaries  and  mobilization  of  women  and  youth.  Majority  of 
97. 
farmers are old and may not have the energy to uproot the old coffee trees, plough the land 
and prepare planting holes as well as plant the seedlings. The project Coffee Specialist, the 
District  cash  crop  officer,  sector  agronomist  under  the  leadership  of  District  Director  of 
Agriculture,  SEDO,  co-operative  officer  and  Cooperatives  management  as  well  as  illage 
opinion  leaders  shall  be  involved  in  the  selection  of  beneficiary  farmers  based  on  their 
willingness  to  formalize  these  activities  and  capacity  to  dedicate  at  least  25-30%  of  their 
coffee trees. The 200 ha of coffee dedicated to women, women headed households and the 
youth shall be identified at this point. Consequently, the same team shall engage the youth 
and organize them in groups to be trained for rehabilitation activities. These groups can be 
transformed  into  registered  formalized  groups  like  CBOs  through  the  assistance  of  District 
Authorities and SEDO to empower them through savings schemes to improve their livelihoods. 
A total of 116 groups are targeted to be formed, 2 groups each from the 58 sectors in the 
target 6 Districts. A total of 116 sensitization and campaign meetings shall be held to create 
awareness  in  the  communities  on  the  need  for  replacement  and  rehabilitation  in  coffee  to 
improve production and increase their incomes. 
98. 
Raising Coffee Seedlings. PSAC will use a community-based approach for nursery 
raising  managed  by  women  and/or  youth  under  the  supervision  of  district  and  sector 
agronomist.  The  groups  are  either  well  experienced  in  nursery  raising  or  have  interest  in 
nursery raising. They will get required training and knowledge of nursery management and 
develop technical skills from the district / sector agronomist and trained nursery technicians. 
The process will help to impart skills to local group and develop their ownership in the project. 
The nurseries shall also produce shade/fruit tree seedlings for intercropping in addition to the 
coffee seedlings for replacement. A total of 7.5 million seedlings shall be raised at a cost of 
USD 0.1 per seedling by these nurseries for old coffee trees replacement. An additional 10% 
33 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
of the target seedlings shall be produced to cater for infilling in the subsequent year following 
replacement.  A  further  5%  of  the  seedlings  shall  be  considered  for  infilling in  the  1082  ha 
coffee rehabilitation areas.   
99. 
Procurement of Tools for Coffee Replacement and Rehabilitation. The total area 
under coffee replacement, 3050 and rehabilitation, 1082 is 4132 ha. Tools required these two 
activities include hoes, spades, machetes, pruning saws and pruning secateurs. The cost of 
these tools has been estimates per unit are at USD 15 per ha.  
100.  Following the decisions made during PSAC design mission to engage project technical 
assistants for proximity extension services and use of FFS approach in all coffee field activities, 
involvement  of  the  District  Cash  Crop  Officers,  cooperatives  and  village  opinion  leaders  or 
lead farmers where they exist, below is the proposed procedure for implementation: 
i.    Recruitment  of  project  proximity  extension  technical  assistants  (TAs)  at  the  sector 
level, 2 TAs per sector  for 58 sectors in the target  six districts, preferably the FFS 
ToTs trained under PRICE.  
ii.    One  day  training  of  the  TAs,  District  Cash  Crops  Officers,  District  Agronomists 
Cooperative  Leadership  and  Lead  Farmers/opinion  leaders  on  the  objectives  and 
importance of replacement of old coffee trees, prepare a calendar of events/program 
of activities.   
iii.   Data  collection  and  classification  of  smallholder  farmers  based  on  the  number  of 
coffee trees they own, for example- 0-150 coffee trees, 151 -250 coffee trees, etc. 
as well as considering Ubudehe categories.  
iv.   Identification of a category of farmers based on the number of trees they own that 
can withstand loss of not more than a third (25%) of the income each year from year 
1 to year 4 with the remaining 2 more years of the project duration to maintain the 
last lot of the replaced coffee trees; 
v.    Identification  of  early  adopters/willing  farmers  (low  hanging  fruits)  through  the 
District  Authorities,  Cooperative  Leadership  and  Lead  Farmers/Opinion  Leaders. 
Signing official consent documents between the District Authorities, Cooperatives and 
Early Adopters (farmers) shall be done.  
vi.   Procurement of coffee seedlings, shade tree seedlings (favorably Fruit Species) from 
youth/women  nurseries  supported  by  the  project,  manure,  mulching  materials, 
fertilizers and crop protective products; 
vii.  Procurement  of  Tools  for  replacement  activities  (Pruning  saws,  pruning  secateurs, 
machetes, Hoes, Spades, Tape measures, spirit levels, etc.).  
viii. Organize  Youth  in  groups  for  employment  in  replacement  activities,  sensitize  and 
train them on the objectives of this specific activity, how to go about it,  determine 
and  agree  on  the  daily  tasks/targets,  carryout  demonstrations.  NAEB  and  Director 
Agriculture & Mineral Resources takes the lead; 
ix.   Roll out replacement activities in August after the coffee harvesting season of April-
July  each  year  to  prepare  land  ready  for  planting  in  October/December.  NAEB  & 
Director Agriculture & Mineral Resources take the lead; 
x.    Committed youth may be encouraged to formalize their groups through the District 
Administration and allowed to open group savings accounts and get some trainings 
34 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
in financial literacy for their economic empowerment. Director Agriculture & Mineral 
Resources/Social Department take the lead; 
xi.   Project TAs to follow up the activities on daily basis, report on progress, and report 
any challenge in the execution of activities, uptake and growth of new seedlings, etc 
in real time as they arise. 
b) Coffee Rehabilitation 
101.  1,082 Ha of coffee (about 2.7 Million coffee trees) that is above 7 years of age shall 
be rehabilitated to give them vigour to produce more volume of better-quality coffee. Multiple 
System of pruning is commonly used in Rwanda with each coffee tree carrying average three 
heads (stems). A systematic removal of two heads in the first year followed by removal of 
the remaining one head in the third year shall be done with close supervision of the project’s 
technical assistants in collaboration with the District’s Cash Crops Officers and agronomists. 
This  method  shall  ensure  that  farmers  who  have  given  consent  to  rehabilitate  their  coffee 
shall not be deprived of the income completely.  
102.  As described above in the execution of replacement, the activity shall be implemented 
through engagement of youth as a source of employment and as a means of introducing them 
into acquisition of some skills in coffee agronomy. This strategy in change of cycle for coffee 
rehabilitation include careful removal of two stems (60%) facing the eastern side (sunrise) 
after  the  main  harvest  to  encourage  growth  of  suckers  (young  shoots),  selection  of  best 
suckers  with  big  potential  for  production,  pruning  and  maintenance  for  two  years  before 
production in the third year and finally removing the last old head after harvesting the main 
crop.  These  skills  shall  be  trained  through  the  FFS  by  the  PSAC  TAs  and  District  staff. 
Rehabilitation and maintenance for the two years has been estimated at USD 400 and USD 
250 respectively.  
103.  Gaps existing in the coffee farms being rehabilitated shall be infilled using the 5% of 
seedlings  allocated  in  the  seedlings  raising  by  the  women  and  youth  managed  nurseries. 
Proposed procedure for implementation is as outlined below: 
i.    One day training of PSAC TAs already engaged, District Cash Crops Officers, District 
Agronomists,  Cooperative  Leadership  and  Lead  Farmers/Opinion  Leaders  on  the 
objectives and importance of rehabilitation, prepare a calendar of events/program of 
activities; 
ii.    Data  collection  and  classification  of  smallholder  farmers  based  on  the  number  of 
coffee trees they own, for example,0-150 coffee trees, 151 -250 coffee trees, etc. as 
well as considering Ubudehe categories; 
iii.   Identification of a category of farmers based on the number of trees they own that 
can withstand loss of not more than a third (60%) of their income each year. 
iv.   Identification  of  early  adopters/willing  farmers  (low  hanging  fruits)  through  the 
District  Authorities,  Cooperative  Leadership  and  Lead  Farmers/Opinion  Leaders. 
Signing official consent documents between the District Authorities, Cooperatives and 
Early Adopters (farmers) shall be done. 
35 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
v.    Procurement  of  coffee  seedlings  for  gap  filling  of  dead  trees  and  fruit  shade  trees 
from  youth/women  nurseries  supported  by  PSAC,  manure,  mulching  materials, 
fertilizers and crop protective products;  
vi.   Procurement  of  Tools  for  rehabilitation  activities  (Pruning  saws,  pruning  secateurs, 
etc.).  
vii.  Organize  Youth  in  groups  for  employment  in  rehabilitation  activities,  sensitize  and 
train them on the objectives of this specific activity, how to go about it, the determine 
and  agree  on  the  daily  tasks/targets,  carryout  demonstrations.  PSAC  TAs  shall 
carryout the training through the FFS Approach; 
viii. Roll out rehabilitation activities in August after the coffee harvesting season of April-
July each year; 
ix.   Committed youth may be encouraged to formalize their groups through the District 
Administration and allowed to open group savings account and get some trainings in 
financial literacy for their economic empowerment. 
x.    Project TAs to follow up the activities on daily basis, report on progress, and report 
any challenge in the execution of activities, growth of new shoots, etc in real time as 
they arise. 
c) Support  with  seedlings  to  encourage  intercropping  coffee  with  Banana/fruit 
shade trees to improve food and nutrition security 
104.  As a strategy for contribution towards a food and nutrition secure coffee community 
and  sustainable  health  of  the  soil  in  coffee  farms,  PSAC  shall  support  provision  of  about 
500,000  shade  and  fruit  trees  for  integration  in  the  coffee  farming  system  in  the  target 
districts. This will take place from the second year of implementation at an estimated cost 0f 
USD 0.3. The seedlings shall be provided by the same community led nurseries producing the 
coffee seedlings.  
d) Support for 2 coffee technical assistants to deliver proximity technical assistance 
for the 58 sectors 
105.  To enhance the efficacy and effectiveness of FFS, PSAC shall provide for support of 2 
technical assistants for each of the 58 sectors,  totalling 116 of them. This team shall work 
closely  under  the  supervision  of  the  crops  officer  reporting  to  the  District  Director  of 
Agriculture and Natural Resources. The estimated cost for each TA is USD 150 per month. 
Table 7 Implementation plan for coffee replacement and rehabilitation 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Identification of 
Women and youth 
groups to be involved 
in coffee seedlings 
production from 58 
sectors in 6 Target 
Districts 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
1
1
6
G
r
o
u
p
s
0
0
0
0
0
116 groups of women 
and youth (at least 2 
groups per sector) 
identified to be trained 
in raising coffee 
seedlings 
36 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Support for 2 coffee 
technical assistants to 
deliver proximity 
technical assistance 
for the 58 sectors 
(Annual@150USD per 
Month) 
Women and Youth led 
Nurseries for 
production of 
Seedlings for 
Replacement of 
3050Ha 
@2500trees/Ha + 
15% for infilling  
Formation, capacity 
building of youth 
groups to engage in 
Replacement, 
Rehabilitation and 
Expansion program 
(2 groups per sector) 
Sensitization, 
campaign and 
selection of early 
adopters for 
replacement, 
rehabilitation and 
Expansion program 
through Local 
Government in all 86 
Sectors (2 Meetings 
per sector) 
Uprooting Old coffee 
trees and 
establishment of new 
coffee plantations 
(Ha) through 
engagement of youth 
groups 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
A
s
s
i
s
t
a
n
t
s
1
1
6
T
e
c
h
n
i
c
a
l
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
1
,
0
0
0
,
0
0
0
1
1
6
g
r
o
u
p
s
1
1
6
M
e
e
t
i
n
g
s
116 TAs shall be 
employed to supervise 
activities and deliver 
proximity extension 
A total of 9,000,000 
seedlings produced to 
cover 3050 Ha 
identified for 
replacement including 
infilling for both 
replacement and 
rehabilitation area 
2 groups of youth shall 
be drawn from the 86 
sectors in the six target 
Districts. The groups 
shall receive a one day 
training 
3
,
0
0
0
,
0
0
0
3
,
0
0
0
,
0
0
0
1
,
2
5
0
,
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
116 campaign and 
sensitization meetings 
shall be held in the 86 
Sectors of the six 
target Districts 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
4
0
0
H
a
H
a
1
,
2
0
0
H
a
1
,
1
0
0
H
a
3
5
0
0
0
3050 Ha of old coffee 
trees shall be uprooted 
and replaced from year 
2 to year 5 of project 
implementation 
37 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Maintenance of 
Replaced Coffee 
Plantations (Ha) - 
each lot planted 
every year shall be 
maintained  
Procurement of Tools 
for for use in coffee 
replacement and 
rehabilitation (4132 
Ha) 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
4
1
3
2
S
e
t
s
o
f
T
o
o
l
s
4
0
0
H
a
1
,
6
0
0
H
a
2
,
3
0
0
H
a
1
,
4
5
0
H
a
Cumulative 6100 Ha of 
young coffee shall be 
maintained before 2 
yrs before production 
3
5
0
H
a
  Each set of tools shall 
comprise of 1Pc 
Secateurs, 1 Pc 
Prunning saw, 1 Pc 
Hoe, 1 Pc Spade, 1 Pc 
Machete per Ha for 
replacement and 
rehabilitation activities 
500,000 trees and fruit 
trees seedlings planted 
in coffee as intercrops 
Provision of fruit 
shade/trees for 
intercropping with 
coffee 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
S
e
e
d
l
i
n
g
s
1
5
0
,
0
0
0
S
e
e
d
l
i
n
g
s
1
5
0
,
0
0
0
S
e
e
d
l
i
n
g
s
1
0
0
,
0
0
0
S
e
e
d
l
i
n
g
s
1
0
0
,
0
0
0
Rehabilitation & 
maintenance of 1082 
Ha of coffee trees 
over 8 years old 
through engagement 
of youth groups 
(removal of stems 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
2
7
1
H
a
2
7
1
H
a
2
7
0
H
a
2
7
0
H
a
0
0
A total of 1082 Ha of 
coffee shall be 
rehabilitated and 
maintained for two 
years 
A.1.2 Tea expansion and infilling 
A.1.2.1 Expansion of tea plantations 
106.  The  Expansion  (1,790  ha)  and  infilling  (620ha)  will  cost  USD  5,108,206  to  plant 
39,870,600  seedlings  in  2410  hectares  and  to  provide  fertilizer  for  3  years.  Farmers  will 
contribute  maintenance  labour  on  their  farms.  A  total  of  11,625  farmers  spread  in  7 
cooperatives and 6 districts will benefit from project interventions. 
107.  Six of the cooperatives are fully operational with mature plantations while one is newly 
formed and has planted 104 ha of tea bushes. COTHECYAKA is currently receiving technical 
support from Ferwacothe and Cyato tea factory in order to serve its 178 members, 114 (65%) 
being male and 64 (35%) women. The target hectares for expansion has been identified by 
each  cooperative  based  on  land  available  within  their  zone  and,  according  to  NAEB,  the 
ubudehe clusters have  also been used in classifying the beneficiaries mainly by the size of 
land owned.  
38 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
108.  Furthermore, in order to enhance the success of the expansion and infilling activities, 
the project will consider the profile of the target beneficiaries by ensuring that they live on or 
near their tea farms and have access to family labour.    
109.  While six cooperatives are engaged in conventional tea production, HOT is engaged in 
production of organic tea and will not receive chemical fertilizers during maintenance phase 
and fertilizers will only be applied at nursery level. Through collaboration with the factory and 
the cooperative, PSAC will strive to ensure that new farmers have access to organic manure 
for their farms. 
Table 8 Target hectares for expansion and infilling per cooperative 
COOPTE 
DISTRICT 
EXPANSION 
(ha) 
INFILLING (ha) 
TOTAL  
(ha) 
1  KATECOGRO  
Karongi 
2  RUTEGROC 
Rutsiro 
3  COTHEGA 
Nyanasheke 
4  COOTHEMUKI 
Nyaruruguru 
5  COOPTHEGA 
Nyabihu 
6  HOT 
Rulindo 
7  COTHECYAKA 
Nyamasheke 
240 
300 
500 
0 
200 
300 
250 
150 
150 
100 
220 
0 
0 
0 
390 
450 
600 
220 
200 
300 
250 
TOTAL 
1,790 
620 
2,410 
Source; NAEB  
110. 
In order to carry out successful expansion activities without compromising the capacity 
of the cooperative to manage both costs of transport and quality of green leaf, beneficiary 
cooperatives will be encouraged to focus on expanding production in areas within a radius, 
preferably not more than 30 Kms from the factory. HOT has already confirmed that such an 
agreement has been  reached internally by all its members to set a maximum radius of 20 
Kms  while  COTHECYAKA  has  indicated  that  activities  will  be  restricted  to  2  administrative 
sectors. 
111.  At  the  core  of  expansion  activities  is  the  cost  sharing  models  where  farmers  will 
maintain  their  farms  while  the  project  provides  seedlings,  fertilizers,  technical training  and 
market  linkage  by  investing  in  logistical  capacity  of  the  cooperatives.  Cooperatives  will  be 
strict  in  selecting  beneficiaries  and  will  prepare  contingency  measures  based  on  PRICE 
lessons, and avoid cases of abandoned tea farms and lengthy plucking rounds occasioned by 
absentee farm owners or elderly farmers who are unable to provide maintenance labour. In 
PRICE,  this  was  attributed  to  weaknesses  in  preparing/sensitizing  beneficiaries.  PSAC  will 
therefore,  sensitize  and  train  all  mobilized  farmers  but  only  provide  support  to  those  who 
39 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
show  commitment  to  the  objectives  of  the  project  including  regular  attendance  of  training 
sessions.  Moreover,  only  cuttings  from  recommended  clones  (as  per  agro-ecological  zone) 
will be propagated with support from the project in order for the country to realize the benefits 
which were targeted by PRICE investments in tea research. 
112. 
In order to boost the performance of the project, cooperatives will be encouraged to 
utilize  part  of  the  5%  fund  to  incentivize  successful  farmers,  field  agronomists  and  Field 
Production  Assistants  (FPA)  who  excel  in  helping  farmers  to  succeed  by  reducing  seedling 
mortality,  achieving  early  table  formation  and  good  leaf  quality  as  well  as  environmental 
protection.  Additionally,  cooperatives  will  consider  output  based  annual  incentives  for 
agronomists  based  on  a  calendar  of  development  activities,  hectares  of  mature  bushes  in 
production as well as the share of production (volume and quality) that each agronomist is 
responsible  for  at  any  one  time.  Some  of  the  environmental  conservation  initiatives  that 
cooperatives will consider include zero tillage on hillsides. However, agronomists will closely 
monitor the performance of tea bushes planted using zero tillage practices to ensure that the 
mortality rate is within the target set by the project. 
113.  There is an opportunity for NAEB, cooperatives and factories to explore the viability of 
private  extension  and  farm  management  services  to  larger  or  absentee  farmers  who  can 
afford wages for trained FPAs and FFS graduates. Having a pool of trained persons within a 
cooperative is a critical success factor that will ensure that new farmers are easily identified, 
trained  and  on-boarded  in  the  value  chain  as  a  means  to  building  a  sustainable  economic 
sector.  Larger  farmers  will  also  have  a  pool  of  FPAs  from  which  to  select  farm  supervisors 
thus a major barrier to entry into the value chain will have been eliminated. 
114.  Clonal  selection,  Preparation  of  mother  bushes  and  cuttings:  A  total  of  51,831,780 
cuttings will be prepared on the assumption that 10% of cuttings will lose viability in transit 
while  being  transported  to  various  nursery  sites  while  another  20%  will  not  survive  in  the 
nursery. Each cutting is estimated to cost Rwf 5 at source and beneficiary cooperatives and 
factories are expected to organize suitable transportation means. 
115.  Suitable mother bushes based on RAB list of GxE  clones selected  for adaptability in 
different agro-ecological zones will be identified from farmers plantations, factory industrial 
blocks and RAB trial sites as sources of cuttings for propagating the seedlings required under 
PSAC/SPIU, in collaboration with NAEB/SPIU and other stakeholders will develop a cuttings 
production plan in proximity to cooperatives covered by the project. The elaborate plan will 
give rise to healthy cuttings with low mortality rates in transit, nurseries and fields.  
116.  Detailed expansion activities are as below: 
i.    PSAC will support 7 cooperatives to expand their plantations by 1790 hectares. The 
expansion program will require 27,566,000 seedlings. An assumption is made that 
20% of the seedlings will not survive upon transplanting and that 10% of the failed 
seedlings will be replaced in the same year while the other 10% will be replaced in 
subsequent year. The cost of seedlings for expansion is projected to be Rwf 60 per 
seedling. 
ii.    Cooperatives will appoint trained persons preferably trained pluckers who have also 
undergone  FFS  training  as  Field  Production  Assistants  (FPA)  to  be  trained  on  the 
above procedures. The FPAs will be allocated specific farmers (and hectares) to lead 
in the expansion program. The FPAs will be retained, at the least for the period until 
40 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
the  tea  bushes  in  expanded  areas  have  undergone  first  pruning  and  tipping  to 
establish a plucking table. 
iii.   PSAC will support groups (informal and formal) of trained tea pluckers to establish 
nurseries in areas close to expansion and infilling sites. To the largest extent, pluckers 
who fall under youth bracket (male and female) will be given priority to set up and 
manage  the  nurseries  while  maintaining  attendance  to  their  plucking  duties.  The 
cooperatives will be careful in setting the prices of seedlings to ensure that the youth 
groups are able to capture decent profits as compensation. 
iv.   In  order  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  high  mortality  rate,  beneficiaries  will  be  guided  to 
carry out propagation, planting and transplanting activities in both the nurseries and 
on farms in accordance with guidelines provided by the Tea Management Handbook34 
to  minimize  mortality  rates.  It  is  estimated  that  20%  of  seedlings  planted  during 
expansion will fail and be replaced immediately or in the subsequent year.  
v.    Documentation of project activities will be given priority. Towards this end, a Project 
activities  log/diary  will  be  created  by  the  Tea  division/SPIU  to  ease  monitoring  of 
implementation  activities  and  as  the  basis  for  providing  incentives  to  cooperatives 
personnel. The activities to be included in the log/diary include; 
a.  Training  calendar  of  agronomist  on  relevant  activities  by  senior  RAB 
agronomists and plant scientists  
b.  Number of nursery operators trained and supervised by agronomist 
c.  Number  and  status  of  mother  bushes,  cuttings  under  preparation,  raising 
seedlings and transplanting.  
d.  Selection criteria for beneficiary farmers and number of those who qualify. 
e.  Number and attendance of sensitization meetings with beneficiaries on project 
expectations  
 Calendar of farmers and farm workers training on project activities 
f. 
g.   Monitoring  of  project  core  indicators  and  milestones  including  young  tea 
development, mortality rates, census and productivity. 
h.  Calendar of delivery of project support to cooperatives 
Table 9 Implementation plan for expansion of tea plantations activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
beneficiaries per 
cooperatives 
Cuttings production 
plan  
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB Tea 
specialist 
0 
600 
600 
590 
ha 
ha 
ha 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB Tea 
specialist, RAB 
Tea Expert 
Beneficiaries identified 
with land availability 
within suitable radius 
from the factory 
Identified mother 
bushes and nursery 
sites 
34 Tea Management Handbook is published and reviewed by the Tea Research Institute of Kenya 
41 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Clonal selection, 
Preparation of mother 
bushes and cuttings; 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, Tea 
Specialist. RAB 
tea experts 
173
737
81 
Cutt
ings  
173
737
81C
uttin
gs 
165
050
91 
Cutt
ings 
0 
Mobilize/organize 
groups of trained 
pluckers to be trained 
on nursery 
management 
Cooperative 
teams, NAEB tea 
specialist 
Seedlings Preparation  
 Cooperative 
teams, NAEB tea 
Specialist 
9,24
0,00
0  
9,24
0,00
0  
8,77
8,00
0  
Appoint & Train Field 
Production Assistants 
NAEB Tea 
Specialist, 
Cooperative 
teams 
A.1.2.2: Infilling of tea plantations  
Mother bushed 
nurtured and cuttings 
collected 
Trained nursery 
operations teams 
mandated to establish 
nurseries. 
Nurseries in suitable 
sites 
Expansion fields under 
respective FPAs 
Infilling  in  tea  farms  is  a  common  practice  that  results  from  mortality  of  young 
117. 
seedlings soon after planting due to a combination of adverse factors including immaturity of 
seedlings,  adverse  weather  conditions 
land 
preparation/holing and disease.  
timing  of  activities),  poor 
(wrong 
118.  Four (4) out of seven (7) cooperatives will benefit from infilling of 620 ha. A total of   
12,304,600 seedlings will be transplanted after propagation in the nursery for 18 months at 
a cost of Rwf 90 per seedling. It is estimated that 10% of infill seedlings will fail to survive 
after transplanting planting and will be replaced immediately they show signs of failure. 
119.  Demand for infilling of gaps, especially at the scale proposed by PSAC is indicative of 
a challenging growing/production environment at the identified sites. In order to overcome 
the challenges and improve results, each cooperative will appoint a lead agronomist to be in 
charge of the infilling plan. The agronomist will be the Project Focal Point at cooperative level 
and will work with district technical officers, trained nursery operators and field production 
assistants to deliver on project targets with regard to infilling. It is not anticipated that the 
agronomist will be a new hire but rather a promotion of one from the existing staff. 
120.  Detailed infilling activities are as below: 
42 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
i.    Once the project is approved, cooperatives will select one agronomist who will take 
charge of the infilling plan and become fully accountable for its implementation as its 
lead. The agronomist will work with nursery operators preparing infilling seedlings as 
well  as  beneficiary  farmers  to  ensure  that  mortality  rates  and  growth  rates  are 
managed to the expected standards. 
ii.    Mapping and monitoring of beneficiary farms will take place with a view to ensuring 
that adequate preparations are made to guarantee a survival rate of the infill plants 
that is within the targeted range. In particular, where infilling is planned in a mature 
tea  field,  pruning  will  be  scheduled  ahead  of  infilling.  In  the  case  of  HOT  where 
chemical fertilizers are not in use, well matured manure/compost will be available for 
the infilling plan. Those farms at the greatest risk of soil erosion will be identified and 
suitability of introducing zero tillage practices explored. 
iii.   Documentation of activities will proceed as set out under Activity A.1.5 
Table 10 Implementation plan for tea infilling activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Appoint an Infilling 
project Focal person 
at cooperative level  
Cooperative 
teams 
4 
One infilling project 
Focal person per 
cooperative identified 
and engaged in the 
operations.  
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
beneficiaries per 
cooperatives 
Cuttings production 
plan  
Clonal selection, 
Preparation of mother 
bushes and cuttings; 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB 
Tea specialist 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB 
Tea specialist, 
RAB Tea Expert 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, Tea 
Specialist. RAB 
tea experts 
Mobilize/organize 
groups of trained 
pluckers to be trained 
on nursery 
management 
Cooperative 
teams, NAEB 
tea specialist 
0 
0 
310 
310 
ha 
ha 
Beneficiaries identified 
within suitable radius 
from the factory 
Identified mother 
bushes and nursery 
sites 
Healthy mother bushes 
prepared and cuttings 
from suitable clones 
collected 
Trained nursery 
operations teams 
mandated to establish 
nurseries specifically 
for infilling seedlings 
(Minimum 18 months 
old seedlings). 
43 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Seedlings Preparation  
 Cooperative 
teams, NAEB 
tea Specialist 
6,15
2,30
0  
6,15
2,30
0  
0  
Specific nurseries in 
suitable sites to 
propagate seedlings for 
infilling purposes only 
A.1.2.3: Access to tea fertilizers (RFS Evaluation Report)  
121. 
 Tea cooperatives in Rwanda face difficulties in acquiring sufficient fertilizers in order 
to  increase  production.  The  Fertilizer  Revolving  Scheme  (RFS)  strategy  developed  under 
PRICE is relevant for PSAC. Indeed 4  of the 7 cooperatives under PSAC are beneficiaries of 
RFS and will therefore provide relevant data for planning purposes. 
122. 
In  2020,  during  the  design  of  RFS,  the  baseline  data  for  the  shortfall  in  fertilizer 
demand  for  the  5  cooperatives  was  116%.  This  is  the  gap  that  RFS  sought  to  fill  in  a 
sustainable way. The  sole purpose  of the scheme was to avail support of one billion seven 
hundred  twenty  million  Rwandese  Francs  (1,720,000,000)  for  use  in  procuring  optimum 
quantities  of  fertilizers  for  beneficiary  cooperatives  based  on  actual  farm  needs  to  be 
established through verification of productive tea bushes per farmer.  The  concept note  set 
out implementation modalities to revolve the fund annually while accumulating minimal or no 
deficits. 
In  developing  the  RFS  concept  paper,  which  is  relevant  under  PSAC,  it  was 
123. 
acknowledged that fertilizer quantities are not the only factor limiting productivity. In order 
to maximize response to fertilizer application, all other factors that limit productivity were to 
be addressed through a comprehensive Productivity Improvement Plan (PIP). The first draft 
of  PIP  appears  not  to  have  been  robust  enough  and  was  not  well  implemented.  PSAC  will 
support  a  revision  of  the  PIP  which  will  be  released  to  guide  all  activities  pertaining  to 
productivity management in tea value chain. Ultimately, implementation of the PIP is a critical 
pathway to increasing production and improving quality thereby boosting competitiveness of 
Rwanda tea. Support will be provided under PSAC to have it implemented as a standardized 
common service to all cooperatives, among other services under the management framework 
to be developed by the Ferwacothe CSDE35.  
124.  Preliminary  analysis  indicates  that  in  its  second  year  of  full  implementation,  RFS 
contributed significantly to higher production that has been achieved in 4 out of 5 cooperatives 
that  benefited  from  fertilizer  supply  in  2021.  Notably,  Cothemuki  increased  production  by 
40%  while  Cothega  registered  a  meagre  2.5%  growth.  Overall,  the  5  cooperatives  added 
1,358,187 Kgs (13%) of green leaf to their 2020 achievement.  The value of the additional 
green leaf is estimated at USD 414,340 against the total RFS investment of USD 450,000.  
35 Common Services Delivery Expert 
44 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 11 Green production trend after RFS implementation in 2020 
Year of 
production 
Coop 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Variance 
% 
Production of green leaf in Kgs 
KATECOGRO 
1,147,811  
1,090,745  
1,255,746  
1,458,835  
203,089  
16.17 
COTHEGAB 
1,621,281  
1,773,237  
1,509,284  
1,856,813  
347,529  
23.03 
RUTEGROC 
794,688  
866,944  
1,271,868  
1,578,576  
306,708  
24.11 
COOTHEMUKI 
748,317  
554,950  
922,429  
1,292,038  
369,609  
40.07 
COTHEGA 
2,995,512  
4,074,315  
5,334,896  
5,466,148  
131,252  
2.46 
TOTAL 
7,307,609  
8,360,191  
10,294,223  
11,652,410  
1,358,187  
13.19 
 Source; Ferwacothe production data for 2021 
125.  Detailed implementation activities are as below: 
i.    In order to better understand the performance of RFS, an analysis of the 2021 report 
of the steering committee will be undertaken.  
Committee 
ii.    Building  on  the  apparent  success  of  RFS,  NAEB  &  RTA  will  establish  a  Fertilizer 
Management 
chain 
(FMC)  made 
managers/agronomists/researchers  with  experience  of  more  than  10  years  to 
interpret and implement the RFS concept paper. The committee will report to the RFS 
Steering  Committee.  Moreover,  once  the  PSAC  has  been  rolled  out,  the  Common 
Services Delivery Expert at Ferwacothe will join the committee and offer new insights 
into fertilizer management as a standardized common service to cooperatives.  
value 
tea 
up 
of 
iii.   The  FMC  will  undertake  a  detailed  performance  review  in  line  with  the  principles, 
objectives and operational guidelines established in the approved concept paper of 
2020 and make proposals to strengthen controls at cooperative level.  
iv.   The FMC will investigate the reasons for extremely poor fertilizer response in Cothega 
and verify whether the recorded production figures are accurate at cooperative and 
factory level. 
v.    The FMC will establish a baseline of fertilizer utilization in 2 additional cooperatives 
under PSAC and determine the appropriate RFS support required for all cooperatives 
under project intervention. 
45 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 12 Implementation plan for fertilizer access activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Establish a Fertilizer 
Management 
Committee(FMC) 
RTA, RAB and 
NAEB 
1 
Review of 
implementation 
status of RFS 
 NAEB, 
FERWACOTHE 
& RAB Teams 
1 
Prepare a baseline 
report for Fertilizer 
access in 2 new 
cooperatives  
Co-operative 
teams & FMC 
1 
Determine the needs 
of cooperatives to be 
supported by PSAC 
FMC  
Fertilizer Management 
Committee formulated 
Performance report of 
RFS within the 
parameters of the 
concept paper 
prepared and shared. 
Baseline report for 
fertilizer access in 2 
new cooperatives 
prepared and shared 
RFS for 6 co-operatives 
and their needs for 
support prepared. 
A.1.2.4: Agroforestry in tea plantations 
126. 
Increasing  demand  for  fuel  wood  by  tea  factories  poses  a  major  threat  to 
environmental  conservation  measures  through  deforestation,  especially  in  areas  where 
competition  for  land  between  food  and  commercial  crops  is  intense.  This  is  despite  the 
economic benefits that accrue from expanded tea farms and factory processing capacities. 
127.  Cooperatives will receive support to plant trees on their farms to the extent that land 
is available to practice agroforestry. Alongside tea seedlings, farmers will receive seedlings of 
tree  varieties  that  are  suitable  for  windbreaks  (recommended  by  GoR  agencies),  have 
commercial value and pose little threat to performance of tea bushes. Possible risks/threats 
include productivity decrease and diseases such as armillaria root rot. Through PSAC support, 
a  total  of  2042  ha  of  agroforestry  will  be  established  and  maintained  through  cost  sharing 
models. The demand for seedlings is projected at 260,000 assuming a mortality rate of 15% 
after transplanting. 
i.    Cooperatives  will  identify  an  agroforestry  project  Focal  Person  who  will  receive 
training  from  government  and  non-government  agencies  who  have  the  expert 
knowledge  required  as  well  as  the  mandate.  The  FP  will  work  with  experts  and 
cooperative management to develop an agroforestry work plan for the cooperative 
based on which a budget will be finalized. It is anticipated that the FP may be a new 
hire  whose  sole  responsibility  will  be  to  ensure  viability  and  sustainability  of  the 
intervention at individual farmer level and at cooperative level. 
ii.    The  FP  will  compile  data  on  farmers  willing  to  receive  support  for  agroforestry 
activities and use the data to guide selection of nursery sites in view of demand for 
seedlings  within  different  parts  of  the  tea  zones.  The  data  will  also  be  useful  in 
46 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
designing collaboration between individual land owners and the cooperative on the 
management of the agroforestry project. 
iii.   Nurseries will be established in line with the principles of community approach and 
also focusing on providing income opportunities and skills development to youth and 
women.  
iv.   In order to mitigate any adverse effects on tea bushes and food crop production, the 
FC will study the farms and advise farmers accordingly. It is anticipated that farmers 
shall  not  benefit  equally  from  agroforestry  activities  as  conditions  of  their  farms 
including size of land and the neighboring environment could limit their participation. 
v.    Equality  among  members  is  a  powerful  rationale  for  the  cooperative  movement 
everywhere  in  the  world.  Towards  this  end,  cooperatives  will  be  encouraged  to 
undertake  agroforestry  activities  as  a  common  service  to  create  credibility  and 
viability  with  markets/factories.  This  approach  will  guarantee  similar  pricing  of  the 
wood fuel in the market and possibly higher incomes to all cooperative members in 
line with cooperative principles of economies of scale. 
vi.   Cooperative  leaders  and  managers  will  receive  training  on  business  skills  through 
PSAC partnerships with Cordaid to raise their capacity to negotiate with customers 
and partners with a view to extracting revenue gains from project investments. 
Table 13 Implementation plan for agroforestry in tea plantations 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Appoint an agroforestry 
activity Focal person at 
cooperative level  
Cooperative 
teams 
7 
Identify the varieties 
suitable for local 
production and fuelwood 
market 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, 
FONERWA 
experts, 
Factory 
foresters  
Community mobilization 
and identification of 
beneficiaries per 
cooperatives 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB 
Tea specialist 
Mobilize farmers to sign 
MOUs to establish a 
Common Approach to 
agroforestry 
management so as to 
assure the market of the 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, 
47 
One Focal person for 
agroforestry 
intervention appointed 
per cooperative 
Agroforestry work plan 
prepared 
Recommended suitable 
tree varieties per 
cooperative area 
Beneficiaries with 
adequate land 
identified 
Cooperatives signed 
Agroforestry 
management MOU  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
quality and quantity to 
meet  wood fuel needs 
of factories. 
Fonerwa 
experts 
Train farmers on 
establishment of 
agroforestry nurseries 
Seedlings Preparation  
Farmers supported to 
plant tree on their farms 
alongside tea bushes 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, 
Fonerwa 
experts 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, 
Fonerwa 
experts 
District and 
cooperative 
teams, 
Fonerwa 
experts 
PSAC to disseminate the 
agroforestry opportunity 
in tea cooperatives to 
potential partners  
District and 
cooperative 
teams, NAEB & 
Ferwacothe 
Community based tree 
nurseries initiated 
through trained 
farmers.  
Quality seedlings for 
transplanting prepared 
as per requirement 
Viable/productive small 
holder tea farmers 
agroforestry and 
woodlots prepared 
Partnership proposals 
including possibilities of 
carbon trade developed 
681 
ha 
681
ha 
680 
ha 
A.1.3 Horticulture plantation Establishment and productivity improvement 
a) Expansion of mango plantation  
128.  Community  mobilization  and  selection  of  sites.  The  subcomponent  envisages 
establishment of new mango plantations on 200 ha covering 2 districts viz. Rusizi (primarily) 
and Bugesera. At least 400 smallholders will engage in development of mango orchards on 
their  own  land  or  on  the  land  offered  by  the  government  or  other  institutions.  In  close 
coordination  with  the  project  Horticulture  Specialist,  the  District  cash  crop  officer,  sector 
agronomist  under  the  leadership  of  District  Director  of  Agriculture,  SEDO  and  co-operative 
officer will be responsible for community mobilization, selection of consolidated land pockets 
of smallholders and identification of participants as per the targeting strategy. 
129.  Development of mango plantation plans. The plantation will be established on the 
smallholder owned consolidated pockets of land. The recommended plantation density is 300 
plants per ha. The District team in association with respective sector agronomists will develop 
a  participatory  plantation  plan  involving  farmers’  groups.  The  plan  will  consist  of  decisions 
about  number  of  plants  per  plot,  plantation  layout,  plan  of  soil  and  water  conservation 
measures etc. Accordingly, the participant farmers will complete the activities pertaining to 
48 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
labour  component  viz.  pit  digging,  mixing  of  top  soil  with  manure,  fertilizer,  pit  filling  and 
immediate aftercare work as their own contribution – this in-kind contribution is assessed at 
RWF 550 per tree. The project will provide a package of inputs viz. grafted seedlings, manure 
(30kg  per  plant)  and  recommended  dose  of  insecticide  /  pesticide.  The  seedlings  will  be 
supplied at nominal farmers’ contribution of Rwf 20 per seedling.  
130.  Production  of  mango  seedlings  and  procurement  of  other  inputs  for 
plantation.    PSAC  will  use  a  community-based  approach  for  nursery  raising  managed  by 
women and/or youth under the supervision of district and sector agronomist. The groups are 
either well experienced in nursery raising or have interest in nursery  raising. They will get 
required knowledge of  nursery management and develop technical skills from the district / 
sector agronomist and trained nursery technicians. The process will help to impart skills to 
local group and develop their ownership in the project.  
131.  Towards  this,  district  authorities  will  first  register  the  existing  community-based 
nurseries in different sectors. NAEB will make a call for proposals (CfP) for mango seedlings 
supply  from  the  registered  community-based  nurseries  who  qualify  the  basic  criteria  viz. 
experience  of  avocado  or  mango  nursery  management,  sufficient  space  for  nursery 
operations, availability of water, production capacity, distance from the consolidated land site 
for smallholder avocado plantation etc. RAB will check and ratify the source of scions for each 
nursery owner. The group can hire skilled grafting technicians as per the need. NAEB along 
with  RAB  will  also  set  minimum  quality  standards  for  seedlings  in  terms  of  age  of  graft, 
firmness  of  grafting  joint,  number  of  leaves,  size  of  tubes  (polythene  bags  for  raising 
seedlings) etc. NAEB will also set the price of seedlings, which can be slightly less than the 
market price but will motivate communities to produce seedlings. The nursery owner groups 
will  make  their  own  arrangement  for  purchase  of  inputs  and  materials  (against  advance 
payment made to them) or NAEB through district office will make the arrangement and deduct 
these costs from the final payment or can access loan from SACCO or MFI against the market 
order and as per the policies of Financial Institutions.  
132.  Other components of the plantation inputs package, assessed at maximum RWF 3,000 
per tree will be provided by the project based on a CfP for external suppliers. This package is 
expected to cover the purchase of (i) 30 kg manure per tree; (ii) 3 kg lime per tree; as well 
as for group use: (iii) insecticides and fungicides. 
133.  The farmers will manage all the aftercare activities as their own contribution.  
134.  Maintenance  of  Mango  plantations.  Mango  has  a  strong  domestic  and  regional 
market. PSAC intends to support farmers to capture the opportunity of mango production as 
import substitute as well as growing regional export market. District and sector agronomist 
as  well  as  exporters  will  work  closely  with  farmers  to  develop  FFS  groups  of  maximum  30 
members,  backstopped  by  2  Lead  Farmers  (1  man,  1  woman)  for  developing  good  quality 
plantations. 
49 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 14 Implementation plan for expansion of Mango plantation activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Selection of 
consolidated land 
pockets  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
25 
ha 
50 
ha 
75 
ha 
50 
ha 
Consolidate land pockets 
for 200ha mango 
plantation selected in 
the targeted 2 districts 
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
participants as per 
targeting strategy 
Development of 
participatory 
consolidated avocado 
plantation 
development plan 
involving farmers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
50 
farm
ers 
100 
farm
ers 
 150 
farm
ers 
100 
farm
ers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
1 
plan 
3 
plan
s 
4 
plan
s 
2 
plan
s 
25 
ha 
50 
ha 
75 
ha 
50 
ha 
3 
6 
8 
8 
Ensured proper layout 
for plantation and pit 
digging before supply 
of seedlings and 
other inputs.  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Registration of 
community-based 
nurseries for grafted 
mango seedlings 
production 
Arrangements for 
input supply for 
nursery raising made  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
CfP for production 
and supply of grafted 
mango seedlings 
through community-
based nurseries 
(including 15% for 
gap filling in yr.2 of 
each new plantation) 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
2 
CBN
,  
5 
CBN  
5 
CBN  
5 
CBN
,  
4 
CBN
,  
750
0 
161
25 
247
50 
183
75 
225
0 
50 
At least 400 
smallholders identified 
for establishment of 
their own mango   
orchards as per the 
targeting strategy 
About 10 participatory 
consolidated mango 
plantation plans 
developed for Rusizi  
(primarily) and  
Bugesara districts 
Layouts for planned 
200ha given and 
accordingly plots made 
plantation ready 
At least 8 community-
based nurseries mainly 
involving women and 
youth registered.   
Nurseries received 
timely input support.  
At least 5 Community 
based nurseries engaged 
in seedling production 
and supplied 69000 
grafted seedlings.  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
seed
lings 
seed
lings 
seed
lings 
seed
lings  
seed
lings 
25 
ha 
50 
ha 
75 
ha 
50 
ha 
CfP for a package of 
inputs – manure and 
fertilizer initiated 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
Plantation of mango 
seedlings 
Seedlings 
providers,  
Maintenance, post-
harvest handling and 
marketing  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist  
SPs exporters, 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Gap filling of selected 
seedlings (Up to 15% 
supported by project)   
Seedlings 
providers,  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
SPs exporters, 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
maintenance support 
for 2nd year through 
project (manure + 
other inputs) 
Suppliers selected and 
required quantity and 
quality of inputs 
procured and supplied as 
per the agreed time 
frame. 
200 ha of mango 
plantations established 
in target districts 
High survival rates 
ensured in mango 
plantations. Mango 
producers empowered to 
manage their plantation 
in a profitable way with 
sustainable market 
Gap filling of all the 
orchards completed  
Inputs (manure, 
fungicides, fertilizer) 
provided and applied to 
all the orchards.  
b) Expansion of avocado plantation 
135.  Community  mobilization  and  selection  of  sites.  The  subcomponent  envisages 
establishment of new Avocado plantations on 800 ha covering 5 districts viz. Rusizi, Huye, 
Nyanza, Rwamagana, and Bugesera. At least 1,600 smallholders will engage in development 
of  avocado  orchards  on  their  own  land  or  on  the  land  offered  by  the  government  or  other 
51 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
institutions.  In  close  coordination  with  the  project  Horticulture  Specialist,  the  District  cash 
crop officer, sector agronomist under the leadership of District Director of Agriculture, SEDO 
and  co-operative  officer  will  be  responsible  for  community  mobilization,  selection  of 
consolidated  land  pockets  of  smallholders  and  identification  of  participants  as  per  the 
targeting strategy. 
136.  Development of avocado plantation plans. The plantation will be established on 
the smallholder owned consolidated pockets of land. The recommended plantation density is 
300  plants  per  ha.  The  District  team  in  association  with  respective  sector  agronomists  will 
develop  a  participatory  plantation  plan  involving  farmers’  groups.  The  plan  will  consist  of 
decisions  about  number  of  plants  per  plot,  plantation  layout,  plan  of  soil  and  water 
conservation measures etc. Accordingly, the participant farmers will complete the activities 
pertaining to labour component viz. pit digging, mixing of top soil with manure, fertilizer, pit 
filling and immediate aftercare work as their own contribution  – this in-kind contribution is 
assessed  at  RWF  550.  The  project  will  provide  a  package  of  inputs  viz.  grafted  seedlings, 
manure (30kg per plant) and recommended dose of insecticides/fungicides. The seedlings will 
be supplied at nominal farmers’ contribution of Rwf 20 per seedling.  
137.  Production  of  avocado  seedlings  and  procurement  of  other  inputs  for 
plantation.    PSAC  will  use  a  community-based  approach  for  nursery  raising  managed  by 
women and/or youth under the supervision of district and sector agronomist. The groups are 
either well experienced in nursery raising or have interest in nursery  raising. They will get 
required knowledge of  nursery management and develop technical skills from the district / 
sector agronomist and trained nursery technicians. The process will help to impart skills to 
local group and develop their ownership in the project.  
138.  Towards  this,  district  authorities  will  first  register  the  existing  community-based 
nurseries in different sectors. NAEB will make a call for proposals (CfP) for avocado seedlings 
supply  from  the  registered  community-based  nurseries  who  qualify  the  basic  criteria  viz. 
experience  of  avocado  or  mango  nursery  management,  sufficient  space  for  nursery 
operations, availability of water, production capacity, distance from the consolidated land site 
for smallholder avocado plantation etc. RAB will check and ratify the source of scions for each 
nursery owner. The group can hire skilled grafting technicians as per the need. NAEB along 
with  RAB  will  also  set  minimum  quality  standards  for  seedlings  in  terms  of  age  of  graft, 
firmness  of  grafting  joint,  number  of  leaves,  size  of  tubes  (polythene  bags  for  raising 
seedlings) etc. NAEB will also set the price of seedlings, which can be slightly less than the 
market price but will motivate communities to produce seedlings. The nursery owner groups 
will  make  their  own  arrangement  for  purchase  of  inputs  and  materials  (against  advance 
payment made to them) or NAEB through district office will make the arrangement and deduct 
these costs from the final payment  
139.  Other components of the plantation inputs package, assessed at maximum RWF 3000 
per tree will be provided by the project based on a CfP for external suppliers. This package is 
expected to cover the purchase of (i) 30 kg manure per tree; (ii) 3 kg lime per tree; as well 
as  for  group  use:  (iii)  insecticides  and  fungicides;  (iv)  spraying  pumps  and  full  protective 
wears.  
140.  The  farmers  will  manage  all  the  aftercare  activities  as  their  own  contribution.  They 
may receive support to invest in small-scale efficient irrigation technologies (EIT) through the 
52 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
small-scale grants’ mechanism – this will be supported through WB funded upcoming project 
CDAT; however, PSAC will intervene if the support from CDAT is not materialized.  
141.  Maintenance  of  avocado  plantation.  Avocado  has  strong  domestic  and  regional 
market. It has the potential to be highly profitable for export to Europe and UAE. PSAC intends 
to support farmers to meet export requirements of such high value market.  This requires a 
strong engagement of producers with exporters who can guide PSAC as well as producers in 
varietal selection, export standards (about fertilizer, pesticide etc.), certification requirements 
etc. PSAC will follow FFS approach for maintenance of avocado plantation. District and sector 
agronomist  as  well  as  exporters  will  work  closely  with  farmers  to  develop  FFS  groups  of 
maximum 30 members, backstopped by 2 Lead Farmers (1 man, 1 woman) for developing 
good quality plantations 
142.  The  exporters  will  work  closely  with  Farmer  field  schools  and  develop  skills  and 
capacities of lead farmers to guide others on the lines of innovative training approach initiated 
during PRICE. These trainings will be initiated from year 2 and will generate awareness among 
at  least  1,600  small  avocado  producers  about  the  export  market,  its  demands  and 
management.  This innovative training to be provided directly by renown exporters (based on 
a competitive CfP) is further detailed under ‘Activity 1.1.22: Innovative training package for 
macadamia, avocado, mango French beans, chili and essential oils (with exporters)’ 
Table 15 Implementation plan for expansion of Avocado plantation activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Selection of 
consolidated land 
pockets  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
100 
ha 
200 
ha 
300 
ha 
200
ha 
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
participants as per 
targeting strategy 
Development of 
participatory 
consolidated avocado 
plantation 
development plan 
involving farmers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
200 
farm
ers 
400 
farm
ers 
 600 
farm
ers 
400 
farm
ers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
5 
plan
s 
15 
plan
s 
20 
plan
s 
Consolidated land 
pockets for 800ha 
avocado plantation 
selected in the targeted 
5 districts 
At least 1600 
smallholders identified 
for establishment of 
their own avocado 
orchards as per the 
targeting strategy 
About 25 participatory 
consolidated avocado 
plantation plans 
developed across the 5 
target districts 
Ensured proper layout 
for plantation and pit 
digging before supply 
District and 
sector teams, 
100 
ha 
200 
ha 
300 
ha 
200
ha 
Layouts for planned 
800ha given and 
53 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
of seedlings and 
other inputs.  
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Registration of 
community-based 
nurseries for grafted 
avocado seedlings 
production 
Arrangements for 
input supply for 
nursery raising made  
CfP for production 
and supply of grafted 
avocado seedlings 
through community-
based nurseries 
(including 15% for 
gap filling in yr.2 of 
each new plantation) 
5 
15 
20 
20 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
3 
CBN
,  
6 
CBN
,  
10 
CBN  
10 
CBN  
10 
CBN
,  
300
00 
seed
lings 
645
00 
seed
lings 
990
00 
seed
lings 
135
00 
seed
lings 
103
500 
seed
lings  
CfP for a package of 
inputs – manure and 
fertilizer initiated 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
Plantation of avocado 
seedlings 
Maintenance, post-
harvest handling and 
marketing  
Seedlings 
providers, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist  
SP exporters, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
100 
ha 
200 
ha 
300 
ha 
200 
ha 
54 
accordingly plots made 
plantation ready 
At least 20 community-
based nurseries mainly 
involving women and 
youth registered by 
year 2.  
Nurseries received 
timely input support.  
At 10 Community 
based nurseries 
engaged in seedling 
production and 
supplied 276000 
grafted seedlings.  
Suppliers selected and 
required quantity and 
quality of inputs 
procured and supplied 
as per the agreed time 
frame. 
800 ha of macadamia 
plantations established 
in target districts 
High survival rates 
ensured in Avocado 
plantations. 
Avocado producers 
empowered to manage 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Gap filling of 
selected seedlings 
(Up to 15% 
supported by 
project)   
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Seedlings 
providers,  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
maintenance 
support for 2nd year 
through project 
(manure + other 
inputs) 
SPs exporters, 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
their plantation in a 
profitable way with 
sustainable market 
Gap filling of all the 
orchards completed  
Inputs (manure, 
fungicides, fertilizer) 
provided and applied 
to all the orchards.  
c) Expansion of macadamia plantations 
143.  Community  mobilization  and  selection  of  sites.  The  subcomponent  envisages 
establishment  of  new  plantation  of  macadamia  on  500ha  covering  5  districts  viz.  Rusizi, 
Nyamasheke,  Karongi,  Rutsiro  and  Rwamagana.  At  least  1000  smallholders  will  engage  in 
development of macadamia orchards on their own land or the land offered by the government 
or other institutions. In close coordination with the project Horticulture Specialist, the District 
cash crop officer, sector agronomist under the leadership of District Director of Agriculture, 
SEDO  and  co-operative  officer  will  be  responsible  for  community  mobilization,  selection  of 
consolidated  land  pockets  of  smallholders  and  identification  of  participants  as  per  the 
targeting strategy.  
144.  Development of macadamia plantation plans. The plantation will be established 
on the smallholder owned consolidated pockets of land. The recommended plantation density 
is 204 plants per ha. The District team in association with respective sector agronomists will 
develop  a  participatory  plantation  plan  involving  farmers’  groups.  The  plan  will  consist  of 
decisions  about  number  of  plants  per  plot,  plantation  layout,  plan  of  soil  and  water 
conservation measures etc. Accordingly, the participant farmers will complete the activities 
pertaining to labour component viz. pit digging, mixing of top soil with manure and fertilizer, 
pit filling and immediate aftercare work as their own contribution – this in-kind contribution 
is assessed at RWF550. The project will provide a package of inputs viz. grafted seedlings, 
manure (30kg per plant) and recommended dose of fertilizer, lime etc.  The seedlings will be 
supplied at nominal farmers’ contribution of Rwf 20 per seedling which will be kept with district 
SEDO and will be further used as contribution for gap filling work.  
55 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
145.  Production  of  macadamia  seedlings  and  procurement  of  other  inputs  for 
plantation. PSAC recommends in general a community-based approach for nursery raising. 
However, in the case of Macadamia, due to the low survival rate of grafted seedlings (ranging 
from 30%to 60%), the nursery operations need to be carefully handled. The above-mentioned 
private sector players and their associated technicians possess required skills and capacities 
to produce macadamia grafts at scale. So, the project will source the grafted seedlings from 
experienced private sector players engaged in the macadamia value chain who can guide the 
farmers as well as ensure the production  of good quality grafted seedlings. RAB will check 
and ratify the source of scions for each nursery owner. Towards this NAEB will make a call for 
proposals (CfP) for macadamia seedlings supply among those sector players who qualify the 
basic  criteria  viz.  experience  of  macadamia  nursery  management,  ability  to  guide  farmers 
during  and  after  plantation,  capacity  to  produce  at  scale,  production  of  required  quality 
standards (firm grafted joint, number of leaves, age of graft, healthy plant etc.).  
146.  The CfP will include not only seedlings supply, but also other inputs for plantation viz. 
manure, fertilizer, fungicides etc. and make sure that material of required quality and quantity 
remains available to the farmers before plantation of seedlings. The cost of the macadamia 
seedlings is assessed at RWF 4,000/unit. Other components of the plantation inputs package, 
assessed at maximum RWF 3,000 per tree will be provided by the project based on a CfP for 
external suppliers. This package is expected to cover the purchase of (i) 30 kg compost per 
tree; (ii) 3 kg lime per tree; as well as for group use: (iii) insecticides and fungicides.  
147.  Partnership with technical support providers. Macadamia is grown as an export 
potential crop. The linkage of producers with aggregators / processors / exporters who have 
capacity  to  guide  small  producers  in  development  of  plantation  and  advice  on  agronomical 
practices is key for development of the supply chain. This is an important step with reference 
to Kenya and Malawi where illegal trade of macadamia is a cause of concern for development 
of a strong macadamia value chain. There are some private players like FDINDA Ltd, Rwanda 
Nuts, Norlega, etc. who are well experienced and have strong technical capacity to provide 
guidance on grafted seedling production, orchard management, post-harvest handling as well 
as processing and marketing. Considering the nascent stage of the macadamia value chain in 
Rwanda which has problems of accessing good planting material, limited technical know-how, 
unorganized  chain,  limited  local  market  etc.,  it  is  opportune  time  to  create  space  for  such 
experienced private sector players as technical service providers.  The service providers will 
work with the macadamia producers through a Farmer Field School approach (entailing groups 
of  maximum  30  members,  with  2  lead  farmers  –  1  man/1  woman  trained  by  the  SP  to 
strengthen the proximity coaching).  
148.  Using the above rationale, the project will have following approach for expansion of 
macadamia plantation: 
a)   ‘The  Rwanda  Nuts  Ltd’,  has  agreed  to  provide  the  advisory  services  free36 for  the 
development and follow up (including post-harvest handling and marketing) of 250ha 
of smallholder macadamia plantation at least until the 4th year after plantation. This 
private sector contribution is assessed as equivalent to a cost of USD 50 per farmer 
and per year (eq. to USD 25,000 per year). For this purpose, NAEB will enter into an 
MoU  in  the  first  year  of  the  programme  to  recognize  Rwanda  Nuts  contribution  and 
36 E-mail communication from Rwanda Nuts during the PSAC design mission in Rwanda (9th-20th May 2022).  
56 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ensure the services to the target group with clear timelines and deliverables.  Rwanda 
nuts  is  expecting  NAEB  and  respective  district  authorities  to  mobilize  communities, 
organize  them  in  groups  and  facilitate  consolidated  land  availability  for  smallholder 
macadamia  plantation.  On  the  other  hand,  Rwanda  Nuts  will  ensure  continuous 
support to macadamia farmers on the 250ha (exact locations to be defined once the 
macadamia plantation plans have been developed). 
b)  For the remaining 250 ha of macadamia plantation, NAEB will launch a call for proposal 
(CfP) from the experienced private sector players in Macadamia Value chain to provide 
technical  services  to  cultivators  for  the  first  4  years  after  plantation.  The  proposed 
criteria  for  selection  of  Private  sector  service  providers  will  be  –  a)  engaged  in 
macadamia  cultivation  /  processing  activities,  b)  have  long  term  vision  and  plan  to 
remain in Macadamia VC and c) in position to provide technical services for orchard 
development, post-harvest handling and marketing) d) have experience of supporting 
Macadamia  cultivators  regularly.  The  budget  of  USD  60,000  for  technical  support 
services for 250 ha is estimated at USD30 per ha per farmer per year for 4 years. 
Table 16 Implementation plan for expansion of Macadamia plantation activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Selection of 
consolidated land 
pockets  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
50h
a 
150
ha 
200 
ha 
100 
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
participants as per 
targeting strategy 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
100 
far
mer
s 
300 
far
mer
s 
200 
far
mer
s 
400 
far
mer
s 
Development of 
participatory 
consolidated 
macadamia plantation 
development plan 
involving farmers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
10 
plan
s 
10 
plan
s 
5 
plan
s 
CfP for technical 
service providers to 
facilitate macadamia 
orchard development. 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
57 
Consolidated land 
pockets for 200ha 
macadamia plantation 
selected in the targeted 
5 districts 
At least 400 
smallholders identified 
for establishment of 
their own macadamia 
orchards as per the 
targeting strategy 
About 25 participatory 
consolidated 
macadamia plantation 
plans developed across 
the 5 target districts 
Private sector partners 
engaged in 
Macadadamia 
cultivation, processing 
and marketing selected 
for different 
geographical locations 
and started providing 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
regular advisory and 
training services.  
Rwanda Nuts provided 
advisory and training 
services to farmers 
using its own 
resources. 
Suppliers selected and 
required quantity and 
quality of seedlings 
produced and supplied 
as per the agreed time 
frame.  
500ha of macadamia 
plantations established 
in target districts 
High survival rates 
ensured in macadamia 
plantations 
Macadamia producers 
empowered to manage 
their plantation in a 
profitable way with 
sustainable market 
Gap filling of all the 
orchards completed  
MoU with The Rwanda 
Nuts Private Ltd.  
CfP for production 
and supply of grafted 
macadamia seedlings 
combined with a 
package of inputs – 
manure, fertilizer and 
fungicides 
Plantation of 
macadamia seedlings 
Rwanda Nuts and 
other SP exporters 
support macadamia 
producers in 
maintenance, post-
harvest handling and 
marketing  
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
Seedlings 
providers, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist  
Rwanda Nuts 
and SP 
exporters, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Gap filling of selected 
seedlings (Up to 15% 
supported by project)   
Seedlings 
providers,  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
50 
ha 
100 
ha 
50 
ha 
58 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
maintenance support 
for 2nd year through 
project (manure + 
other inputs) 
SPs exporters, 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Inputs (manure, 
fungicides, fertilizer) 
provided and applied to 
all the orchards.  
d) Expansion of essential oils plantations  
149.  Community mobilization.    Essential oils from three types  of plants viz. patchouli, 
eucalyptus  and  lemon  grass  are  extracted  through  producer  -  exporter  linkage  in  targeted 
districts. The total area under cultivation is 186 ha, mainly cultivated as an intercrop in coffee 
and banana plantation. It belongs to 513 producers from 4 co-operatives (166 member of co-
operatives  and  347  out  growers).  The  proposed  expansion  aims  to  cover  100  ha  of  new 
patchouli  cultivation  and  100  ha  of  replacing  /  expanding  the  existing  patchouli  plantation 
with new varieties based on successful trials (described in Activity 1.1.20) in five districts viz. 
Rusizi,  Nyamasheke,  Nyabhihu,  Nyruguru,  Nyanza,  Musanze.  This  will  need  mobilization  of 
1000  more  producers,  making  a  total  of  1513  producers.    The  expansion  will  come  from 
increasing the number of out growers around existing 4 co-operatives and addition of 2-3 new 
co-operatives.  
150.  PSAC  will  use  FFS  approach  for  mobilization  while  involving  lead  farmers.  In  close 
coordination  with  the  project  Horticulture  Specialist,  the  District  cash  crop  officer,  sector 
agronomist  under  the  leadership  of  District  Director  of  Agriculture,  SEDO  and  co-operative 
officer will be responsible for community mobilization, selection of consolidated land pockets 
of  smallholders  for  intercropping  and  identification  of  participants  as  per  the  targeting 
strategy. They will work in tandem with essential oil exporter during mobilization phase.  
151.  Nursery  raising.  PSAC  recommends  a  community-based  approach  for  nursery 
raising, mainly engaging women and/or youth from the participating co-operatives under the 
guidance  of  district  and  sector  agronomist  and  exporters.  Towards  this,  district  authorities 
will  first  register  interested  community-based  groups.  NAEB  will  make  a  call  for  proposals 
(CfP)  for  patchouli  seedlings  supply  from  the  registered  community-based  nurseries  who 
qualify the basic criteria viz. experience of nursery management, sufficient space for nursery 
operations, availability of  water, production capacity, distance from the plantation site etc. 
Ess Oil will check and ratify the source of cuttings for each nursery owner. NAEB along with 
Ess Oil will establish minimum quality standards for seedlings.  NAEB will also set the price of 
seedlings which can be slightly less than the market price but will motivate communities to 
produce seedlings. The nursery owner groups will make their own arrangement for purchase 
of inputs and materials (against advance payment made to them) or NAEB through district 
office will make the arrangement and deduct these costs from the final payment or can access 
loan  from  SACCO  or  MFI  against  the  market  order  and  as  per  the  policies  of  Financial 
Institutions. 
59 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
152.  Development  of  patchouli/geranium  plantation. 
of 
patchouli/geranium  seedlings  will  be  established  on  consolidated  essential  oil  plots,  and 
whenever  possible  also  as  an  intercrop  in  smallholder  coffee  plots.  The  recommended 
plantation density is 28,000 seedlings per ha (on consolidated plots). The participant farmers 
will complete the activities pertaining to labour component viz. land preparation for plantation, 
application of manure and fertilizer and immediate aftercare work as their own contribution – 
this in-kind contribution is assessed at RWF 5 per seedling.  The project will provide seedlings 
at  nominal  farmers’  contribution  of  Rwf  1  per  seedling.  The  farmers  will  manage  all  the 
aftercare activities as their own contribution.  
The  plantation 
Table 17 Implementation plan for expansion of essential oil plantation activity 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Selection of 
consolidated land 
pockets  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
20 
ha 
50 
ha 
50 
ha 
80 
ha 
Community 
mobilization and 
identification of 
participants as per 
targeting strategy 
Development of 
participatory 
consolidated avocado 
plantation 
development plan 
involving farmers 
Ensure proper layout 
and land preparation 
before supply of 
seedlings and other 
inputs.  
Registration of 
community-based 
nurseries for grafted 
avocado seedlings 
production 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
150 
farm
ers 
400 
farm
ers 
 400 
farm
ers 
650 
farm
ers 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
2 
plan
s 
3 
plan
s 
3 
plan
s 
8 
plan
s 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
20 
ha 
50 
ha 
50 
ha 
80 
ha 
2 
3 
3 
8 
60 
Consolidated land 
pockets to cover total 
200 ha patchouli 
plantation selected in 
the targeted 5 districts 
At least 1000 
smallholders identified 
for establishment of 
patchouli as an 
intercrop in their coffee 
/ banana plots as per 
the targeting strategy 
About 16 participatory 
consolidated patchouli 
plantation plans 
developed across the 5 
targeted districts 
Layouts for planned 
200 ha given and 
accordingly plots made 
plantation ready 
About 16 community-
based nurseries mainly 
involving women and 
youth registered.  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Arrangements for 
input supply for 
nursery raising made  
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
CfP for production 
and supply of 
patchouli seedlings 
through community-
based nurseries  
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
2 
CBN
,  
3 
CBN
,  
3 
CBN  
8 
CBN  
560
000 
seed
lings 
140
000
0 
seed
lings 
140
000
0 
seed
lings 
224
000
0 
seed
lings  
20 
ha 
50 
ha 
50 
ha 
80 
ha 
Plantation of 
patchouli seedlings  
Maintenance, post-
harvest handling and 
marketing  
Seedlings 
providers, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist  
SP exporters, 
supervised by 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Nurseries received 
timely input support.  
About 16 Community 
based nurseries 
engaged in seedling 
production and 
supplied 5600000 
grafted seedlings.  
800 ha of macadamia 
plantations established 
in target districts 
High survival rates 
ensured in patchouli 
plantations. 
Patchouli producers 
empowered to manage 
their plantation in a 
profitable way with 
sustainable market 
e) Trials on essential oils 
153.  Purpose  of  trials.  Patchouli  is  a  perennial,  small  bushy  herb  which  yields  fragrant 
leaves containing very sweet-smelling oil.  It is a commercial crop with high export demand 
for its oil extracted from leaves. The major producers of this high value crop are Indonesia 
and China. Indonesia contributes to about 80 - 90% of global supply of Patchouli oil (1,600-
2,000MT/ year).  
61 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
154.  The  agro-climatic  conditions  in  Rwanda  are  suitable  for  growing  Patchouli  and  is  a 
suitable  for  export  (high  value  –  low  volume)  considering  landlocked  nature  of  Rwanda. 
However,  the  current  production  in  Rwanda  is  meager  (less  than  1%  of  Indonesia’s 
production). One of the issues is low productivity due to varietal constraint. The productivity 
of Indonesian varieties is 100kg/ha as against the variety in Rwanda produces 20kg /ha. It 
mainly affects competitiveness of Rwanda’s Patchouli oil value chain. So one option to improve 
productivity is to test selected Indonesian Patchouli varieties in Rwanda.  
155.  Implementation  modalities.    Ess  OIL  is  a  private  Rwandan  company  engaged  in 
production and export of high quality pure, natural, and organic essential oil. It has its own 
farm in Kayonza district and also engaged with more than 1000 small farmers in its supply 
chain.   
156.  The  propagation  of  the  crop  is  through  stem  cutting.  Ess  Oil  plans  to  improve  the 
productivity of Patchouli in Rwanda by introducing suitable varieties from Indonesia. It has 
identified  three  high  yielding  varieties  Patchouli  Java,  Patchouli  Sulawesi  and  Patchouli 
Sumatra to be tried out in Rwanda. 
157.  There are interventions and costs involved at various stages - a) procurement (import) 
of  new  varieties,  b)  multiplication  of  seedlings  c)  Conducting  trials  in  the  field  to  identify 
suitable varieties for Rwanda 
a)  Procurement  (import)  of  new  varieties:  Ess  Oil  will  take  lead  in  engaging  with 
Government of Rwanda, RAB and Sources in Indonesia to get the required permissions 
and clearances for importing of  Patchouli stem cuttings of three  varieties planted in 
small  cups,  it  will  also  make  all  the  arrangements  for  transport  and  clearances  in 
Rwanda. The total quantity (including three varieties) is 10,000 cuttings.  The cost of 
sourcing the material and importing (USD 10300) will be borne by the project (NAEB). 
The expected time period is 3 to 6 months.  
b)  Multiplication of seedlings: Ess Oil will raise these cutting in nursery at its farm. It will 
make  all  the  arrangements  for  manure  application,  fertigation  and  use  appropriate 
infrastructure (shade net, poly hose as required). It will use its human resources to 
manage the nursery. All the costs related to nursery raising will be borne by Ess Oil. 
It  is  expected  that  the  nursery  will  provide  about  100,000  cuttings  for  large  scale 
multiplication. The expected time period is 6 months.  
c)  Field trials: NAEB Essential Oil Specialist along with District and Sector Agronomist will 
identify 5 plots of 0.5ha each. The plots will be well prepared along with drip irrigation 
facilities for planting of 100,000 cuttings from nursery. Ess Oil will monitor the work 
along with District and sector agronomist. It will also study the yield of Patchouli oil as 
per variety and in different batches to arrive at conclusion about suitable variety. Based 
on  the  results  it  will  recommend  one  or  more  varieties  for  cultivation.  All  the  costs 
including transportation of cuttings will be borne by the project. Ess Oil will manage 
the cost of monitoring and guiding 5 nursery plots in the field through its own sources. 
The  expected  time  period  is  6  months.  However,  land  preparation  and  installing 
irrigation  systems  may  take  more  time  and  needs  to  be  planned  when  the 
multiplication of seedlings will be in process.  
d)  The total cost for trials to the project is estimated as USD 23,000, which involves cost 
of  3  varieties  of  cutting,  cost  of  importing  and  development  of  5  field  plots  for 
62 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
multiplication.  Ess  oil  will  bear  the  cost  of  facilitation  for  trials  and  cost  of  nursery 
raising of imported cutting which amounts to total USD 8,000  
Table 18 Implementation plan for essential oil – varietal trials 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Procurement (import) 
of new varieties 
(sourcing, approvals, 
clearances and 
transportation) 
Ess Oil 
(management 
of activities) 
NAEB (PSAC)- 
cost of 
procurement 
Multiplication of 
seedlings 
Ess Oil 
Preparation of plots 
for field trials (land 
preparation and 
establishment of 
irrigation system) 
Conducting field trials 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
along with Ess 
Oil. 
District and 
sector teams, 
Horticulture 
Specialist along 
with Ess Oil 
10000 cutting of three 
varieties imported 
safely to Rwanda.  
10000 cuttings raised 
in the nursery and 
produced  
5 sites, each of 0.5 ha 
prepared to receive 
100000 cuttings from 
nursery.  
100000 seedlings 
successfully raised and 
tested productivity 
result. Appropriate 
varieties recommended 
A.1.3.12: International Technical Assistance for the production of macadamia 
seedlings  
158.  Avocado grafting takes about 18 months to produce a good quality graft. The survival 
rate of grafts (wedge graft) in nursery varies from 20% to 60% in Rwanda. The long grafting 
period with poor survival rate is a challenge for establishing long gestation period Macadamia 
plants. It also results in increased cost of grafted seedlings.   
159.  Therefore, it is recommended to provide take Technical Assistance of experts from the 
traditional Macadamia cultivation areas like South Africa. The scope of work includes a) visit 
to  major  macadamia  nursery  producers  in  the  country  and  interaction  with  them  to 
understand the issues at the nursery level. b) understand the climatic factors and agronomic 
practices including impact of timing of grafting, quality of mother orchards and suitability of 
varieties. c) Sharing of best practices of grafting from other countries d) Analysis of gathered 
information and provide recommendations for improving survival rate of grafting.  
63 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
160.  NAEB will make a call for proposals (CfP) for consultancy as per abovementioned scope 
of  work  to  identify  right  agency  /  candidate  who  have  strong  theoretical  and  practical 
experience  in  Macadamia  cultivation  especially  seedlings  production  (USD20,000).  NAEB 
Horticulture specialist will lead the process while engaging RAB scientist and major nursery 
producers in the country viz. Rwanda Nuts, FDINDA Ltd. etc.  
Table 19 Implementation plan for technical assistance to improvement in survival rate of macadamia grafts 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Preparation of 
detailed scope of 
work  
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist  
CfP for consultancy 
assignment to 
improve survival rate 
of wedge grafting of 
Macadamia in 
Rwanda 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
Execution of 
consultancy 
assignment 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist  
Detailed scope of work 
prepared and shared 
for CfP.   
CfP announced and 
right candidate 
recruited  
Issues related to poor 
survival of grafts 
identified and valid 
alternatives / change 
of practices 
recommended.   
A.2 Improvement of Rural Infrastructure facilities and equipment at cooperative 
and exporters’ level 
A.2.1 Direct Support (100% Project support) 
A.2.1.1: Support for soil and water testing kits (Palintest Kits) 
161.  Palintest kits are “mobile labs’ that can be used by producers on their farms to test 
their soils in order to determine the PH and nutritional requirements of their farms. The kits 
can also be used at the CWS to test the quality of processing water as well in the management 
of liquid waste from the factories. Additionally, these kits can be used to carryout nutrition 
analysis of compost made in homes or factories as well as analysis of commercial fertilizers 
bought from suppliers.  
162.  PSAC shall fully support acquisition of 10 Palintest Kits to be provided to CWS owned 
by cooperatives for use at the CWS and Farm levels.  
A.2.1.2: Pilot Hangar construction for coffee cherry collection  
163.  With creation of the new coffee zones in an effort to ensure maximum utilization of all 
CWS, each zone was assigned the nearest CWS (both private and cooperative owned) to sell 
their produce. Despite this effort, some of the CWS are still far from some of the farms. Coffee 
64 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
cherry is supposed to pulped within a few hours after harvesting to maintain the quality of 
coffee. The distance between the farms and the CWS therefore has a direct relationship with 
the quality of coffee after processing. In addition, middlemen have taken advantage of this 
challenge buying coffee from the farmers at extremely low prices thus disenfranchising them 
the opportunity to fetch better prices if they were able to sell directly to the CWS.  
It is for this reason that PSAC shall support 2 pilot hangars in areas where the farmers 
164. 
still  have  to  walk  for  a  long  distance  to  access  the  CWS.  This  will  be  constructed  in  two 
Districts, each getting one Pilot Hangar. PSAC shall invest in the construction of Hangers while 
the farmers shall provide land for the hangar in a suitable location that has water and does 
not pose any adverse risk to the environment. 
A.2.1.3: Construction of Eco-friendly Coffee Drying Infrastructure 
165.  Coffee drying can be a delicate process as fully washed coffee should not be exposed 
to wetness once the parchment is subjected to the drying process and at the same time wet 
parchment should not be covered under water proof materials for so long to avoid growth of 
mould. The adversaries of climate change resulting in prolonged wet days and unpredictable 
rainfall patterns during coffee processing season calls for some adaptation strategies.  
166.  Two  adaptation  strategies  considered  by  PSAC  that  are  eco-friendly  are  parabolic 
drying structures and mechanical driers. The project shall determine the design of the driers 
to ensure that they meet the standard for the intended drying purpose and that they are user-
friendly. The project shall fully support 3 driers including 1 parabolic dryer for pilot testing 
and demonstration for their use.  
Table 20 Implementation of rural infrastructure – Direct support (100% project supported) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Outputs 
Soil and water 
testing kits 
(Palintest Kits) 
NAEB 
Environment 
specialist, and 
coffee specialist 
Construction of Pilot 
Hangar for coffee 
cherry collection 
District and 
sector teams, 
NAEB/SPIU/ 
Procurement  
10 
0
2
H
a
n
g
a
r
s
Construction of 
100% financed 3 
Eco-friendly Coffee 
Driers 
District and 
sector teams, 
NAEB/SPIU/ 
Procurement  
3
e
c
o
f
r
i
e
n
d
y
l
c
o
f
f
e
e
d
r
i
e
r
s
10 palintest kits 
purchased and 
provided to CWS 
managed by 
cooperatives 
0
0
0
0
2 hangars in two 
different districts 
2 parabolic coffee 
driers and 1 
mechanical drier 
A.2.1.4: Build Hangars for collection of green Tea leaves 
65 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
167.  PSAC  will  support  cooperatives  to  establish  52  leaf  collection  hangars  in  strategic 
locations  to  facilitate  quality  inspection,  green  leaf  weighing  and  scheduling  of  transport. 
Farmers, through their cooperative will provide the land on which the  hangars and ablution 
blocks will be constructed. 
168.  Constructed  hangars  will  serve  as  meeting  venues  for  dissemination  of  information 
and coordination of training programs. two main value chain activities will take place at the 
hangar,  namely  green  leaf  weighing  and  coordination  of  training.  Maintenance  and 
improvement  of  the  hangar  will  be  the  responsibility  of  respective  farmers  who  are 
members/owners of the hangar.  
169.  The national tea register which will be maintained at the cooperative and factory will 
issue unique farmer identification numbers linked to the hangar where a farmer weighs their 
green leaf. 
170.  New farmers may be charged a membership fee to be registered as members of the 
hangar. 
A.2.1.5: Investment in avocado grading line at NAEB packhouse  
171.  The recommended addition of avocado grading machine is to improve competitiveness 
of avocado value chain with reference to reginal players and take advantage of large export 
markets  available  for  fresh  avocado.  The  data  of  last  two  years’  peak  season  (August  to 
December) 2020 and 2021 suggest that there is an increase in monthly fresh avocado export 
– from about average 100MT/month to average 200 MT/month (from 4 containers /month to 
8 containers per month). Based in NAEB’s estimate, It is expected to be doubled in next 4-5 
years.  
172.  Currently  sorting  and  grading  operations  are  carried  out  manually.  However,  it  is 
challenging to handle increasing volumes, strict export requirements for quality, quantity of 
packaging  (4kg  /  box)  and  timeliness  of  operations  manually.  Rwanda  is  eyeing  for  Dubai 
market through sea route. In order to be competitive with its regional players, spending long 
time in filling the containers is not feasible. So, it is recommended to introduce mechanized 
avocado  grading  operations  along  with  hydrocooling  facility  to  reduce  losses.  The 
neighbouring countries - Tanzania and Kenya possess this technology.  
173.  NAEB  has  currently  acquired  quotations  for  understanding  costs  involved,  available 
capacity, training needs, installation possibilities etc. The cost of machine including transport 
cost and taxes and installation and training to NAEB team is USD 400,000. Its capacity is to 
2 containers of 23T per day. NAEB will do expansion of space in its packhouse to accommodate 
the avocado grading machine using its own resources (around USD 100,000).  
Table 21 Implementation plan mechanized avocado grading line 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Preparation of Tender 
Document for 
mechanized avocado 
grading equipment 
and identification of 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
officers in 
association 
with specialist 
Detailed requirements 
and specification 
prepared and shared 
for CfP. Identified 
major equipment 
66 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
major equipment 
manufacturers 
NAEB - Head of 
Packhouse, 
Horticulture 
specialist  
Sharing the tender 
Document to 
identified equipment 
manufacturers and 
selection of the 
suitable manufacturer 
Expansion of 
packhouse facilities to 
accommodate 
Mechanized Avocado 
Grading line.   
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
NAEB – Head of 
Packhouse  
Procurement of 
Equipment 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers 
Installation and 
Training to operators 
and NAEB staff 
Equipment 
Manufacturer 
manufacturers for 
sharing of Tender 
document.  
Tender document 
released, quotations 
received, suitable 
manufacturer added 
and order placed after 
negotiations.  
Packhouse facilities 
expanded to install 
mechanized avocado 
grading line. 
Equipment procured as 
per order and verified. 
.  
New avocado grading 
line installed, trial run 
completed and staff 
trained in operation, 
management and 
trouble shooting.  
A.2.1.6: Electronic weighing scales 
174.  Accurate green leaf weighing is critical to farmer’s satisfaction and trust building. This 
is important in creating loyalty that enables farmers to follow advice given by officers of the 
cooperative. PSAC will support cooperatives to procure an electronic weighing scale per truck. 
The scale will be capable of issuing instant receipts for green leaf upon weighing and therefore 
avoiding human interventions that may be associated with loss of integrity of the data. 
A.2.1.7: Farmers information/data servers (software-based database of farmers' 
green leaves collection and revenues)  
175.  PSAC will support 3 new cooperatives to procure servers to maintain farmers data and 
enable  electronic  payments  for  green  leaf.  The  servers  will  enable  the  cooperatives  to 
maintain data for individual farmers including the census reports and to match the same with 
their  production  in  order  to  prevent  falsification  of  records  and  payments  that  may  deny 
genuine farmers their rightful earnings. 
67 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
176.  The electronic Greenleaf weighing scales shall transmit data directly to the servers and 
avoid human intervention thus enhancing data integrity that will boost trust between farmers 
and cooperative management thus increasing their motivation. 
177.  Maintaining  individual  farmers  records  using  unique  registration  numbers  per 
cooperative  in  line  with  the  national  tea  register  will  further  support  certification  and 
traceability mechanisms with a view to linking farmers to more lucrative markets under the 
leadership of the factory. 
A.2.1.8: Pick Up truck for Ferwacothe 
 Ferwacothe serves all tea cooperatives in Rwanda and these are located in different 
178. 
parts  of  the  country  thus  making  mobility  a  prerequisite  for  effective  coordination  and 
supervision. Towards this end, and in order to effectively implement Cooperatives Common 
Services  activities  under  the  guidance  of  the  international  expert,  PSAC  will  support 
Ferwacothe  to  acquire  a  pickup  truck  for  use  in  coordination,  training  and  monitoring 
activities. 
A.2.1.9: Green leaf transportation Trucks 
179.  Green leaf once plucked may deteriorate very quickly if the outside temperature is not 
well  controlled  hence  the  need  for  suitable  transport  from  the  farms  to  the  factory  where 
cooling takes place. Inadequate transport affects both volume and quality of production by 
way of long plucking cycles, excessive loose leaves and red leaves due to overheating. It may 
also lead to high losses in transit. 
a)  PSAC  will  support  cooperatives  to  acquire  appropriate  trucks  for  green  leaf 
transportation. A total of 11 (3 ton) trucks will be procured on grant basis. The general 
condition of the road network and terrain in tea zones is relevant and will be considered 
in choosing the model of trucks. 
b)  Capacity of trucks is important considering that some farms are far away from factories 
since  the  country  has  no  regulation  limiting  the  radius  of  tea  catchments.  Long 
journeys  increase  the  risk  of  quality  deterioration  and  therefore  it  is  preferred  that 
green leaf bags should be hanged/suspended using hooks on pillars mounted on the 
trucks. 
c)  Quality of green leaves quickly deteriorate when the leaves are compacted and bruised 
leading  to  uncontrolled  fermentation  and  reddening  of  leaves.  Cooperatives  will 
procure enough bags to ensure that only the optimum amount of leaf (15 Kgs) is put 
in a bag. 
d)  Records  or  loading  sheets  shall  be  kept  by  the  driver  indicating  which  rows  of  bags 
have been loaded at which hangar in an effort to aid traceability for purposes of quality 
management and identification of training needs among farmers affiliated to different 
hangars. 
Table 22 Implementation plan for direct support to tea value chain (A.2.1.4 and A.2.1.6 to A.2.1.9) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Build Hangars for collection of green 
Tea leaves 
68 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Prepare tender for 
construction of 
hangers and selection 
of vendors  
Construction of 
hangers completed 
Electronic weighing 
scales 
Prepare tender and 
selection of a vendor 
Procure weighing 
scales  
Tea specialist  
Procurement 
specialist 
Co-operatives 
26 
26 
Tea specialist  
Procurement 
specialist 
11 
Farmers information/data servers 
Tea specialist 
Tea specialist 
Prepare tender for 
the data servers and 
select a vendor  
Complete data server 
installation and 
operationalization  
Pick Up truck for 
Ferwacothe and 
Green leaf 
transportation 
Trucks 
Prepare tender for 
the pick-up truck and 
green leaf 
transportation trucks 
and select a vendor 
Tea specialist  
Procurement 
specialist 
Co-operatives 
Tenders prepared, 
released and vendors 
selected  
Hangar construction 
completed 
Tender prepared, 
released and vendor 
selected 
Electronic weighing 
scales procured 
Tender prepared, 
released and vendor 
selected 
Data server 
operationalized  
Tender prepared, 
released and vendor 
selected 
Procure the vehicles 
Vehicles procured 
A.2.2: Investment Grants 
A.2.2.1: Small-scale investments for climate-resilient technologies – Cat 1 Grants  
69 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
180.  This grant category is meant to facilitate the access to on-farm equipment and tools 
for  smallholder  farmers  and  cooperatives,  further  to  the  adoption  of  the  climate  smart 
agriculture  practices  and  technologies  they  have  been  exposed  to  along  their  training 
packages.  A  total  of  74  grants  will  be  availed  under  this  category,  as  detailed  in  table  22 
below: 
Table 23 List of PSAC small-scale grants – Cat 1 
Type of intervention (small-scale) 
Protective agriculture at smallholder level (greenhouse, walk-in tunnel, 
shade net…) 
Ecofriendly coffee drying technologies  
Total 
Target  
50 units 
24 units 
74 units 
181.  The peculiarity of this grant category is that it will be tied to a loan representing the 
full investment sought, and the grant will only be disbursed upon the satisfactory repayment 
of the loan portion. Such performance-based grant facility (PBGF) will thus involve ‘Partner 
Financial Institutions (PFIs)’ who will be selected along the same principle as the ones used 
in PRICE project.  
182.  The project targets a minimum of 50% women and/or youth as beneficiaries of these 
grants. Women and youth will be given an advantage by being allocated a higher grant portion 
(70%  vs  50%  for  men  aged  above  30  years).  The  maximum  ceiling  for  grants  will  be 
USD 3,500 for men >30 and USD 5,000 for women and youth. No individual will be able 
to access a PSAC grant more than once, and no applicant who has previously benefitted from 
other grant  facilities under other  IFAD-funded  projects (e.g. PASP, RDDP  or PRICE) will be 
able to access a PSAC grant.  
183.  The detailed mechanisms of these Small-Scale Cat 1 grants are provided below: 
Table 24 Cat 1 Grant Mechanisms 
Category 1a: Small 
Investment Grants for 
individual men (> 30) 
Category 1b: Small 
Investment Grants for 
individual women and youth 
(< 30) 
Eligible investments 
Protective agriculture at smallholder level (greenhouse, walk-in 
tunnel, shade net…), Ecofriendly coffee drying technologies etc. 
Eligible beneficiaries 
- average value of investment: USD 10,000 
- possibility to combine several types of equipment once and within 
the max. grant ceiling 
Individual farmers, males, aged 
above 30, and who have been 
attending PSAC training 
Individual farmers, women or 
youth (i.e. aged below 30), and 
who have been attending PSAC 
training 
70 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Category 1a: Small 
Investment Grants for 
individual men (> 30) 
Category 1b: Small 
Investment Grants for 
individual women and youth 
(< 30) 
Financing modality 
Performance-based grant facility (based on PRICE model): 
- A simplified BP will support grant application, outlining in 
particular market outlet, expected productivity increase and loan 
repayment schedule 
- Loan to be taken by beneficiary on full investment sought, 
through PFI  
- BDF disburses the grant amount to PFI once the loan has been 
disbursed and grant application has been approved 
- Grant is disbursed to beneficiary by PFI once the full loan portion 
has been paid back by the beneficiary 
- Note: interest is charged by PFI on full investment loan 
Financing rule 
- IFAD 50% 
- IFAD 70% 
- Beneficiary 50% 
- Beneficiary 30% 
Max grant ceiling 
USD 5000 
USD 5,000 
Number of grants 
37 
37 
IFAD Budget 
USD 185,000 (total 50% of 
investment) 
USD 185,000 (total 70% of 
investment) 
Beneficiary contribution  USD 185,000 (total 50% of 
investment) 
USD 79,550 (total 30% of 
investment) 
Total Budget 
USD 370,000 
USD 264,550 
Objectives  
Smallholder CC resilience, improved productivity and product 
quality, enhanced competitiveness on export markets 
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Small Equipment investments adopt CSA technology solutions 
184.  The Cat.1 grant process is schematized as follows: 
71 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 5 CAT 1 Grant process 
Activity A.2.2.2: Medium-scale investments for climate-resilient technologies at 
cooperative level– Cat 2 Grants  
185.  This grant category is meant to address the key infrastructure gaps that are hindering 
smallholder cooperatives/POs’ competitiveness in the export-driven VC. Unlike Cat1 grants, 
this grant category will not be necessarily tied to a loan; the beneficiaries may also raise their 
contribution through their own resources. The grant model under this category will draw from 
modalities used in PASP and RDDP (cooperative-led model). A total of 30 grants will be availed 
under this category, as detailed in the table below: 
Table 25 List of PSAC medium-scale grants at cooperative level – Cat 2 
Type of intervention (medium scale, cooperative) 
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification at cooperative 
level – Horticulture  
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification at cooperative 
level - coffee 
Protective agriculture at cooperative level (greenhouse, walk-in tunnel, 
shade net…) 
Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities at cooperative level 
(coffee washing stations, loading stations and processing plants for the 
various value chains) 
Total  
Target  
3 units 
6 units 
3 units 
10 units 
22 units 
72 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
186.  The maximum ceiling for these Cat 2 grants will be USD 30,000. No cooperative 
will be able to access a PSAC grant more than once, and priority will be given to cooperatives 
who have never benefitted from other grant facilities under other IFAD-funded projects (e.g. 
PASP, RDDP or PRICE).  
Table 26 Cat 2 Grant Mechanism 
Category 2: Grants for cooperative medium-scale investments 
Eligible investments 
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification; 
Protective agriculture; Proper effluent and solid waste 
handling facilities 
Eligible beneficiaries 
Registered cooperatives operating in PSAC target value 
chains (i.e. coffee, tea, horticulture) 
Financing modality 
Cooperative-led grant facility (simplified from PASP model): 
- Full BP to be developed, including marketing 
arrangements, working capital needs (not eligible to grant), 
and realistic income and cashflow statements 
- BDF disburses the grant amount to beneficiary along 3 
tranches: 50% upon the realization of 100% of the 
beneficiary’s contribution as planned in the BP; 30% upon 
the approval of the utilization of the first instalment; 20% 
after ascertaining that the working capital funds are 
available as specified in the business plan 
Financing rule 
- IFAD 50% 
- Beneficiary 50% (can be from loan or from own resources) 
Max grant ceiling 
USD 30,000  
Number of grants 
22 
IFAD Budget 
USD 330,000 (total 50% of investment) 
Beneficiary 
contribution 
USD 330,000 (total 50% of investment) 
Total Budget 
USD 660,000 
Objectives  
Smallholder CC resilience, improved productivity and 
product quality, environment protection, enhanced 
competitiveness on export markets 
73 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Category 2: Grants for cooperative medium-scale investments 
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Medium scale investments adopt CSA technology solutions 
187.  The Cat 2 grant application process is schematized as follows: 
Figure 6 Cat 2 grant process 
A.2.2.3: Medium-scale investments for climate-resilient technologies at exporters 
level – Cat 3 Grants  
188.  This grant category is meant to address the key infrastructure gaps that are hindering 
private  sector  exporters’  competitiveness  in  the  export-driven  VC,  while  at  the  same  time 
encouraging the establishment of contractual arrangements with cooperatives. Unlike Cat.1 
grants, this grant category will not be necessarily tied to a loan; the beneficiaries may also 
raise their contribution through their own resources. The grant model under this category will 
draw from modalities used in PASP and RDDP (private-led model). A total of 29 grants will be 
availed under this category, as detailed in the table below: 
Table 27 List of PSAC medium-scale grants at exporters’ level – Cat 3 
Type of intervention (medium scale, joint ventures with exporters)  Target  
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification at exporter 
level  
Protective agriculture at exporter level (greenhouse, walk-in tunnel, shade 
net…) 
7 units 
7 units 
74 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Type of intervention (medium scale, joint ventures with exporters)  Target  
10 units 
Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities at exporter level (coffee 
washing stations, loading stations and processing plants for the various 
value chains) 
Total  
24 units 
189.  The maximum ceiling for exporters’ grants will be US$ 24,000. No exporter will be able 
to  access  a  PSAC  grant  more  than  once,  and  priority  will  be  given  to  exporters  who  have 
never  benefitted  from  other  grant  facilities  under  other  IFAD-funded  projects  (e.g.  PASP, 
RDDP or PRICE).  
Table 28 Cat 3 Grant Mechanism 
Category 3: Grants for exporters’ medium-scale investments 
Eligible investments 
Basic facilities, tools and equipment to acquire certification; Protective 
agriculture; Proper effluent and solid waste handling facilities 
Eligible beneficiaries 
Private sector exporters operating in PSAC target value chains (i.e. 
coffee, tea, horticulture) 
Financing modality 
Private-led grant facility (simplified from PASP model): 
- Full BP to be developed, including marketing arrangements, working 
capital needs (not eligible to grant), and realistic income and cashflow 
statements 
- BDF disburses the grant amount to beneficiary along 3 tranches: 
50% upon the realization of 100% of the beneficiary’s contribution as 
planned in the BP; 30% upon the approval of the utilization of the first 
instalment; 20% after ascertaining that the working capital funds are 
available as specified in the business plan 
Financing rule 
- IFAD 40% 
- Beneficiary 60% (can be from loan or from own resources) 
Max grant ceiling 
USD 100 per coop member37 engaged in contractual relationship with 
the private company, with a maximum of 24,000 USD 
Number of grants 
24 
IFAD Budget 
USD 576,000 (total 40% of investment) 
Beneficiary 
contribution 
USD 864,000 (total 60% of investment) 
37 In the specific case of exporters’ grants, beneficiary exporters are not obliged to be established in PSAC target districts – they may be established in Kigali or in other 
districts, but their contractual engagement with supplier cooperative(s) is a requisite to access PSAC grants 
75 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Category 3: Grants for exporters’ medium-scale investments 
Total Budget 
USD 1,440,000 
Objectives  
Smallholder CC resilience, improved productivity and product quality, 
environment protection, enhanced competitiveness on export markets 
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Medium scale investments adopt CSA technology solutions 
190.  The Cat 3 grant application and disbursement process is schematized as follows: 
Figure 7 Cat 3 grant process 
Note: full details on the grant implementation arrangements will be provided in the PSAC 
Grant Implementation Manual that will be prepared by NAEB team at the onset of PSAC and 
shared with IFAD for No Objection. 
A.2.2.1 to A2.2.3: Grant Management  
191.  The  management  of  all  grant  facilities  will  be  carried  out  in  collaboration  with  the 
Business Development Fund, building on the structures and mechanisms already established 
for similar funds under other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. A specific MoU will be signed 
between NAEB and BDF at the onset of PSAC. The project will strive to establish a thorough 
grant monitoring system so as to closely follow up and guide the business promoters and then 
draw  the  impact  of  these  specific  interventions  in  terms  of  improved  productivity,  food 
security and income. 
76 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
192.  The management of all three grant facilities foreseen in PSAC will require extensive 
upstream  engagement  with  both  applicants  (to  check  their  compliance/eligibility)  and 
participating  financing  institutions  (PFIs)  in  the  case  of  a  grant  tightened  to  a  loan  (Cat.1 
grants). It also requires thorough follow-up, monitoring and evaluation once the grants have 
been disbursed, to ensure that the projects financed are not deviated and the grant tranches 
are disbursed according to  the set procedures. A grant management fee  of USD 300,00038 
will thus be availed by the project to BDF, in order to cover such expenditures. 
193.  Based on experience from PASP and PRICE, PSAC will ensure that all grants are duly 
implemented  within  the  first  years,  so  that  proper  monitoring  and  follow  up  of  grant 
beneficiaries  can  be  done,  and  the  real  impact  of  such  important  investments  can  be 
measured. No grants should de facto be disbursed in the last year of the Project. 
Table 29 Implementation plan for Cat 1, 2, 3 activities (Activity 2.2.1. to 2.2.3.) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Draft comprehensive 
PSAC Grant 
Implementation 
Manual 
NAEB, BDF 
Sign MoU with BDF 
NAEB, BDF 
Launch call for 
expression of interest 
to apply for PSAC 
grants – support it 
through information/ 
mobilization 
campaign 
NAEB, district 
teams 
Implement Cat.1a 
and Cat 1b grants 
NAEB (led by 
AFS), BDF, PFIs 
30 
34  10 
Implement Cat. 2 
grants 
NAEB (led by 
AFS), BDF 
4 
10 
8 
Grant implementation 
modalities in PSAC are 
clearly set 
Grant Management MoU is 
signed with BDF 
PSAC target group is well 
aware of various 
opportunities made 
available to support their 
investments, as well as 
eligibility criteria and 
application process 
74 small equipment & 
tools grants are availed to 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture smallholder 
farmers (of which 50% 
women and/or youth) to 
enhance their use of CSA 
practices, improve their 
productivity and product 
quality, and enhance their 
competitiveness on export 
markets 
30 cooperatives in PSAC 
target VCs are availed 
grants to enhance their 
use of CSA practices, 
38 BDF grant management fee equivalent to about 7% of total grants to be managed by the BDF. 
77 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
improve their productivity 
and product quality, 
improve the protection of 
their environment and 
enhance their 
competitiveness on export 
markets 
29 exporters in PSAC 
target VCs engage in 
contractual arrangements 
with cooperatives and are 
availed grants to enhance 
their use of CSA practices, 
improve their productivity 
and product quality, 
improve the protection of 
their environment and 
enhance their 
competitiveness on export 
markets  
BDF has appropriate 
financial capacity to 
manage PSAC grants 
All PSAC grants are closely 
monitored and their 
impact can be measured 
Implement Cat. 3 
grants 
NAEB (led by 
AFS), BDF 
6 
11 
7 
Grant management 
fee to BDF 
NAEB 
¼  ¼  ¼  ¼ 
Follow up and 
Monitoring of PSAC 
grants 
PSAC, BDF, 
PFIs 
II.2: COMPONENT B: ENABLING BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT ALONG SELECTED EXPORT-
DRIVEN VALUE CHAINS 
B.1 Capacity Building for Producer Organizations 
B.1.1 Organizational Capacity Dev. for cooperatives and functional groups Coffee 
194.  B.1.1.1:  Capacity  building  in  climate  smart  agricultural  practices  in  coffee. 
Climate change and the effects of its adversaries is a big threat to coffee productivity and so 
is the competitiveness of this value chain in the export market. 50 cooperatives owning CWS 
have been targeted under PSAC to give awareness and knowledge to coffee farmers on the 
effects of climate change and how to adapt and mitigate these changes.  
195.  B.1.1.2:  Farmer  Field  School  (FFS)  approach,  strengthened  by  proximity 
coaching. 38,000 households have been targeted to benefit from PSAC investments in coffee 
replacement  and  rehabilitation.  These  households  have  been  divided  into  1300  FFSs  to 
78 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
enhance outreach of capacity building initiatives and activities. The FFS activities shall spread 
out through the six districts. It is projected that over 4,800  field schools shall be executed 
throughout the project cycle. 
196.  B.1.1.3:  Capacity  building  of  Proximity  coaches  (PSAC  approach,  targeting, 
interventions and role of FFS (For FFS Coaches). Technical assistants for FFS proximity 
coaching  shall  receive  trainings  to  enhance  their  skills  in  the  delivery  of  FFS.  About  120 
coaches shall receive the trainings.  
197.  B.1.1.4: Field Visits and experience  exchange and  learning visits. PSAC shall 
create a forum for exchange and learning of experiences through Training and Exposure visits 
in the six districts and wherever possible outside the target districts. 2 farmers FFS and the 
FFS  coaches  shall  go  through  such  experience  for  a  number  of  days  to  give  them  an 
opportunity to pick and learn some of the best experiences from their peers. 
198.  B.1.1.5: Training in nursery raising and management. 4 women per cooperative 
for 50 co-operatives owning the CWS shall receive routine trainings in nursery management 
to empower them with skills that will have an impact in their efficiency as well as economic 
achievements. 
Table 30 Implementation plan of skills and knowledge building at grassroots level - coffee 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Capacity building in 
climate smart 
agricultural practices 
in coffee for 50 co-
operatives (1 training 
per co-operative) 
Farmer Field School 
(FFS) approach, 
strengthened by 
proximity coaching, 
targeting 1300 FFS 
@30farmers 
Capacity Building for 
proximity coaches 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
Training and 
exposure visits for 
Lead Farmers and 
FFS coaches 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
Training on climate 
smart agricultural 
practices organized for 
50 co-operatives to 
generate awareness 
and build capacity 
1300 FFS each with an 
average of 30 Farmers 
targeting 38,000 shall 
be formed to access 
various trainings 
during the project cycle  
2
0
0
F
F
S
120 coaches training at 
project inception and 
followup refresher 
trainings at year 3 and 
year 5 
3 days field trips 2600 
lead farmers and 120 
coaches 
5 
10 
15 
15 
5 
2
5
0
F
F
S
2
5
0
F
F
S
1
2
0
C
o
a
c
h
e
s
2
0
0
F
F
S
1
2
0
C
o
a
c
h
e
s
2
0
0
F
F
S
1
2
0
C
o
a
c
h
e
s
2
0
0
F
F
S
79 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Training in Seedlings 
Raising and Nursery 
Management 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist 
2
0
0
i
t
r
a
n
e
e
s
200 women and youth 
from 4 from each of 
the 50 cooperatives 
trained at PSAC 
inception 
B.1.2: Organizational capacity development for co-operatives, Ferwacothe and 
functional groups (Tea)  
199.  Competitiveness can be enhanced by increasing efficiency in core activities across the 
value  chain.  These  will  in  turn  lower  costs,  eliminate  wastage  and  improve  quality  giving 
producers more headroom to absorb market shocks when they occur and also encouraging 
more investments which may come from expansion or new private investments. 
200.  B.1.2.1: Support focal persons (FPs) for infilling activities. In Tea VC, FPs will 
act as FFS coaches along with other tea plantation and management activities. There will 4 
FPs  operational  in  the  Tea  VC  who  will  receive  honorarium  for  first  three  years  of  the 
programme. 
201.  B.1.2.2: Training of Field Production Assistants (FPAs) 
a)  Regular  training  of  Field  Production  Assistants  (FPA)  by  cooperative  and  factory 
agronomists as well as RAB senior agronomists and researchers. This will take place 
on  cooperative  farms  (local  benchmarking  is  encouraged),  factory  industrial  blocks, 
RAB trial sites and research stations. 
b)  FPAs  will  act  both  as  proximity  coaches  and  farm  supervisors  covering  farmers 
delivering to one  or two leaf collection  hangars. NAEB/Cooperatives  will ensure that 
their job description reflects this important task. They will be responsible for ensuring 
that farm costs are well managed at all times. 
202.  Mass  training  of  farmers.  Training  to  farmers  is  a  regular  activity  and  will  be 
implemented through FPs and FPAs along with agronomists. Tea production is labour intensive 
starting  from  preparation  of  cuttings,  seedling  propagation,  transplanting  and  harvesting. 
Effective  management  of  tea  production  requires  continuous  training  in  order  to  meet 
knowledge  gaps  occasioned  by  labour  attrition,  research  findings  and  changes  in  market 
conditions. 
a)  Tea development projects are complex in nature and from the outset, a credible exit 
plan will be at the back of the mind of implementers. In order to ensure high success 
rate, NAEB, RAB, Factories and cooperatives will organize comprehensive training for 
agronomists in target cooperatives on mother bush selection, preparation and handling 
of cuttings, nursery site selection and management, tools and implements selection as 
well  as  land  preparation  and  seedling  management.  The  training  will  cover  both 
theoretical components of tea agronomy and husbandry as well as on farm training to 
be carried out at RAB demonstration farms or the factory industrial blocks and could 
take up to 5 days. 
80 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
b)  Mass training of farmers and farm workers (pluckers)  will be undertaken  on regular 
basis  on  model  farms  (owned  by  lead  farmers  from  each  hangar  area)  within 
cooperatives. This activity will be one of the responsibilities of agronomists who will 
make use of FFS training methodology and Good Agricultural practices (GAP) among 
other approaches. 
203.  B.1.2.4:  Training  of  cooperatives’  leadership.  Cooperatives  are  fundamentally 
wealth creating enterprises for persons with limited resources and their economic viability is 
underpinned  by  low  costs  of  operations,  shared  risks  and  economies  of  scale  (seller/buyer 
power). In order to unlock the full potential of the enterprise model, cooperative leaders and 
managers will have to look outside the Rwanda tea value chain and borrow best practices that 
can unlock and scale up the economic impact of their enterprises. This goal will be served by 
training  top  leaders  at  the  unions  and  federation  to  conceptualize  the  full  potential  of 
cooperatives and how to unlock it. Leadership development training and coaching will enable 
the leaders to identify and pursue audacious strategic goals for their enterprises. Partnerships 
between PSAC and other partners like Cordaid will be useful in implementing the leadership 
development objective. 
B.1.2.3 to B.1.2.7: Organizational/institutional development 
204.  Strategy and implementation activities. Cooperatives within the tea value chain 
are  homogenous  in  structure  yet  they  achieve  varied  operational  and  commercial  results 
mainly  because  they  do  not  have  common  strategy,  resources,  business  management  and 
decision support tools. This varied performance ultimately hurts farmers who end up paying 
more when purchasing goods and services or receiving lower prices for goods sold.  
In order to bridge the performance gap and unlock higher value for cooperatives, PSAC 
205. 
will; 
a)  Support 
to 
implement 
Ferwacothe 
a  Cooperatives  Common  Services 
Framework/Strategy  through  the  technical  support  of  a  Common  Services  Delivery 
Expert.  The  expert  will  develop  a  collaborative  and  standardized  services  execution 
framework for all core activities in homogenous tea cooperatives. In order to effectively 
implement and monitor the progress of the initiative, the expert/Service provider will 
provide services  for a period of 12 months (312 Working days) spread out over the 
duration of the project as follows; Y1-90 days; Y2-60 days; Y3-45 days; Y4-45 days: 
Y5-40 days: Y6-32 days. 
b)  Train  cooperative  leaders  and  managers  on  the  design  and  operationalization  of  the 
Common Services Delivery Strategy/Framework. The training will have both classroom 
and workplace/practical modules targeting to achieve organizational and performance 
transformation of cooperatives and unions through ferwacothe intervention.  
c)  Facilitate  the  emergence  of  Service  Delivery  Champions  (SDC)  from  the  training 
process. The SDCs will be certified as champions in their cooperatives with a mandate 
to advocate, promote, assess and report the progress made on all Common Services 
Indicators (CSI) to the CSDE in their respective cooperatives. The CSDE will follow up, 
through Ferwacothe, NAEB management as well as District directors of Agriculture to 
further  understand  the  gaps  in  performance  and  propose  pathways  (immediate, 
medium and long term) to improvement. Quarterly and annual reports detailing the 
achievements  and  limitations  of  the  strategy  in  terms  of  efficiency  gains  leading  to 
cost reductions, increase in productivity, green leaf price increase, new members sign 
ups  and  asset  base  expansion  among  other  CSIs  will  be  prepared  and  shared  with 
81 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PSAC, Cooperatives, Ferwacothe and District administration. It is anticipated that each 
cooperative will have 2 SDCs, one from elected leaders and another from the team of 
management. 
d)  Support  the  SDC  to  form  a  joint  committee  that  will  regularly  receive  coaching  and 
recertification by the CSDE.  They will also be  facilitated to undertake benchmarking 
missions  to  cooperatives  that  have  achieved  higher  scores  on  the  CSIs  and  to  use 
these lessons to propose review of the strategy. 
e)  Endeavour to improve efficiencies in service delivery by cooperatives as a strategy to 
lower enterprise costs, increase the take home income for farmers and scale up organic 
growth  sustainably.  This  will  be  part  of  the  responsibilities  of  Service  Delivery 
Champions (SDC) who will work directly with the CSDE. Duty allowances for the SDC 
will come from the PSAC budget for the CSDE intervention on monthly basis subject 
to an agreed results framework. 
Table 31 Implementation plan for organizational capacity development (B.1.2.1 to B.1.2.3 and B.1.2.5 to B.1.2.7) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Support to Co-operatives  
Support to focal 
persons (FPs) for 
infilling activities 
Cooperatives 
through PSAC 
support 
Training to Field 
Production Assistants 
(FPA)  
Cooperative 
and factory 
agronomists as 
well as RAB 
FPs identified and 
supported 
FPAs trained through 
Co-ops, factory and 
RBA 
Trainings to tea 
farmers using FFS 
approach  
Leadership 
development to 
improve business 
mindset of Co-
operative and union 
leader 
FPs and FSPs 
FFS operationalized  
Cordaid 
partnership 
Training to coop and 
union leaders 
completed  
Support Ferwacothe to implement 
a Cooperatives Common Services 
Framework/Strategy 
CfP for selection of 
Common services 
delivery expert (TA) 
Tea specialist 
CfP for selection of 
Common services 
delivery expert 
prepared and released 
82 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Recruitment of a 
Common service 
expert for Ferwacothe  
Training of 
cooperative leaders 
and managers to 
operationalize 
common service 
delivery strategy 
Selection of Common 
service champions  
Training to common 
service champions to 
prepare reports aper 
indicators and submit 
to Ferwacothe CSDE 
Review and plan for 
improvement of 
common service 
delivery  
Common 
service Expert 
of Ferwacothe 
Ferwacothe and 
cooperative 
leadershio in 
consultation 
with common 
service expert 
Common 
service expert 
Ferwacothe and 
Cooperatives 
along with 
common 
service expert, 
Tea specialist 
Common service expert 
for Ferwacothe 
recruited 
Cooperative leaders 
and managers to 
operationalize common 
service delivery 
strategy trained 
Common service 
champions selected 
Common service 
champions trained to 
prepare reports as per 
the indicators s  
Common services 
progress reviewed in 
terms of benefits to tea 
farmers and new plans 
prepared every year. 
B.1.3 Organizational Capacity development for Cooperatives and functional groups 
(Horticulture) 
B.1.3.1 to B.1.3.5 Strengthening FFS approach through training and capacity 
building, and B.1.3.8 and B.1.3.9 Training in nursery raising and management and 
Grafting  
206.  The Horticulture component will have 225 groups of average 30 members. Each group 
will form one FFS. They will be supported by two lead farmers (FFS facilitators) of which at 
least 1 will be a woman. There will be 25 FFS coaches (for proximity support and coaching) 
with 1 coach supporting about 9 FFS groups. The role of FFS coach will be to strengthen FFS 
operations and build capacity of the facilitators. 
207.  The FFS coaches and lead farmers play the key role in responding to farmers, ensuring 
participation of targeted groups (women, youth, smallholders, poor etc.) and providing on-
83 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
field technical support. They will also liaison between producers and other actors in the value 
chain, technical service providers and project  staff.  Therefore, it is important to build their 
facilitation skills as well as technical and management aspects of the project.   
208.  FFS is the key for execution of project interventions at the grassroot  level. To build 
the  capacity  of  lead  farmers  and  FFS  coaches,  following  capacity  building  measures  are 
recommended 
a)  Operationalizing FFS through Capacity building of lead Farmers and FFS coaches 
209.  Managing  FFS  through  training  and  exposure  visit  FFS.  It  is  aimed  at 
understanding the approach and importance of good FFS for smallholders. It will mainly cover 
principle  of  FFS,  roles  and  responsibility  of  facilitators,  methods  of  engagement,  problem 
solving etc. A three-day training will involve 3 lead farmers (two regular and one potential) 
from 9 FFS and an FFS coach (s), thus forming a batch of about 30 persons. Twenty-five such 
trainings will be organized during 4 years.  They will be facilitated by experienced FFS experts.  
210.  Training on Social inclusion strategies. PSAC primarily targets smallholders and 
further focuses women, women headed households and youth participation. The training on 
social  inclusion  strategy  will  be  devoted  to  ensure  right  targeting  and  exploring  ways  to 
engage women and youth so that they can be key players in the value chain. It will help them 
to identify the opportunities for skill building and access to finance to support the efforts of 
social  inclusion.  The  participants  for  the  training,  duration  and  number  of  trainings  will  be 
same as that of training on ‘Managing FFS’.  
211.  Capacity  building  in  certification  and  climate  smart  technologies.  PSAC 
interventions help farmers to acquire product certifications to develop environment friendly 
interventions as well as to benefit from the added value due to certification. It is expected 
that the lead farmers should have idea about different certifications, their purpose, compliance 
measures which can help them in guiding the farmers and also engage with PSAC staff as well 
as value chain actors.  The duration and number of trainings will be same as that of ‘Managing 
FFS’ training. 
212.  Capacity building of Proximity FFS coaches. The NAEB Horticulture specialist and 
FFS experts will impart knowledge about PSAC approach, targeting, interventions, role of FFS 
in programme development and FFS strengthening through a two-day training session. Total 
6 trainings spread over 5 years will be organized. Every year, previous years’ experience will 
be reviewed and new needs will be taken into account to help coaches to be better equipped. 
The FFS coaches will be paid honorarium through the project support.   
213.  Operationalisation of FFS. FFS concept will be implemented through planning at the 
village level. Lead farmers will visit fellow farmers individually as well as in groups. They will 
regularly organize learning - sharing and problem-solving meetings to find local solutions to 
the  problems  as  well  as  to  seek  support  of  experts  (through  project  or  government 
programmes). A budget of USD1,000 per FFS is planned to support major meeting / training, 
demonstrations and expert advice.   
b)  Developing skills and capacities of women and youth in seedlings production 
214.  Training  on  nursery  raising  and  management.  PSAC  horticulture  component 
emphasizes  on  community-based  nurseries,  which  is  important  to  sustain  value  chain 
development and use this opportunity to build the knowledge and skills of local women / youth 
in  seedling  production.  This  will  help  to  create  a  footprint  at  the  base  of  value  chain. 
84 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Considering  type  of  crops,  it  is  proposed  to  use  community-based  approach  for  avocado, 
mango and essential oil crops.  
215. 
In  case  of  macadamia  dedicated  private  sector  players  are  engaged  in  nursery 
production along with processing of macadamia nuts and marketing. It is recommended to 
use  the  same  approach  for  development  of  Macadamia  Plantations  through  PSAC  support. 
The  main  reason  is  –  its  uses  community  members  in  nursery  development,  trains  and 
engages local youth in grafting operations, owners take the risk of low survival of grafts at 
nursery stage and finally they also mobilize nearby farmers and provide advisory as well as 
market services. So, nursery raising is taken care by the actors in the macadamia value chain 
itself.  However,  specific  trainings  are  required  for  nursery  raising  of  mango,  avocado  and 
essential oil crops. Towards this following capacity building trainings are planned:  
a)  Training  on  nursery  raising  and  management:  Selected  women  groups  interested  in 
nursery raising will be identified in each of the consolidated plantation areas. They will 
be imparted trainings in nursery raising facilitated by sector and district agronomists 
and expert from RAB. Local resource persons who have experience of nursery raising 
will also be involved. It will be a hands-on training where participants will understand 
the purpose of each activity by observing, doing and listening. It will cover topics such 
as  -  soil  and  seed  preparation  for  nursery,  selection  of  appropriate  season,  nursery 
care, critical care of grafts, use of shade net, handling of seedling, transportation care, 
cost benefit analysis, material and infrastructure required etc.  It is expected that 44 
community-based  nursery  groups  for  mango,  avocado  and  essential  oil  crops  will 
participate. Selected members from each group will be trained for two days. Total 6 
trainings covering 180 participants will be organized during the project period. Each 
training will be of 2 days duration.  
b)  Training  to  potential  grafting  technicians:  It  will  be  aimed  at  developing  skills  of 
selected  rural  youth.  Local  experienced  grafting  technicians  along  with  Horticulture 
expert from RAB will impart this training. Two trainings, one each during the 1st and 
2nd year of programme implementation will be organized with emphasis on practical 
aspects, do and don’ts in grafting and relevant theory. Total 60 youth will be trained 
and they will be linked with existing nurseries to practice the skills after training.  
Table 32 Implementation plan of skills and knowledge building at grassroots level - Horticulture 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Preparation of CfP to 
identify SP for 
capacity building of 
FFS and programme 
approaches and 
management) and 
carry out the award 
process 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist.  
Procurement 
officer 
Detailed requirements 
and specification 
prepared and shared 
for CfP.  
Identified suitable SP 
from the available 
proposals.  
85 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Training on Managing 
FFS (Training and 
exposure visit to ideal 
FFS) to lead farmers 
and FFS coaches 
District / sector 
agronomist 
150 
lead 
farm
ers 
300 
lead 
farm
ers 
225 
lead 
farm
ers 
Training on Social 
inclusion strategies to 
lead farmers and FFS 
coaches 
District / sector 
agronomist and 
SEDO 
150 
lead 
farm
ers 
300 
lead 
farm
ers 
225 
lead 
farm
ers 
Training on 
certification processes 
and climate smart 
technologies to lead 
farmers and FFS 
coaches 
District / sector 
agronomist, 
NAEB– 
Environment 
specialist 
150 
lead 
farm
ers 
300 
lead 
farm
ers 
225 
lead 
farm
ers 
Capacity building of 
Proximity FFS 
coaches 
District / sector 
agronomist 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
450 lead farmers + 
225 potential lead 
farmers trained in a) 
FFS approach through 
training and exposure 
visit, b) PSAC targeting 
approach and engaging 
women and youth in 
value chain 
interventions and c) 
certification processes 
and climate smart 
technologies 
application 
25 FFS coaches trained 
through regular 
training in Yr.1 and 
refresher course from 
Ye.2 onwards. 
District and 
sector teams, 
FFS coaches  
5
0
F
F
S
1
5
0
F
F
S
2
2
5
F
F
S
2
2
5
F
F
S
2
2
5
F
F
S
2
2
5
F
F
S
225 FFS covering 6900 
hh formed and 
operationalized.  
Operationalisation of 
FFS 
Training on Nursery 
raising and 
Management to 
community-based 
women’s groups 
District / sector 
agronomist, 
RAB expert 
2
3
1
Training on grafting 
technique for mango 
and avocado to local 
youth 
District / sector 
agronomist, 
RAB expert 
1
1
180 women trained in 
nursery raising activity 
60 persons trained in 
grafting (of which at 
least 50% are women) 
and they start 
practicing with existing 
nurseries in their own 
areas. 
B.1.3.6 and B.1.3.7: Innovative training package for macadamia, avocado, mango 
French beans, chili and essential oils (with exporters)  
86 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
216.  The innovative training package, established during the PRICE project as one of the 
key  innovations,  will  be  applied  for  all  the  value  chains  in  PSAC  project.  It  entails  direct 
engagement  of  exporter  with  the  producers,  making  it  time  and  energy  saving  training 
programme initiated to suit the purpose of jointly achieving the goal of export marketing.  
217.  PSAC focuses on implementing innovative training package through FFS. So the lead 
farmers  and  FFS  coach  are  the  key  facilitators  who  could  support  the  farmers  all  along  in 
addition  to  direct  engagement  of  exporter  with  producers.  Two  levels  of  training  are 
recommended for this purpose: a) Innovative training package to FFS Lead Farmers to create 
a local resource person on export market requirement, post-harvest operations and guiding 
farmers. b) Regular innovative training package for farmers covering market requirement and 
post-harvest operations. The additional part of crop cultivation and management issues will 
be covered by NAEB Horticulture specialist along with the District and sector agronomist and 
RAB (as required).   
218.  The project will cover 225 farmer groups (managed by 450 lead farmers and 25 FFS 
coaches) of maximum 30 farmers per group, meaning 6,750 farmers. Each year new farmers 
will be trained through direct engagement with exporters. Whereas both new and old farmers 
will continue to get the support from lead farmers and FFS coaches throughout the project 
period. The cost of complete training for one person is estimates as USD 40. 
Table 33 Implementation plan for innovation training package for macadamia, avocado, mango, French beans, chili 
and essential oils (with exporters) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Identification of 
exporters and 
sharing the idea of 
innovative training 
package – purpose, 
role and 
expectations 
Exporter’s feedback, 
action note and 
training plan based 
on interaction with 
producers and 
observing the field 
operations. 
NAEB – 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Exporters, 
NAEB- 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Review of 
innovative training 
proposal 
NAEB -
Horticulture 
Specialist 
Agreement with 
exporters for 
providing training 
support to farmers 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist and 
Exporters 
87 
About 25 potential 
exporters to be 
engaged with the 
project participants 
identified and shared 
about Innovative 
training package  
About 15 exporters 
submitted the training 
plan.  
15 innovative training 
proposals received and 
feedback shared.  
15 exporters signed 
agreements for training  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
and lead farmers 
and FFS coaches 
Organization of 
innovative training 
for farmers  
Exporters, 
NAEB – 
Horticulture 
specialist 
30  75  90  30 
Organization of 
innovative training 
for lead farmers and 
FFS coaches 
Exporters, 
NAEB – 
Horticulture 
specialist 
5 
10 
Contact between 
farmers and 
exporters  
Exporters, 
Producers’ 
groups, NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist and 
District / Sector 
agronomist 
30  75  90  30 
Exported conducted 
225 innovative 
trainings for 9000 
Farmers 
Exporter conducted 15 
innovative trainings for 
450 lead farmers and 
25 coaches 
225 contracts signed 
between farmers and 
exporters. 
B.1.3.10: Engagement with the Horticulture Center of Excellence (HCoE) 
219.  The  HCoE  shares  the  technical  know-how  about  modern  technologies  related  to 
irrigation,  green  houses  and  high  yielding  fruits  and  vegetable  seedlings.  It  has  developed 
mother orchards of mango, citrus and avocado comprising of export suitable varieties.  It is 
also producing grafted seedlings of these fruit crops. It has developed the training facilities 
on  greenhouse  management  and  detailed  training  manual  for  Chili  is  prepared  in 
Kinyarwanda.  The  greenhouse  technology  demonstration  for  chili,  tomato,  cucumber,  okra 
etc. is established at the centre.  The centre offers training to farmers, lead farmers / FFS 
facilitators, staff from different organizations etc.  
220.  Considering  the  above  well  be  established  facilities,  PSAC  can  engage  with  HCoE  to 
avail  services  such  as  scions  for  grafting  of  mango  and  Avocado,  procuring  seedlings  for 
vegetables such as chilli, procurement of grafts (to fill the gap in seedling production if occurs) 
and training to be selected lead farmers in green house management as per arising needs.  
221. 
It  is  recommended  to  train  90  persons  (selected  lead  farmers  and  green  house 
operators) in green house operation and management for vegetable cultivation esp. chili. The 
composition of trainees should be at least 50% women and 30% youth. The training should 
be  offered to lead farmers and  operators in the areas where the greenhouse technology is 
adopted or in the areas there is potential for adoption this technology.  
88 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 34 Implementation plan for engagement with the horticulture center of excellence (HCoE) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Procurement of scions 
for mango and 
avocado (in case of 
shortage in 
availability of scions 
from mother trees in 
field & RAB)  
Procurement of 
mango and avocado 
grafts (in case of 
shortage in 
availability from field 
nurseries)   
Contract with HCoE 
for training of farmers  
Training to lead 
farmers and green 
house operators (for 
2weeks at HCoE and 
on site) 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, RAB, 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
officers  
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officers and 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist  
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist  
30 
30 
30 
Scions procured if 
required.   
Grafts procured if 
required. 
Contract for training of 
protective agriculture 
approved.  
90 persons (lead 
facilitators and green 
house operators) 
trained in operation 
and management of 
green house.  
B.1.4 Enhanced Gender Action Learning System (GALS+) 
222. 
IFAD has supported the implementation of the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) 
in Rwanda since 2011 and currently two projects, the dairy development project (RDDP) and 
the  Kayonza  Irrigation  and  Integrated  Watershed  Management  -  Phase  II  (KIIWP2)  have 
included GALS in their activities. In addition, GALS is being promoted by IFAD in Rwanda in 
the  context  of  the  Joint  Programme  on  Accelerating  Progress  towards  the  Economic 
Empowerment of Rural Women (JP-RWEE).   
223.  GALS is a behavioural change methodology, which offers a framework to implement a 
gender transformative approach (GTA) by: challenging the root causes of inequalities between 
women  and  men;  promoting  positions  of  social  and  political  influence  for  women  in 
communities; and addressing power inequities between women and men. In addition, under 
the JP RWEE in Rwanda, aspects of youth inclusion, improved nutrition outcomes as well as 
climate  adaptation  have  been  incorporated  into  the  methodology.  This  ‘Enhanced  Gender 
Action Learning System (GALS+)’ has been also recently implemented under RDDP.  
89 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
224.  Use of the enhanced GALS in PSAC will be rolled out through the FFS model and used 
to  tackle  discriminatory  social  norms  and  to  generate  gender  transformative  changes  and 
improved intra-household gender relations (see annex 2 for the full TORs). GALS+ will also 
be used to address livelihood  challenges  related to nutrition, climate adaptation and youth 
inclusion. Recommendation and lessons learned from a recent Outcome Assessment of the 
GALS+ in the JPRWEE will be used to inform the implementation of GALS+ for PSAC.  
Table 35 Implementation plan for GALS interventions 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Start-up phase: 
recruitment 
processes, setup of 
technical assistance 
and roll-out plan 
NAEB, SPIU 
x 
Kick-off GALS+ 
activities (year 2 and 
3) 
NAEB, service 
provider 
x 
x 
Replication and 
scaling up (year 3 
and 4) 
NAEB, Service 
provider 
x 
x 
Service provider for 
enhanced GALS 
contracted 
Roll-out plan revised and 
finalised 
Inception meeting held 
Induction and 
introduction workshop to 
the facilitators and the 
core team held 
Identification of FFS 
groups and GALS 
champions finalised 
100 FFS coaches trained 
750 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (4000 HHs) 
finalised 
150 FFS coaches trained 
3000 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (17000 HHs) 
finalised 
Consolidation and 
sustainability phase, 
NAEB, Service 
provider 
x 
x 
849 FFS lead farmers 
trained 
90 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
with GALS+ (year 5 
and 6) 
Upscaling GALS into FFS 
groups (3490 HHs) 
finalised 
Sustainability plan, exit 
strategy finalised 
B.1.5 Capacity building of producer organisations through Cordaid on Cross-cutting 
issues (governance, financial management, Farming as a business, BDS  provision, 
gender equality, women’s empowerment and youth employment)  
B.1.5.1 Cooperative Strengthening 
225.  One  of  the  main  challenges  that  affects  the  growth  of  farmer  organizations  is  poor 
managerial  skills  of  farmer  organization,  poor  business  planning,  poor  internal  financial 
management, weak internal organizations, weak operations management. These challenges 
make that farmer organizations often fail to take advantage of various opportunities and more 
importantly,  fail  to  access  markets  and  finance.  Cordaid  Rwanda  will  use  different  tools  to 
assess  the  capacity  of  cooperatives  and  develop  capacity  building  plans  to  improve  their 
performance in the following key areas: managerial capacity, financial management, internal 
organizations, operations and business plan development and coaching for access to finance.  
226.  Cordaid  has  experience  using  Scope  insight  assessment  tool  (SI),  Cooperative 
assessment  matrix  (CAM)  and  KOBO  built  tool  to  identify  capacity  gaps  for  improvement. 
After gap assessment we will develop capacity building plan (CDP) which intend to improve 
and reinforce weak areas identified in the assessment results. We will target approximately 
62  cooperatives  in  both  coffee  and  tea.  Furthermore,  will  create,  organize,  assesses  and 
capacitate new created cooperatives especially in horticulture value chain to ensure that they 
capable  to  run  their  business  as  rural  enterprise  with  capacity  to  serve  its  members  and 
benefit economic of scales., we will target approximately 46 cooperatives. 
Table 36 Cooperative strengthening 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Output 
Conduct capacity 
gap assessment 
for farmer 
organizations 
Cordaid 
70 
Coop 
38 
coops 
Capacity gap 
assessment 
conducted for 
108 coops to 
identify capacity 
building needs 
91 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Output 
Cordaid 
70 
coops 
38 
coops  
Cordaid 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
Cordaid 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
108 
coops 
Cordaid 
10 
16 
10 
10 
108 capacity 
development 
plan developed 
for 108 
cooperatives for 
capacity building 
purposes  
108 coops 
selected from 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture value 
chains trained 
and coached on 
internal 
management 
108 coops 
selected from 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture value 
chains trained 
and coached on 
operations 
46coops created, 
trained and 
coached  
Developing 
capacity 
development 
plan 
Internal 
management 
(governance, 
membership 
management, 
business 
planning, 
internal 
organization) 
Operations 
(storage, post-
harvest 
handling, 
logistics, quality 
management)  
Formation of 
new 
cooperatives, 
coop principles, 
laws, policies, 
relations with 
external 
stakeholders in 
horticulture VC. 
B.1.5.2 Financial management and Literacy for farmer organizations 
227.  Financial  literacy  is  a  critical  component  and  key  determinant  of  cooperative 
performance,  it  tells  if  the  cooperative  is  bankable  or  professionally  managed.  Financial 
management is the vein for cooperatives and SMEs business performance and key to their 
success. Cordaid will train and develop coaching trajectory for 108 cooperatives in coffee, tea 
and horticulture to ensure that they are familiar and practice financial management principles, 
financial  records  keeping,  financial  reporting  and  statements,  business  plan  and  financial 
planning  and  budgeting,  financial  accounting  and  systems,  managing  liabilities,  such  as 
accounts payable and obtaining favorable long-term financing etc... Cordaid has experience 
of  providing  financial  management  training  for  entrepreneurs.  Cordaid  has  experience  in 
92 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
providing training and coaching to improve cooperative financial management performance, 
for example Cordaid supported 30 cooperatives through STARS program, 25 through Irrigate 
to win project and 22 rice processors companies through (Rwanda forum of rice millers), and 
through  ASDF  Cordaid  provided  trainings  and  coaching  and  seed  capital  Agri-SMEs  to  10 
SMEs.  
228.  Farming is successful when farmers have enough and timely finance to invest in their 
agricultural  activities.  This  requires  them  to  have  the  financial  knowledge  to  acquire  and 
access those finances and the skills to manage them. It is in that regard the Cordaid Rwanda 
assist farmers to establish the farmer savings groups, build their capacity on financial literacy 
such as budgeting, loan management and finance access and management and link them to 
financial institution whose capacity is built by Cordaid in the agri-financing sector. 
229.  Farmers  are  trained  in  setting  targets,  savings  culture,  internal  loan  management, 
bookkeeping, working with financial institutions, budgeting, loan management. 
230.  Farmers  need  external  financing  to  expand  their  activities.  Cordaid  links  them  with 
financial institutions, be microfinance institutions or commercial banks. Financial institutions 
are equipped with skills and tools to be able to serve the farmers and assist them in developing 
farmer-tailored products to finance the agricultural sector. 
Table 37 Financial management and Literacy for farmer organizations 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Outputs 
Financial 
administration 
 (accounting 
system, 
accounting 
policies, cash 
handling, 
Financial planning 
(budgeting, 
external finance, 
finance strategy, 
membership 
contribution, 
savings) 
Cordaid 
25 
Coops 
30 
coops 
30 
coops 
23 
coops 
Cordaid 
25 
Coops 
30 
coops 
30 
coops 
23 
coops 
108 producer 
organizations 
selected from 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture 
value chains 
108 producer 
organizations 
selected from 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture 
value chains 
93 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Outputs 
Financial reporting 
and monitoring 
(financial 
reporting, costs & 
sales price, cash 
flow, income, 
expenditure, 
liquidity, 
transaction 
recording/record 
and bookkeeping, 
access and use of 
financial 
information) 
Cordaid 
20 
Coops 
20 
coops 
30 
coops 
28 
coops 
10 
coops 
Train and 
coaching 108 
producer 
organizations 
selected from 
coffee, tea and 
horticulture 
value chains 
B.1.5.3 Innovative trainings & Interventions 
a) Sustainable Business Development Service (BDS) provision  
231.  Access to agricultural services in a more sustainable way is a challenge to smallholders. 
In Rwanda farmers mostly rely on the government and development organizations to provide 
both  extension  services  and  other  business  development  services  for  example  market  and 
market linkages, business plan development, filing tax and facilitating access to key services 
in  the  chain.  Cordaid  Rwanda  has  extensive  experience  developing  more  sustainable  fee-
based BDS provider models, in which farmer organizations pay for BDS services received, this 
does  not  only  make  easy  access  to  services  but  ensure  the  sustainability  and  create 
employment  for  youth  business  development  service  providers.  Within  PSAC  Cordaid  will 
Identify areas with potential for business development services  Within, Cordaid will mostly 
target the more structured value chains (tea and coffee value), involving youth as a potential 
BDS  service  provider.  Furthermore,  Cordaid  support  BDS  provider  to  ensure  that  service 
provide reflect value for money, demand driven and tackle key challenges in the value chain. 
Table 38 Sustainable Business Development Service (BDS) provision 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Developing business 
development services 
provision business 
model 
Identifying, selecting 
youth for to become 
fee-based business 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
94 
Establish BDS services 
for structured value 
chains (Tea and Coffee) 
Identify services within 
selected Value chain for 
BDS, targeting at least 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
development service 
provider 
Identify potential 
services for BDS 
providers within value 
chains 
Coaching and 
mentoring BDS 
providers to ensure 
they provide value for 
money & demand 
driven BDS 
Facilitating BDS 
provision, create 
linkage with value 
chain actors to 
develop paid for 
services 
Develop sustainable 
training/service 
delivering model for 
BDS providers 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
26 youth as BDS 
provider (2 per districts) 
Potential services for 
BDS providers within 
value chain identified. 
26 youth identified, 
trained and coached on 
BDS model in 13 
districts at initial stage 
BDS provision facilitated 
linkage with value chain 
actors created to 
develop paid services 
Sustainable training/ 
service delivery model 
for BDS providers 
developed 
b) Farming as a Business  
232.  Most  smallholder  farmers  in  Rwanda  get  into  farming  for  food  security  fulfilment  or 
just making use of land. Therefore, shifting from sustenance farming into commercial farming 
is challenging. The harvest of these farmers mostly contributes to food security and less to a 
living  income.  In  its  intervention  to  farmers  and  farmer-based  organizations,  Cordaid 
integrates  the  ‘farming  as  a  business’  concept.  Through  various  interventions,  Cordaid 
contributes  to  turning  subsistence  farming  into  sustainable  farming  business  enterprises, 
increasing  farmers’  capacity  to  understand  commercial  farming,  as  instrumental  for  both 
poverty reduction and wealth creation.  
233.  We will integrate farming as business (FaaB) model into farmer field school approach 
and  use  FFS  coaches  to  deliver  FaaB,  Cordaid  will  develop  farming  as  business 
curricular/module, train and coach FFs  coaches FaaB module who  will train farmers on the 
module. The objective is to strengthen the capacity of farmers and farmer organizations to 
better  manage  farming  enterprises,  focus  on  market-oriented  farming  in  order  to  take 
advantage of the new opportunities that are arising from PSAC, i.e access to market, access 
to finance, access to markets, etc. Cordaid will spur the development of an entrepreneurial 
farming  mindset  to  adopt  farming  as  business,  to  improve  their  growth  potential,  reduce 
95 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
dependency  on  development  partners  and  develop  their  own  capacity  to  sustain  attained 
results beyond the PSAC project. 
Table 39 Farming as Business (FaaB) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Outputs 
Developing 
farming as 
business 
module/curricula 
(FaaB) 
Incorporate FaaB 
into FFS approach 
& training and 
coaching FFS 
coaches on 
Farming as 
business module 
Training and 
coaching of 
farmers on FFS 
curricula through 
FFS groups 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
50 
80 
67 
35 
Cordaid 
3440  6020  4902  3058  2580 
Farming as 
business 
curricular/module 
developed  
Training and 
coaching 232 FFs 
coaches on FAAB 
curricula/module 
232 trained FFS 
Coaches to train 
and coach at least 
20000 farmers on 
farming as 
business 
c) Mobilising youth for equipment maintenance  
It is common in farmer organization’ premises to find broken equipment while it's still 
234. 
new. Farmers need equipment to improve on yield and quality but lack the maintenance skills 
even for simple machine breakdowns. Government and development partners have promoted 
agri-mechanization but it failed due to lacking equipment maintenance services. Absence of 
maintenance services discouraged both farmers to use and access equipment's and financial 
institutions to finance equipment   due to high write off, hence no business case.  
235.  Cordaid  Rwanda  will  develop  curricula  and  practical  education  trajectories  around 
equipment  maintenance,  training  of  trainers  for  youth  as  services  providers  on  equipment 
maintenance, develop a fee-based services model for equipment maintenance to make the 
service  business  oriented  and  sustainable.  Furthermore,  Cordaid  will  carry  out  market 
sensitization  with  farmers  on  the  benefit  of  using  equipment.  Through  our  intervention  in 
access to finance we will link these farmers to MFIs partners who can provide asset finance 
loans  or  leases.    Cordaid  has  experience  in  developing  BDS  service  in  agricultural 
mechanization  for  example  in  STARS  program,  we  introduced  fee-based-BDS  provider  for 
equipment maintenance  
236.  PSAC  project  will  benefit  from  expertise  of  Kilimo  Trust  Rwanda  which  has  already 
established a network of technical colleges (IPRCs & TVETs) and agribusiness companies to 
96 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
build  vocational  skills  that  will  be  instrumental  in  operation  and  maintenance  of  project 
supported  equipment,  machinery,  and  facilities.    Kilimo  Trust  Rwanda  in  partnership  with 
Rwanda Polytechnic (RP), Rwanda TVET Board (RTB), RAB and RYAF has already developed 
10  competence-based  training  curriculums  that  are  being  used  by  accredited  training 
institutions for creation of relevant skills and employment in agribusiness, and maintains in-
house  capacity  to  develop  more  curriculums  depending  on  the  need.  This  will  attract  and 
retain youth as employees (wage or self) and provide skills required by investors across the 
different nodes of target value chains. 
237. 
Involving  youth  creates  new  employment  opportunities  in  equipment  maintenance 
while building the ecosystem of agri-mechanization. Employing competent and skilled youth 
will  reduce  the  cases  of  machinery  breakdown  and  attract  more  farmers  to  adopt 
mechanization. Statistics show that over 50% of the Rwandan population are youth and the  
unemployment rate is 22%. 
Table 40 Mobilizing youth for equipment maintenance 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Revising curricula & 
practical education 
trajectories around 
equipment 
maintenance 
Cordaid, Kilimo 
Trust & Rwanda 
TVET Board 
Training trainers for 
youth as services 
providers on 
equipment 
maintenance 
Developing fee-based 
services model/paid 
for services for 
equipment 
maintenance 
Market sensitization 
farmers on the use of 
equipment / 
mechanization 
Cordaid, Kilimo 
Trust, TVET & 
IPRCs 
20  35  10 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
Advocate and 
implement adapted 
Cordaid 
97 
Curricula and practical 
education trajectories 
around equipment 
developed. 
Targeting at least one 
youth per sector 
estimation (65 youth) 
13 districts & 
approximately 5 sector 
per district. 
R-YES graduates 
located in the target 
district 
Fee based model 
developed 
Farmers sensitized to 
the use of equipment 
Adapted curriculum 
adapted for vocational 
schools 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
curriculum in 
vocational schools 
B.1.5.4 Enhancing the role of women and youth in value chains and improving their 
financial inclusion 
238.  Women  account  for  40-60%  of  the  agricultural  labor  in  developing  countries, 
particularly  in  Africa.  Women  are  found  to  be  participating  mostly  at  the  production  level, 
providing  the  bulk  of  the  labor  and  having  less  presence  in  input  supply,  trading,  and 
marketing.  Women  face  more  barriers  in  accessing  finance  and  technical  aid  than  men 
(Cordaid study women participation in maize and bean VC study). Similar challenges are faced 
by youth, who often lack the collateral to access finance and the land ownership to pursue 
farming activities. Also, farming is often not considered an attractive income generating option 
for  youth. This means  women and youth require  a unique and tailored approach to ensure 
their inclusivity. As part of the PSAC activities, in line with PSAC targeting and social inclusion 
strategy, Cordaid will develop a cross-cutting women and youth inclusivity approach to ensure 
the participation of these groups in the value chain and in accessing finance. This approach 
will start with identifying new opportunities in terms of agricultural services provision, e.g. in 
the area of equipment maintenance. Cordaid  has experience of integrating youth  and women 
its  program  for  example  in  STARS,  women  were  sensitized  and  cooperative  by-law  were 
established to create space for women to join cooperative leadership. Where feasible, Cordaid 
will work together with Kilimo Trust on these activities. 
239. 
 After assessing the needs and opportunities, Cordaid will strengthen the capacity of 
these groups to venture into new agricultural activities and promoting job creation and income 
generation amongst women and youth, create incentives to increase their participation in the 
value  chains.  Through  access  to  finance  Cordaid  will  develop  tailored    financial  products 
women and youth, for example through STARS program Cordaid developed financial products 
targeting landless youth etc. Our approach will build upon the experiences from the STARS 
program, where tailored women and youth interventions were developed. 
Table 41 Enhancing the role of women and youth in value chains and improving their financial inclusion  
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Identify service 
categories oriented on 
youth and women 
Promoting women / 
youth participation in 
VCs / farming as a 
business / business 
creation /link to 
challenge fund 
Cordaid 
1 
1 
1 
At least 3 services in 
3 value chains 
Cordaid 
Women / youth inclusion 
in leadership roles 
Cordaid 
 30 percent women 
are included in 
98 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
(Govt, FO, Pvt sector, 
...) 
Promoting access to 
finance for women / 
youth (through FI) 
Cordaid 
B.1.5.5. Access to markets  
leadership role and 15 
percent youth of 
producer 
organization,  
2 financial products 
developed targeting 
women and youth 
240.  Lack of access to the market is a challenge to smallholders; in Rwanda only 4.2% of 
the agricultural households have access to contract farming (Agric HH Survey, 2017). Most 
smallholder farmers fall short on market requirements. Some of the challenges are associated 
with poor quality and poor produce aggregation which forms the main element of contractual 
agreements. Cordaid Rwanda has expertise in developing a ‘smallholders’ inclusive access’ to 
market approach, starting with identifying the main barriers to access good markets, improve 
aggregation capacity and quality by introducing tailored post-harvest techniques, facilitating 
market contracts and signing, and strengthening capacity to meet market requirements and 
standards. 
Table 42 Access to markets 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Develop access to market 
model 
Cordaid 
1 
1 
1 
Linking farmer 
organizations to market 
(Supply contract) 
Support/strengthen/train 
producer organization on 
quality improvement 
(aflatoxin control, proper 
post-harvest handling) 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
At least 2 access 
inclusive market 
models 
B2B event organized 
for market linkage, 
Targeting 
horticulture coops 
and coffee,  
Targeting 53 
Cooperatives (coffee 
and horticulture) 
B.2 Backward and Forward Market Linkages  
B.2.1 Backward and Forward Linkages for coffee Development (Activity B2.1.1 to 
B2.1.5) 
99 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
241.  With  the  development  of  coffee  zones,  PSAC  shall  support  Catalyzing  the  private 
owned CWS to embrace Newly Created Coffee Zones by entering into MOUs with the farmers 
in the zones they operate in (Women and Youth Led) 
242.  The  project  shall  also  upscale  PRICE  achievement  in  the  development  of  coffee 
appellates by: 
a)  Patenting the three approved coffee appellate, branding and promotion; 
b)  Design and production of the first lot of packaging materials specifically designed for 
the three appellate; 
c)  Purchase  of  a  specified  volume  from  each  of  the  three  appellate  for  promotion  and 
marketing at the global level through the trade attaché at various diplomatic missions; 
d)  PSAC shall also support NAEB: 
e)  In organizing and participating in National, Regional and International coffee cupping 
events and competitions; 
f) 
 implementation of the E-Marketing Forum based on findings previously supported by 
PRICE. 
Table 43 Implementation of backward and forward market linkage activities - Coffee 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Catalyze the private 
owned CWS to 
embrace Newly 
Created Coffee Zones 
by entering into 
MOUs with the 
farmers in the zones 
they operate in 
(Women and Youth 
Led) 
Support for 
completion of coffee 
appellation activities: 
Patenting, Branding 
and designing of 
packaging materials 
(Lumpsum) 
Support for 
development of 
promotional 
materials, Preparation 
of appellate coffee 
samples for 
promotion in 
diplomatic mission 
District and 
sector teams, 
Coffee 
Specialist, 
Cooperative 
Specialist 
5
C
W
S
7
C
W
S
5
C
W
S
5
C
W
S
0
0
13 Private CWS owned 
by women, 9 Private 
CWS owned by youth. 
29 Cooperative owned 
CWS shall also be 
targeted 
NAEB 
NAEB 
0
0
0
0
20,000 USD dedicated 
to cater Patenting, 
Branding and design of 
packaging material for 
each appellate  
U
S
D
1
5
,
0
0
0
U
S
D
1
0
,
0
0
0
0
0
USD 50,000 Shall be 
spent in Purchase of 
the three appellate 
samples, packaging 
and promotion through 
diplomatic mission 
trade attach’es in 
U
S
D
8
,
0
0
0
U
S
D
1
0
,
0
0
0
U
S
D
1
2
,
0
0
0
U
S
D
1
5
,
0
0
0
100 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
trade attach'es, and 
International trade 
fairs (Lumpsum) 
Prorata support for 
implementation of E-
Market Platform for 
all commodities 
NAEB 
Regional and 
International Coffee 
Cupping events and 
Competitions                                
NAEB 
U
S
D
1
0
,
0
0
0
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
U
S
D
1
0
,
0
0
0
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
various market 
destinations 
20,000 USD 
commitment as a 
proportionate 
contribution to other 
VCs 
0
0
0
0
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
3
E
v
e
n
t
s
18 events to be 
sponsored by PSAC 
B.2.2 Backward and Forward Linkages for Tea Development  
243. 
In building value chain competitiveness, product development, traceability, visibility 
and availability will play a big role. Moreover, global tea markets continue to evolve as new 
consumer  trends  emerge.  Rwanda  traditionally  produces  conventional  green  leaf  that  is 
processed into black CTC teas. However, some established tea factories like Sorwathe have 
diversified production systems and ventured into organic tea production. In order to achieve 
this, a new cooperative known as  HOT has been sponsored by the factory.  HOT has so far 
established 300 ha of organic tea gardens. PSAC is supporting the cooperative to increase the 
area  under  organic  tea  production  as  both  a  strategy  to  increase  farmer  revenues  and  to 
diversify markets for Rwanda tea. 
a)  PSAC  through  NAEB  will  support  other  tea  cooperatives  to  train  some  of  their 
agronomists on organic tea production and certification and to open dialogue with tea 
factories on the possibility of diversifying.  
b)   At a national level, NAEB may consider developing a strategy to guide market driven 
diversification  and  certification  and  approach  PSAC  to  support  its  dissemination, 
validation and implementation.  
244.  Some of the specific actions of market linkages are covered under section C2.2 Specific 
support  to  VC  platforms.  (E-commerce  platform,  National  tea  register,  Tea  census  and 
National tea brand programme) 
B.2.3 Backward and forward market linkages for horticulture VC development 
(2.3.1 to 2.3.5) 
245. 
In view of identifying areas for improving the uptake of HEGF, the BRD had conducted 
the  survey 39  of  22  exporters  (out  of  40  exporters  in  Rwanda)  engaged  in  Horticulture 
39 Findings from the online survey conducted to assess the performance, challenges and opportunities under Horticulture sector, 
Report from The Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD), February 2022.   
101 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
business.  Of  these  40%  are  targeting  international  markets  and  remaining  target  both 
domestic and export market. However, 73%  of them have less than 5 years  of  experience 
and remaining have 5 to 10 years of experience. Considering the nascent status of exporters, 
BRD  has  initiated  capacity  building  process,  through  training  of  a  batch  of  20  exporters  in 
book keeping and governance. PSAC will complement these efforts by educating exporters on 
understanding  market  requirements  and  exploring  markets:  This  will  be  executed  through 
two major interventions –  
a)  Training on export marketing issues: It aims at acquainting and improving exporters’ 
understanding  about  quality  control,  clients’  requirements,  international  business 
environment,  business  processes,  logistics  etc.  The  training  will  be  based  on 
experiential learning of participants facilitated by the expert in international marketing 
with invited exporters to share their practical experiences.  The three-day training will 
be followed by coaching / advice / information sharing on specific issues as demanded 
by the exporters for a day.  Two trainings, one each in Year 2 and 3 will be arranged 
for 20 selected exporters.   
b)  Facilitate  exporters  participation  in  international  horticultural  expositions:  PSAC  will 
provide  support  to  Rwandan  exporters  to  participate  in  trade  fairs  and  forums  to 
identify new buyers as well as strengthen relations with existing buyers. The exporters 
should be either associated with project participants or have potential to engage with 
them.  In order to gain more from these events, it is important to identify events which 
have  potential  to  attract  new  buyers  and  plan  thoroughly  in  terms  of  product 
presentation, information of the product (printed documents, videos, samples, product 
story,  history  etc.).  The  exporters  should  also  be  identified  in  advance  and 
communication  with  some  of  the  potential  buyers  should  be  initiated  before 
participation in the event. The NAEB will select 10 exporters every year for participation 
in  such  events.  The  expected  cost  per  event  includes  cost  of  travel,  fees  for 
participation, products preparations (leaflets, brochures, videos, samples etc.) 
246.  Support  for  market  agents/facilitators  based  in  a  key  diplomatic  mission:  Rwandan 
horticulture exporters are fairly new to international markets and they are facing number of 
challenges. Some of these are mismatch of exporter and buyer expectations (due to limited 
understanding  of  markets  and  communication  gaps),  difficulties  in  channelling  the  product 
through export system (as not fully aware about the mechanism), not aware about stringent 
quality requirements, poor identification of buyer and not able to access niche markets (as no 
experience  in  buyer  identification),  limited  understanding  about  cost  structure  etc.  In  the 
absence of facilitation, the exporters try and always find it difficult to maintain consistency. 
In order to overcome these starting troubles, exporters need a helping hand in the form of 
market  facilitator  in  destination  countries.  PSAC  plans  to  provide  this  support  by  placing  a 
market facilitator / agent in three diplomatic missions- UK/Belgium for EU, DRC for Central 
Africa and Dubai for Middle East. They will identify newer / niche markets, understand and 
share  technical  requirements,  packaging,  certification  etc.,  undertake  specific  market 
research and facilitate link of exporters with buyers, address certain legal and non-payment 
issues, provide support in the planning for participation exporters in trade fairs etc. In nutshell 
they  should  facilitate  in-country  market  intelligence  and  trade  procedures.    The  market 
facilitator should be aware about the project concept, its value chains, associated exporters 
and their products. They should have excellent understanding about certification issues and 
in-country  rules  about  quality  parameters,  ability  to  undertake  market  research  and 
102 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
facilitation skills. This innovative way to support Rwandan exports will be done in partnership 
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MINAFFET). 
247.  PFIs  financing  horticulture  sector  agro-export  companies  will  be  supported  by  the 
existing Horticulture Export Guarantee Facility (HEGF) of USD 500,000 hosted by the BRD, 
which has been formulated and piloted under the PRICE project with initial results which are 
not  yet  in  large  scale.  PSAC  will  support  the  HEGF  with  targeted  technical  assistance  for 
increased  uptake  of  the  facility,  and  increase  the  facility  resources  by  an  additional  USD 
500,000 for the HEGF to extend guarantees also to CAPEX costs which so far have not been 
included. The technical assistance will involve an institutional capacity needs assessment to 
deliver  on  the  HEGF,  design  specific  targets  coupled  with  a  monitoring  and  evaluation 
framework to ensure that intended results are achieved. 
Table 44 Implementation of backward and forward market linkage activities - Horticulture 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Preparation of 
detailed scope of 
work, announcing CfP 
for training to 
exporters on issues 
related to 
international export 
markets and carry 
out award process to 
identify appropriate 
SP / expert 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
Procurement 
officer 
Training on export 
marketing issues (for 
exporters’ cap. 
building) 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, BDR 
Facilitate exporters 
participation in 
international 
horticultural 
expositions 
Preparation of 
detailed scope of 
work and announcing 
CfP for market agents 
/ facilitators based in 
key diplomatic 
missions  
NAEB 
horticulture 
specialist 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
MINAFFET 
103 
  Detailed scope of work 
prepared and shared 
for CfP.   
Identified suitable SP 
from the available 
proposals. 
40 exporters developed 
better understanding of 
issues in export 
marketing through 
training. 
Total 60 exporters 
attended international 
expositions (@10 
exporters per year) 
Process for selection of 
3 market facilitators / 
agents initiated.  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Carrying out award 
process for market 
agents/facilitators 
based in key 
diplomatic missions 
and continue 
engagement with 
them 
Additional support of 
USD 500,000 for the 
HEGF to extend 
guarantees to cover 
CAPEX costs along 
with current support 
for OPEX.  
Technical assistance 
to HEGF for 
institutional capacity 
needs assessment of 
FIs to deliver on 
HEGF, M&E, setting 
targets to improve 
uptake of HEGF 
through short term 
expert or by BRD 
internally 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
MINAFFET 
BRD. NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist 
BRD, NAEB 
horticulture 
specialist 
3 market facilitators / 
agents, one each based 
in UK/Belgium for EU, 
DRC for Central Africa 
and Dubai for Middle 
East identified and 
started supporting 
Rwandan exporters. 
USD 500,000 fund 
added to HEGF  
Selected FIs’ capacities 
to deliver on HEGF 
assessed, M&E 
framework prepared 
and annual targets set. 
B.2.3 Support for Quality control and market-driven certification:  
248.  Certification  is  important  to  show  best  practices  are  followed  and  quality  control 
measures are undertaken. From getting entry into international markets to capturing niche 
markets, certification plays a major role. However, there is a lot of ground work required to 
be done to develop the systems and processes within the country and provide support and 
improve certification services.   
249.  Support  for  market  driven  certifications:  Certification  involves  costs  and  some 
challenges to sustain it as well. Therefore producers / exporters need to be clear about type 
of market they plan to intervene and its specific certification requirements. PSAC will provide 
support to producers and exporters for certification based on certain prerequisites.  
250.  Strong  internal  control  mechanism  is  essential  to  improve  the  pace  of  certification 
process and maintain it. PSAC will provide facilitation support (in the form of local consultant 
/ trained internal auditors) to establish systems and ensure regular record keeping for groups 
identified  for  market-based  certification  support.  The  project  will  also  provide  support  for 
104 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
compliance  requirements  based  on  certain  conditions  on  cost  sharing  basis  to  ensure 
ownership of beneficiaries.  
251.  The support for certification and compliance will be based on following parameters-  
a)  Ensure 10% beneficiaries’ contribution of the cost of certification fees; 
b)  Review of purpose of certification and compatibility of the certificate with the identified 
/ engaged market; 
c)  Capacity of the group to sustain the certification in future; 
d)  Interest of the group to provide 40% contribution (for producer groups / coops) and 
50% contribution (for exporters) in the form of cash or kind to meet the compliance 
needs.    
252.  PSAC  plans  to  support  20  numbers  of  certifications  (10  in  coffee  VC,  and  10  in 
Horticulture  VC)  and  minimum  28  compliance  cases.  The  total  amount  of  USD  150000  is 
allocated to support certification costs with 10% beneficiary contribution which will be kept 
with district SEDO and will be further used as contribution for gap filling work. The compliance 
support will be provided through CAT 2 and CAT 3 grants.  The activities are spread over first 
4 years.  
253.  Build  national  capacity  to  strengthen  certification  framework  in  Rwanda:  Rwandan 
producers  and  exporters  have  to  depend  on  external  resource  person  to  avail  services  for 
certification related requirements (internal audit, recording system, technical guidance etc.). 
There is a scope to build this capacity locally involving youth.  
254. 
It is planned is to select 30 youth (at least 50% women) at entry level of which 20 will 
be trained thoroughly and will attempt to become certified auditors. After theoretical training 
linked with practical exercises (on different certifications, norms, procedures, documentation 
and compliance requirements etc.) the trainees will join internship programme for certification 
and engage with at least one case to learn per youth group to complete certification process. 
It  is  expected  that  the  local  certification  seekers  and  institutions  will  subsequently  hire 
services of these youth. Some may work as certified auditors with international certification 
agencies.  
255.  The support will be provided for training of 30 youth of which 20 will undergo internship 
within country or East Africa region. Additional one-time support for examination fees will be 
provided for youth interested in appearing for accreditation as international certified auditors.  
256.  Support  to  Agro-export  quality  specialized  facility  and  services  accreditation  and 
international  recognition:  NAEB  has  established  upgraded  testing  facilities  (infrastructure, 
laboratory equipment and trained human resources) for product analysis and quality control 
as per international standards with the support of GoR, EU and IFAD. However, it still lacks 
required accreditation so that the results can be recognized and accepted in the international 
markets. Exporters need to depend on quality analysis report from accredited laboratories for 
which  they  have  to  spend  the  samples  outside  Rwanda.    It  leads  to  delays  and  additional 
spending.    Therefore,  there  is  a  need  to  ensure  accreditation  of  existing  testing  facilities 
through provision of technical assistance and upgrading the observed gaps for compliance as 
per scoped accreditation. Towards this PSAC plans to provide short term support of 3 experts 
to build the capacity of staff, calibration of instruments/equipment and complete certification 
105 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
processes for accreditation. As per requirements, few tools will also be procured. The support 
will be provided for 3 years costing USD300,000 (Cost of 3 experts – USD150000, certification 
costs  –  USD  40,000,  Cost  of  tools  and  equipment  –  USD  60,000  and  cost  of  services  and 
calibration – USD 50,000)    
257.  Building local capacity to improve coffee quality: The project through partnership with 
Technoserve  as  a  service  provider  shall  also  support  coffee  processing  specialists  taking 
agriculture courses in tertiary institutions, barristers, coffee grading specialists and Q-graders 
targeting the youth and thus enhance employment of youth in the coffee value chain. Sixty 
persons, at least one person for each co-operative will be trained to build local capacity.  
Table 45 Implementation of quality control and market-driven certification activities 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Support for market 
driven certifications 
through payment of 
cost of certifications 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
NAEB Quality 
assurance  
Division 
Manager 
Build national capacity to strengthen 
certification framework in Rwanda 
Selection of 30 youth 
of which at least 50% 
will be women for 
entry level training on 
various certifications, 
their requirements 
and internal audit 
processes and 
compliance 
requirements.  
Preparation of 
detailed scope of 
work and announcing 
CfP to select SP for 
entry level training on 
certification to 30 
youth and detailed 
training of certified 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
NAEB Quality 
assurance  
Division 
Manager,  
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
NAEB Quality 
assurance  
4 
6 
6 
4 
Support 20 
certifications provided 
to producers and 
exporters under Coffee 
and Horticulture VCs. 
30 youth of which at 
least 50% women were 
selected for training on 
various aspects of 
certification.  
  Detailed scope of work 
prepared and 
announcement for call 
of proposal made to 
select SP.  
106 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
auditor level to 
selected 20 youth.  
Carrying out award 
process for select SP  
Division 
Manager, NAEB 
& SPIU 
Procurement 
Officer 
Organize trainings – 
a) Entry level training 
of 30 youth in 
certification and b) 
Advanced training of 
20 youth to build 
their capacity to 
appear for certified 
auditor examination 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
NAEB Quality 
assurance  
Division 
Manager,  
Internship of 20 
youth at certification 
agencies within 
country and in the 
region. 
Support for 
examination fees 
payment to 10 
trained youth 
interested to appear 
for certified auditor’s 
examination.  
Training of coffee 
liquorers and quality 
analysts/Q-graders- 1 
from each of 
progressive 
cooperatives 
(Capacity Building for 
local coffee quality, 
barrister, coffee 
SP for training to youth 
selected and engaged 
in training. 
30 youth completed 
entry level training in 
certification developed 
capacity to support 
farmers in certification 
processes and 
associate with internal 
auditors. 
20 youth become 
internship ready after 
completing advanced 
training in certification. 
20 youth fully trained 
in certification 
developed capacity to 
work as internal 
auditors  
  Of the 10 youth who 
are supported through 
PSAC, at least 4 youth 
passed certified 
auditor’s examination.  
NAEB Coffee 
specialist 
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
1
0
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
e
s
60 youth trained as 
professional in the 
lower stream of the 
coffee VC available for 
employment 
107 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
grading quality 
specialists 
CfP on international 
consultancy – 
‘Technical support 
for international 
accreditation of 
quality control 
facilities and its 
announcement 
Carrying out award 
process to select SP  
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist, 
NAEB Quality 
assurance  
Division 
Manager, 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
Officer 
Preparation of tender 
document for 
purchase of required 
equipment as per the 
recommendation of 
accreditation 
specialist 
Carrying out award 
process of the tender 
and procurement of 
equipment as per 
plan 
CfP for international 
consultancy prepared 
and announced. 
Award process for the 
consultancy complete 
and after execution of 
all the activities 
(including equipment 
procurement), 
facilities accredited in 
internationally 
. 
Tender document for 
procurement of 
equipment prepared 
and tendering process 
initiated. 
Award process for the 
procurement of 
required equipment 
completed.  
B.2.4: Extension services for tomato, carrots, garlic and onions (partnership with 
Heifer International)  
258.  Heifer  international  complements  PSACs  smallholder  agri-business  competitiveness 
through some key interventions in horticulture sector aiming at domestic and regional market. 
The interventions are aimed at creating more employment opportunities for women and youth 
(as the unemployment rate for women and youth are 17% and 19.7% respectively against 
the  unemployment  rate  13.8%  for  men  and  12%  for  adult  in  Rwanda)  and  contribute  to 
import substitution.  
259.  Heifer  international  will  focus  on  Tomato,  Garlic,  Carrot  and  Onion  value  chains  for 
increasing production for the domestic market, contribution to agriculture processing/value 
addition  transformation.  In  the  process,  it  will  enhance  food  security,  improve  nutrition, 
108 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
facilitate  crop  rotation,  increase  income  for  farmers,  creates  jobs  for  youth/women  and 
strengthen  resilience  of  smallholders.  It  will  work  in  synchronization  with  CORDAID  who 
supports capacity building of co-operatives and facilitate farming as a business model as well 
as access to finance interventions. Of the 14 operational districts of PSAC, Heifer will work in 
9 districts viz.  Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi and Nyabihu in the Western Province; Huye, 
Nyaruguru  and  Nyamagabe  in  the  Southern  Province;  Rulindo  and  Musanze  in  Northern 
Province. All of these districts are covered under PSAC’s horticulture interventions.  
260. 
In  the  abovementioned  crops,  Heifer  will  focus  on  three  interventions  aimed  at 
sustainable  increase  in  quality  production  for  domestic  market,  capitalizing  on  productivity 
gains  increased  investment  in  value  chain  development  while  building  capacity  of  co-
operatives  and  improving  competitiveness  of  smallholders  through  product  diversification. 
The interventions will reach out to 2000HH over a period 6 years.  
261.  Sustainable increase in quality production for domestic market: Heifer team with the 
help of district teams will identify resource poor households (mainly smallholders with focus 
on  women  and  youth)  in  operational  areas  of  9  districts.  Using  the  Value  based  Holistic 
Community  Development  Approach  (VBHCD),  Heifer  team  will  mobilize  interest  of 
participants,  organize  them  in  co-operatives  (and  /or  engage  with  existing  co-operatives) 
through  district  team.  It  will  also  offer  participants  trainings  on  good  quality  inputs  and 
greenhouse  operation  and  management  and  raise  their  awareness  about  climate  resilient 
technologies.  These  interventions  are  expected  to  improve  productivity  of  smallholder 
agriculture.  
262.  Building  capacity  of  co-operatives  and  increasing  investment  in  value  chain 
development: Heifer further plans to build capacity of smallholder co-operative by engaging 
with CORDAID as well as District teams so that co-operative can build the capacity to manage 
investment through good governance and better business management. It will use its VBHCD 
model to ensure community led participatory approach in implementation of activities which 
can  also  create  a  social  capital  required  for  sustainability.  The  investment  in  co-operatives 
will be aimed at improved mechanization at the farm level and infrastructure development for 
processing, transportation, logistics and warehousing so as to reduce the post-harvest losses. 
An investment (of USD 400,000) will be made through Heifer’s Capital Deployment Fund for 
improved mechanization and infrastructure development. 
263. 
Improving  competitiveness  of  smallholders  through  product  diversification  and 
increased  access  to  markets:    Heifer  further  plans  to  add  value  to  the  produce  through 
aggregation, packaging, certification for domestic market and training smallholders in value 
addition to the produce and facilitate market linkages development. It will use Heifer’s Capital 
investment  fund  USD600,000  for  developing  aggregation  services,  process  equipment, 
packaging material and compliance for certification for the domestic market.   It also aims to 
establish  Youth  Agrobusiness  Hubs  at  selected  centralised  locations  to  improve  access  to 
inputs  and  provide  relevant  business  development  services.  Heifer  will  take  lead  role  in 
product diversification with the help of Horticulture consultant.  
109 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 46 Implementation plan for extension services for tomato, carrots, garlic and onions (partnership with HI) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Sustainable increase in quality 
production for domestic market 
Identify and provide 
support to resource 
poor households to 
access quality inputs 
for horticulture 
farming. 
District 
officials, Heifer 
Team 
Horticulture 
specialist NAEB 
Mobilize and provide 
specialized training to 
smallholder farmers to 
engage in sustainable 
farming practices such 
as green houses and 
integrated farming 
methods. 
Heifer Team 
Building capacity of co-operatives 
and increasing investment in value 
chain development 
X 
X 
Support small holder 
farmers to organize 
into horticulture 
cooperatives and 
provide 
training/capacity 
building to 
cooperatives on good 
governance, business 
plans development, 
input supply, 
marketing and access 
to finance. 
District teams 
and Heifer 
Team 
X 
X 
110 
Beneficiaries 
(small holder 
farmers) 
identified and 
mobilized using 
Heifer VBHCD 
model 
Set up of 
greenhouse 
farms 
Increased use of 
better-quality 
inputs 
Farmer 
cooperatives 
formed 
Better business 
plans developed, 
ready for 
financing 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Provide investments 
support to 
cooperatives aimed at 
increased 
mechanization at farm 
level and 
infrastructure 
development for 
processing, transport 
logistics and 
warehousing in order 
to reduce post-harvest 
losses. 
Heifer Team, 
Heifer impact 
capital fund 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Increased 
quality product 
outputs 
Reduced post-
harvest losses 
Improving competitiveness of 
smallholders through product 
diversification and increased 
access to markets: 
Train smallholder 
farmers on value 
addition for 
horticulture products 
and create market 
linkage services. 
Provide capital 
investments to youth 
engaged in value 
addition, marketing 
and horticulture 
product aggregation 
services to acquire 
processing equipment, 
packaging materials, 
compliance and 
certification for the 
domestic market. 
Heifer team 
and 
Horticulture 
consultants 
Heifer Rwanda 
and 
agribusiness 
specialists’ 
consultants 
X 
Heifer Impact 
capital 
X 
X  X 
X 
Farmers linked 
to domestic and 
regional markets 
X 
50 Agri-youth 
hubs created 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Processing 
plants set up 
Use of improved 
packaging 
materials 
B.2.5 Range of diversified financial products 
B.2.5.1 Financial literacy and savings for resilience 
111 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
264.  The  formation  of  savings  groups  (SGs)  within  cooperatives  has  helped  to  improve 
access  to  finance  for  cooperative  members,  including  women.  MFIs  have  opened  savings 
accounts for members and can channel loans to members through the groups. The savings 
from those groups are saved at the financial institutions, which increases their liquidity. For 
MFIs group savings are a risk mitigation mechanism. Financial literacy is promoted through 
the groups and the self-reliance of members is stimulated. Members have access to finance 
to enhance their production and crop volumes, which can be marketed through cooperatives. 
It promotes the business performance of the cooperatives through higher sales volumes. The 
groups  have  contributed  to  increased  trust  of  formal  financial  service  providers  to  finance 
cooperatives. 
265.  Cordaid will support financial institutions to refine the financial products. The targeted 
institutions are microfinance institutions, SACCOs and commercial banks with willingness to 
finance cooperatives. Cordaid will target 62 cooperatives. 
Table 47 Financial literacy and savings for resilience 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Outputs 
Financial 
education - 
introduction to 
financial 
education 
services and 
products 
Financial 
Education - 
Awareness on 
Climate 
change and 
Agri-
Insurance 
Savings 
mobilization 
(VSLA) and 
linking to MFIs 
Cordaid 
25 
Coops 
30 
coops 
30 
coops 
23 
coops 
Cordaid 
20 
Coops 
20 
coops 
30 
coops 
28 
coops 
10 
coops 
Cordaid 
20 
Coops 
20 
coops 
30 
coops 
28 
coops 
10 
coops 
Farmers 
received 
financial 
education 
Farmers 
educated on 
climate 
resilience 
Farmers 
educated on 
savings 
mobilization 
and linked to 
MFIs 
B.2.5.2 Leasing product development (asset loans) 
266.  Access to equipment aims to improve producing, irrigation and decrease post-harvest 
losses.  Farmers  have  difficulties  to  access  those  equipment.  The  main  challenges  are  the 
inappropriate 
institution,  procurement  of  equipment, 
maintenance and availability of spare parts. Therefore, Cordaid Rwanda plans to improve the 
financial  product  at 
financial 
112 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
whole ecosystem of the leasing and will work on developing asset finance products to increase 
smallholders'  access  to  post-harvest  and  irrigation  equipment  through  financial  institution, 
maintenance, training of farmers on the use of the equipment, guarantee scheme. 
Table 48 Leasing product development (asset loans) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Developing the 
asset finance model   
Cordaid 
Asset finance model 
development 
Assist MFIs in 
developing the asset 
finance product   
Develop the official 
documents like MoU, 
Service level 
agreement for the 
parties agreements, 
etc. 
Introduction of 
equipment to 
Farmer 
Organizations (FOs) 
(e.g. field 
demonstrations) 
Linkage workshop 
and roundtable 
discussion between 
equipment supplier 
and FOs 
Cordaid 
Altest 4 MFIs  
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
3 equipment 
suppliers, 3 MFIs, 
maintenance services 
Number of field 
demonstrations per 
type of equipment to 
build business case 
for FO and farmers 
Cordaid 
Number of events 
Connecting FOs to 
MFIs for equipment 
financing 
Cordaid 
Linkage of 
cooperatives to 
Financial institutions 
for equipment 
financing. 
113 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
B.2.5.3  Access  to  agricultural  finance MFIs  (agri-assessment  tool  coffee,  tea, 
horticulture) 
267.  Financial inclusion, i.e. access and use of financial services including savings, loans, 
payment  systems,  have  been  a  central  part  of  Cordaid’s  work  for  decades.  Cordaid  has  a 
longstanding  partnership  with  various  financial  institutions  in  and  outside  of  Rwanda 
(SACCO's,  MFIs,  commercial  banks,  impact  investors).  Together,  we  developed  various 
approaches to foster more investments in the agricultural sector. This includes: 
a)  Capacity  building  of  financial  institutions  –  customized  trajectories  for  FIs 
including  coaching,  designs  strategies,  tools  and  methodologies  that  help  MFIs  to 
better manage the quality of their agricultural lending portfolios and their liquidity to 
increase lending to smallholders 
b)  Financial product development – capacitating FIs to build appropriate tailored agri-
loan products which meet the needs of specific target groups to increase their access 
to finance (e.g. seasonality in agri-finance, lack of collateral for youth, etc.) 
c)  Risk  management  –  decreasing  the  agri-credit  risks  to  increase  the  appetite  for 
agricultural lending by implementing sectoral risk-management trajectories for FIs 
d)  Refinancing,  developing  strategies  for  FIs  to  increase  their  capital  mobilization, 
through  saving  mobilization  but  also  through  attracting  additional investments  from 
national / international investors 
Table 49 Access to agriculture finance MFIs (agri-assessment tool coffee, tea, horticulture) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Agri- financing 
through the 
introduction of the 
digital credit 
assessment tool 
(Simbuka+) 
Institutionalization 
of agri-
assessment tool 
Training MFIs loan 
officers on the use 
of Simbuka+/agri-
credit assessment 
tool 
Capacity building 
needs assessment 
Targeting at least 4 
MFIs 
At least 4 MFIs 
Targeting at least 20 
loan officers in 
different branches 
Targeting 5 MFIs 
114 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
through ratings 
and microscore 
Implementation of 
capacity building 
(Risk 
management, 
product 
development 
Agri-product 
developments, 
digital payments 
Capital 
mobilisation; grow 
savings and 
broker 
international 
refinancing for 
agri loans 
Targeting at least 5 
MFIs, establish risk 
management 
committee and focal 
point 
Agri-product and 
digital payments 
developed. 
Refinancing targeting 
at least 4 MFIs 
B.2.5.4  Access  to  agricultural  finance (Umurenge)  SACCOs  -  in  partnership  with 
AMIR 
268.  Most of producer cooperatives are in remote areas where only Umurenge Saccos and 
other Sacco are the only financial institutions present. 
269.  Those  SACCOs  present  special  need  of  capacity  building  such  as  computerisation, 
capitalization, staff capacity building. The Association of Microfinance in Rwanda (AMIR) has 
introduced  shared  services  to  make  services  affordable  by  small  SACCOs  scattered  across 
Rwanda.  
270.  Cordaid  will  work  with  the  Association  of  Microfinance  in  Rwanda  (AMIR)  to  build 
capacity of the SACCOs active in the districts where the program is intervening.  The program 
will  support  SACCOs  to  have  access  to  shared  services  by  AMIR  such  as  automation, 
capitalization, risk management tools etc.  
B.2.6 Climate resilience financial services 
271.  Financial service providers can assist smallholder farmers to improve long term food 
security by offering financial products linked to ecosystem-based adaptation. Financial service 
providers can be supported to offer financial service that stimulate agroforestry, climate smart 
agriculture,  organic  farming,  or  to  provide  insurance  against  weather  related  risks.  While 
financial  service  providers  can  play  a  crucial  role  in  fostering  the  climate  agenda,  also  in 
Rwanda, they are faced with several constraints as summarized in the table below. 
115 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
KNOWLEDGE GAP 
TECHNOLOGY GAP 
FUNDING GAP 
-  No knowledge of climate 
impact on target groups 
-  No tailored financial 
products, including for 
women 
-  No links to CSA 
providers 
- 
- 
Capacity building on 
policy and product 
development  
linking to non-
financial service 
providers  
-  No tools 
to appraise loans for 
adaptation, 
-  No systems for 
measuring Carbon 
emission (A-Corn) 
Tools are complicated 
- 
SOLUTIONS 
- 
Investment in tools 
for measuring/ screening 
climate impacts 
-  Digital investments 
and connection 
to applications   
-  No access to long 
term high risk 
bearing capital 
-  No access to blended 
finance 
- 
Access to high risk 
bearing capital and 
long term 
(affordable) credit 
funds (at least 7-10 
years) 
272.  To overcome these issues and to stimulate investments of financial sector in climate 
resilient and smart agriculture, Cordaid Rwanda proposed a tailored set of interventions within 
PSAC. 
B.2.6.1 Capacity strengthening of FIs on climate resilient finance 
273.  Partner Financial institutions will be supported to strengthen their capacity on climate 
resilient and green finance. This capacity building trajectory includes awareness raising and 
training of staff on climate impact and solutions, the development of environmental policies 
and  frameworks  (e.g.  integration  in  risk  management  strategies),  facilitation  of  internal 
assessments on climate related risk and opportunities for the FI, and the linkage to potential 
impact investors and  financiers for the  refinancing of  climate related  financial services and 
products. 
Table 50 Implementation plan for capacity strengthening of FIs on climate resilient finance 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Training of staff on 
climate resilience 
Cordaid 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Development of 
climate policies / 
frameworks 
(environmental 
policy, risk 
management 
strategy, etc.) 
Assessment of 
opportunities / 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
116 
Financial institutions 
staff trained on climate 
resilience 
Climate policies/ 
frameworks policy 
developed in 
conjunction with both 
public and private 
sector. 
Opportunities/ risks 
identified for financial 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
risk for FIs in 
relation to CSA 
(climate smart 
agriculture) 
Linking FIs and 
impact investors 
for refinancing of 
CSA services / 
products 
Cordaid 
institutions in relation 
to CSA (Climate Smart 
Agriculture) 
Financial institutions 
linked to impact 
investors for 
refinancing of CSA 
services/ products. 
B.2.6.2 Integration of climate indicators in credit assessment 
274. 
In addition to a more generic capacity building trajectory for the FIs, Cordaid Rwanda 
will  also  support  in  the  integration  of  climate  related  indicators  in  the  credit  assessment 
processes. Guided by the developed  environmental strategy and  risk  management criteria, 
the FIs are supported to further integrate climate risk and opportunities in the usual credit 
assessment. Options for potential indicators are climate vulnerability indexes, weather  data 
and projections, soil erosion, water retention, etc. Also, climate adaptation measures farmers 
are taking / are willing to take can be integrated in the credit assessment procedure. This is 
highly  dependent  on  the  value  chain,  as  adaptation  measures  for  coffee  farmers  (e.g. 
agroforestry) can be very different to horticulture farmers (e.g. irrigation). After selection and 
implementation of relevant indicators and reliable data sources is finalized, Cordaid Rwanda 
will also support FIs to establish monitoring systems to verify these indicators. Due to the fact 
that  climate  data  will  be  coming  from  external  sources  (not  collected  within  FIs)  and  the 
variable  nature  of  this  data,  Cordaid  sees  the  need  to  work  with  digital  credit  assessment 
tools for the effective integration of climate indicators. Within PSAC some of these digital tools 
will be piloted (e.g. Simbuka, YAPU). 
Table 51 Implementation plan for integration of climate risk indicators in credit assessment 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Selection of 
climate risks, 
indicators, and 
data sources 
Include climate 
indicators in credit 
assessment  
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
Establish 
monitoring system 
Cordaid 
117 
Climate risks, 
indicators and datas 
sources selected 
Climate indicators 
integrated in credit 
assessment 
Monitoring system set-
up 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
to verify 
indicators  
Digitalization of 
climate sensitive 
credit assessment 
Cordaid 
Climate sensitive credit 
digitalized using some 
digital tools (e.g 
Simbuka, YAPU). 
B.2.6.3  Adaptation  /  development  of  financial  products  for  climate-smart 
agriculture (CSA) 
275.  Cordaid  Rwanda  has  extensive  experience  in  development  of  financial  products  and 
services. Within PSAC, Cordaid aims to support FIs to make current financial products more 
climate  resilient,  as  well  as  supporting  in  development  of  new  financial  products  to  foster 
climate-smart  agriculture  (CSA).  The  product  development  trajectory  will  start  with  a 
thorough  assessment  of  current  products  and  services,  from  which  the  opportunities  for 
adaptation or new products can be established. Based on these findings, FIs will be supported 
to  pass  all  stages  of  the  product  development  of  refinement  process,  including  design, 
approval, pilot testing, evaluation and upscaling. Cordaid expects that for PSAC a variety of 
value chain specific but also more generic financial products can be developed, e.g. products 
for irrigation, agroforestry solutions, improved input loans, etc. 
Table 52 Implementation plan for adaptation / development of financial products for CSA 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Screening 
products and 
services on 
climate risks / 
opportunities 
Design products 
and 
services climate-
smart agriculture 
Approval of 
products and 
services CSA 
Pilot testing and 
monitoring 
products CSA 
Products and services 
are screened e.g 
products for irrigation, 
agro-forestry solutions, 
inputs loans 
Products and services 
climate-smart 
agriculture designed 
Products and services 
CSA approved 
Pilot testing and 
monitoring of products 
conducted 
118 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Evaluation of 
financial CSA 
products and 
services 
Upscaling of 
financial CSA 
products and 
services 
Financial CSA products 
and services 
evaluated. 
Financial CSA products 
and services rolled out 
in other branches. 
B.2.6.4 ICT4D for value chain development and financial services 
276.  Making  (farmers’)  data  available  and  sharing  information  among  value  chain  actors 
and  stakeholders  is  crucial  for  creating  linkages  among  value  chain  actors,  strengthening 
business  relations  and  to  enable  access  to  finance.  Cordaid  Rwanda  partners  with  various 
software providers to pilot and scale digital solutions in agriculture. We always act as a broker, 
trying to support the software providers to contextualize their solution and build sustainable 
business models. On the side of the target group we support in building digital literacy and in 
the implementation of the digital solution. The data gathered through digital solutions can be 
linked to FIs for credit scoring, and to off-takers for sourcing planning, quality traceability and 
quality-based  payment.  Digital  market  platforms  will  be  created  for  smallholders  and  VC 
actors to interact and create business. ICT4Ag contributes to better farmer profiling, product 
traceability  for  high  end  markets,  access  to  input,  mobile  payment  and  field  monitoring, 
connecting  farmers  to  high-end  niche  markets  with  better  prices,  weather  information  and 
other digital services, field GPS, commodity prices and marketplaces for farmers. 
277.  Depending  on  the  relevance  and  need,  a  variety  of  digital  solutions  will  be  piloted 
within PSAC, including: 
a)  Reducing  information  asymmetries  in  market  systems  in  the  interest  of  farmers 
through a bundled agri-service platform in partnership with Mezzanine. 
b)  Facilitating  Eprod  solutions  to  improve  the  supply  chain  management,  quality  and 
better prices for farmers. 
c)  Promoting and facilitating digital loan assessment for smallholders in partnership with 
Simbuka. 
d)  Digital extension services in partnership with VIAMO 
e)  Facilitating  better  credit  history  and  linkage  to  formal  access  to  finance  through 
digitization of saving groups with Chomoka. 
Table 53 ICT4D for value chain development and financial services 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Piloting & scaling 
ICT for processors 
– creating, Create 
Cordaid 
Targeting horticulture 
cooperatives (3) and 
119 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
comprehensive 
farmer profiles, 
(access to credit 
status of individual 
farmers, field 
data, supply 
contracts, GPS 
location) 
Connecting FOs to 
ICT solutions - 
digital market inf, 
weather inf, digital 
market platform, 
supply mgt 
solutions, product 
traceability, 
mobile payments, 
etc 
Connecting 
farmers data to 
Simbuka+ & MFIs 
Coffee cooperatives 
(2coffee) 
Cordaid 
Targeting at least 3 off 
talkers with number of 
supplying cooperatives 
Cordaid 
Al least 2 MFIs 
B.2.7 Program Embedded Reflection & Learning (M&E)  
278.  Cordaid has a strong Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) practice based on a 
market systems development (MSD) approach. For evidence-based knowledge management 
and - dissemination, we use the Prove Improve and Share model.  
279.  MEL is integrated in the program design as a separate function rather than an add-on 
activity.  It  means  that  program  agility  and  adaptiveness  of  interventions  relies  on  the 
interaction  between  implementation  team  and  MEL.  This  is  essential  for  adaptive 
programming which is core  on  the MSD approach. The activities of MEL are essentially the 
following and each of the activities is detailed in below:  
280.  Next to these, there is  regular monitoring activities such as field visits, quality data 
audits, quick assessments, development and updating Theory of Change (ToC) and learning 
agenda and collection of beneficiary stories. For the IFAD funded PSAC, Cordaid will align with 
the  M&E  activities  of  the  PMU  and  lead  partner  NAEB  to  assure  synergy  and  exchange  of 
knowledge.  
a)  Capture results / Prove  
120 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
281. 
 show what works/doesn’t work through understanding project results and generating 
deeper insights from field challenges/opportunities faced by beneficiaries, client satisfaction, 
value for money and project sustainability. We do this together with project staff, we collect 
data and stories, observations, information, experiences and insights on changes (positive or 
negative) and share with partners, beneficiaries and the ecosystem.  
282.  MEL hosts quarterly reflection sessions as part of the PDCA cycle  - Plan, Do, Check, 
Act.  These  sessions  with  the  implementation  team  help  to  review  progress  made  by  a) 
analysing quarterly key achievements, b) identify strengths and weaknesses, d) identify new 
opportunities  and  d)  develop/adapt  action  plans  to  enhance  /  scale  /  replicate  services  (to 
SHF’s / MFIs / Farmer organisation / etc).   
283.  PDCA sessions serve as an internal platform to share knowledge on what works and 
what needs improvement to nourish a culture of “trial and error”. Other ways to capture and 
document learnings are case studies, internal quick assessments and client rolling profiles.  
b)  Adapt interventions / Improve  
284.  We learn by doing! We will build a learning culture through discussion and reflection 
between  project  teams  and  beneficiaries,  we  do  comparisons  across  countries  (where 
applicable). We will do this together with project staff, partners, and clients where we analyze 
results, reflect and discuss the meaning of these results, make comparisons, enrich data with 
experiences,  identify  missing  information,  and  work  on  an  adjustment  of  the  planning  and 
strategy for the next implementation period.   
c)  Share lessons learned  
285.  We  disseminate  high  level  results  &  learnings  concerned  with  project  approach  to 
relevant audiences and stakeholders, we generate best practices for the program as well as 
sector learnings, and we work towards thought leadership on key themes. We will do this by 
developing  reports,  blogs,  factsheets  and  other  communications  products  on  results  and 
learnings and sharing with relevant audiences (both internally and externally), aligned with 
the influencing and communications strategy. Examples of STARS publications can be found 
here.   
286.  Baseline, midterm, end line evaluations are always done by external and independent 
service providers, usually with international expertise  
287.  Thematic  deep-dive  case  studies  can  be  done  in-house  or  by  external  experts.  This 
depends on the topic, available capacity, and budget. Deep dives would be the foundation for 
learning and dissemination events. The content, planning and execution of deep dives will be 
discussed as needed.  
Table 54 Program embedded reflection & learning (M&E) 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Developing 
knowledge 
products (fact 
sheets, blogs, 
Cordaid 
Knowledge products 
developed targeting 1 
per year in from each 
value chain orf 
121 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
most-significant 
change, 
documentaries, 
videos etc...) 
Conduct Case 
studies to extract 
specific learning 
for sharing 
knowledge eg 
deep -dive, 
Organizing PDCA 
(Plan do check & 
Act) session with 
partners  
Knowledge 
exchange 
(organizing 
knowledge 
dissemination 
events, learning 
events, 
participation in 
webinar, 
conference) 
Monitoring 
activities (field 
visit, quality data 
audits, quick 
assessments) 
Cordaid 
Cordaid 
Cordaid, NAEB 
Cordaid 
MFI annual 
microscore and 
one rating 
Cordaid 
122 
implementing partners, 
innovations eg 
financing, BDS, FaaB  
Case studies conducted 
for interesting for 
learning from value 
chain perspective or 
financing or innovation 
implementation (1-3 
case studies) 
Quarterly PCDA 
workshops and events 
organized with 
implementing partners 
and beneficiaries/staffs 
(at least 1 in each 
quarter) 
Knowledge 
dissemination events 
organized or 
participated in for 
disseminate knowledge 
or influence policy or 
lobby (1-3 event each 
year based on selected 
theme) 
Number assessments, 
data quality check for 
implementing partners, 
assessment to establish 
facts, or controlling 
double counting, quick 
kobo assessments 
Microscores conducted 
for partner MFIs 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5 
Outputs 
Quantified regular 
output monitoring 
Cordaid 
Regular monitoring 
activity 
B.2.8: Piloting of CACHET – a price risk management tool for coffee farmers in 
Rwanda  
288.  PSAC will leverage the special initiative under development launched by IFAD Private 
Sector Advisory and Investment Unit (CACHET: Climate and Commodity Hedging to Enable 
Transformation) to build price risk management capacities of local cooperatives, especially in 
the target VCs. 
289.  CACHET  focus  on  coffee  producers  in  Honduras  and  Rwanda  as  smallholder  coffee 
farmers in these countries are exposed to mounting risks linked to climate change and price 
volatility,  detrimentally  affecting  their  ability  to  generate  regular  incomes,  sustain  their 
livelihoods  and  governments  to  reach  their  SDG  targets.  The  coffee  sector  was  selected 
because it has been highly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and has been facing labour 
shortages, higher prices of inputs and postponement or cancellation of contracts. Moreover, 
cooperatives have been having difficulties to meet their estimated target volumes for coffee 
collection  and  managing  physical  inventories.  Therefore,  in  order  to  avoid  further  financial 
losses and failure to full-fil off-take contracts, it is crucial for CACHET to target and collaborate 
with this sector. 
In  Rwanda,  CACHET’s  activities  will  support  eleven  coffee  Smallholder  Producer 
290. 
Organizations (SPOs). Specifically, CACHET will perform a baseline assessment through visits 
and interviews of these SPOs, a Market analysis of country and sector Rwanda, a Basic three-
day training, and the implementation of a price risk management tool. Part of these SPOs will 
also be involved in PSAC’s activities as beneficiaries, which shall leverage the impact of both 
CACHET  and  PSAC.  The  knowledge  and  lessons  learned  of  CACHET  will  be  shared  and 
incorporated in PSAC’s implementation as well as with the other countries in Latin America 
under CACHET project supporting PO’s in managing price risks in the coffee sector.  
Table 55 Implementation plan for CACHET 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Sharing of 
CACHET plan with 
NAEB and Cordaid 
IFAD CACHET 
Team 
Selection of 11 
SPOs for start-up 
IFAD CACHET 
Team 
Cordaid 
123 
The concept of CACHET 
introduced to develop 
understanding  
11 SPOs selected for pilot 
scale implementation of 
CACHET in Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Conduct baseline 
studies and 
interview of 11 
SPOs 
IFAD CACHET 
Team 
Market analysis of 
Rwanda and the 
sector  
IFAD CACHET 
Team 
Organization of 3-
day training for 
SPOs 
representatives 
and selected staff 
from NAEB and 
Cordaid 
IFAD CACHET 
Team, NAEB, 
Cordaid, 
representativ
es of 11 co-
operatives 
Baseline study wrt 
CACHET completed 
Conducted market 
analysis and sector 
analysis to understand 
the scope for CACHET 
implementation 
Training on concept of 
CACHET and its 
implementation 
modalities conducted 
II.3: COMPONENT C: PROJECT SUPPORT AND COORDINATIONMANAGEMENT AND POLICY 
SUPPORT  
C.1.1 Enabling Policy Environment - Coffee 
291.  PSAC will support Coffee roundtable to discuss about specific issues related to Coffee 
Value chain and stallholder engagement. The issue specific discussions of key stakeholders 
will lead to outcome in the form of practical solutions, issues to be addressed by government 
in terms of policies and practices and it will also help exchange among stakeholders. PSAC 
will  support  two  roundtables  every  year.  Some  of  these  will  be  facilitated  by  the  experts. 
NAEB coffee specialist will take lead in organizing these roundtables.   
Table 56 Implementation plan for enabling policy environment - Coffee 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Support for Public-
Private Sector 
Roundtables to 
engage in coffee 
value chain policy 
NAEB 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
12 Roundtables 
supported during 
project duration 
124 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
research and 
development 
C.1.2 Enabling policy environment -Tea 
292.  Competitiveness  of  Rwanda  tea  can  be  strengthened  by  aligning  the  policy 
environment  to  international  best  practices  in  different  performance  areas  as  well  as 
entrenching lessons into the regulatory framework. PSAC will support/advocate for policy and 
strategy consideration in the following areas. 
293.  C.1.2.1: Distance of farm location from processing factory. The distance over 
which green leaf is transported after plucking is important in maintaining quality of the leaf 
as it determines both the possible losses in transit as well as quality deterioration. This risk 
can be mitigated by regulations to guide the location of farms in relation to tea factories. 
294.  C.1.2.2:  Funding  and  utilization  policy  including  contribution  of  factories  to 
5% fund. The fund is currently being sourced primarily from deductions on the green leaf 
price payable to small holder farmers making. It may be important for NAEB to have a broader 
strategy  for  the  fund  to  enable  it  become  attractive  to  more  co-investors  including  tea 
factories. It may also be necessary to  
295.  C.1.2.3 Tea value  addition policy & strategy  (Develop  and  improve national 
tea marketing strategy in collaboration with RDB). Rwanda tea is only available in the 
country  as  straight-line  teas  with  each  factory  marketing  its  own  mark.  While  this  fosters 
competition between the factories, it also means that the country misses the opportunity to 
create  more  jobs  from  the  tea  value  chain  as  some  important  stages  in  the  chain  are 
undertaken in other countries. In particular, PSAC will support NAEB to undertake a study on 
the  state  and  opportunities  for  value  addition  and  to  elaborate  a  strategic  plan.  Detailed 
feasibility studies will be conducted and business plans developed as per the priorities of the 
strategy. 
296.  Moreover,  PSAC  will  also  support  the  Rwanda  Tea  Association  (RTA)  or  any  of  its 
members  willing  to  establish  a  value  addition  commercial  enterprise  in  the  country  if 
recommended in the  feasibility studies and strategic plan as long as the business is  viable 
and acceptable to more co-investors.   
297.  C.1.2.4: Cooperatives Common Services Policy & Strategy. Cooperatives within 
the  tea  value  chain  are  homogenous  in  structure  yet  they  achieve  varied  operational  and 
commercial results mainly because they do not have common strategy, resources, business 
management  and  decision  support  tools.  This  varied  performance  ultimately  hurts  farmers 
who end up paying more when purchasing goods and services or receiving lower prices for 
goods sold.  
298. 
In order to bridge the performance gap and unlock higher value for cooperatives, PSAC 
will  support  Ferwacothe  to  develop  and  implement  a  framework/strategy  to  be  used  by 
cooperatives to enhance their performance across the common services spectrum. 
125 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
299.  C.1.2.5:  Tea  sector  Agroforestry,  Environmental  conservation  policy  & 
Strategy. By having a common approach to managing the woodlots, cooperatives through 
the support of specialist GoR organizations will create the technical and operational capacity 
that is required to enable farmers to establish sustainable pathways to enable them earn more 
from  their  farms.  The  specialist  organizations  will  strive  to  identify  opportunities  for 
cooperatives/small holder farmers to benefit from carbon trade at global level based on their 
investments in tea farms, agroforestry and woodlots. 
Table 57 Implementation plan for enabling policy environment - Tea 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Outputs 
Distance of farm location from 
processing factory 
Tea specialist. 
Tea factories 
Tea value addition policy & 
strategy 
study on the state and 
opportunities for tea value 
addition and to elaborate a 
strategic plan and preparation 
of business plan through CfP 
Develop and improve national 
tea marketing strategy in 
collaboration with RDB  
PSAC will also support the 
Rwanda Tea Association (RTA) 
Cooperatives Common 
Services Policy & Strategy 
Support Ferwacothe to 
develop the common services  
Initiate implementation of the 
strategy 
Tea sector Agroforestry, 
Environmental conservation 
policy & Strategy 
126 
Guideline for operational 
radius for the tea factories 
prepared.  
Study on Tea value addition 
completed along with 
strategic plan 
Developed national tea 
marketing strategy in 
collaboration with RDB 
Explore possibility of 
supporting RTA based on the 
strategy for Tea value 
addition 
Strategy for common 
services to co-ops developed  
Implementation plan for 
common services to co-ops 
developed. 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Outputs 
Develop strategy on 
agroforestry / woodlots to 
establish sustainable pathways 
to enable farmers earn more 
from their farms. 
Identify opportunities for 
cooperatives/small holder 
farmers to benefit from carbon 
trade at global level based on 
their investments in tea farms, 
agroforestry and woodlots. 
CfP to develop agroforestry 
strategy developed and 
executed 
New opportunities to benefit 
tea farmers for green 
investment identified (tea 
farms, woodlots etc.) 
C.1.3 Enabling policy environment – Horticulture 
300.  PSAC will influence policies and practices through its interventions in horticulture VC. 
It has identified key gaps in Horticulture sector as below: 
a)  intercropping in coffee (banana, essential oil plants) –an evidence base for feasibility 
of intercropping has been demonstrated during the PRICE project. PSAC will support 
formulation of policy on this issue so that more smallholders can be befitted; 
b)  Facilitating  ease  of  importing  packaging  materials  for  export  in  terms  of  logistics, 
aggregation, bulk purchase; 
c)  Increasing airfreight capacity and keep the airfreight rates affordable to small Rwandan 
exporters  and  competitive  with  other  regional  players  in  the  same  horticulture 
commodities; 
d)  Supply contract for smallholder – private sector engagement. 
301.  PSAC  will  provide  support  to  MINAGRI  via  the  formulation  of  specific  guidelines  for 
banana/coffee intercropping that could then feed the overall Rwanda Agricultural Law through 
Ministerial  orders.  It  will  also  prepare  a  policy  brief  on  other  three  issues  and  share  with 
government and other concerned institutions. It will hire a short-term expert to prepare policy 
briefs.  
302.  Supporting  existing  and  new  VC  stakeholder  platforms  such  as  horticulture  working 
groups,  to  address  the  gaps  in  value  chain  development  and  providing  inputs  to  policy 
formulation. The support will be provided for organizing meeting on specific issues, carrying 
out need based small research and documentation etc.   
127 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Table 58 Interventions for creating enabling policy environment 
Responsibil
ity 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist 
Activity 
Hiring a short-term 
expert through national 
cfp for preparation of 
policy briefs 
Development of policy 
briefs for advocacy on - 
a) intercropping in coffee 
(banana, essential oil 
plants), 
b) Access to packaging 
material 
c) increasing airfreight 
capacity and maintaining 
affordable rates 
d) supply contact 
business models 
2. Support to existing 
and new platforms 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
specialist 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Short term 
expert recruited 
Four policy 
briefs / 
guidelines for 
influencing key 
stakeholders 
prepared. And 
shred with key 
stakeholder. 
Horticulture 
Value chain 
platforms 
supported 
C.1.4 Enabling youth to learn PSAC Value chains 
303.  PSAC  will  provide  internship  opportunities  for  educated  youth  to  learn  about  value 
chains,  follow-up  with  farmers,  quality  control  aspects  for  international  markets,  role  of 
financial  institutions  in  VC  development  etc.  About  72  students  (studying  graduation  and 
postgraduation  courses)  over  a  period  of  six  years  will  be  engaged  in  the  internship 
programme with the exporters, processors, co-operatives, district/sector agronomists, NAEB 
team and experts.  
304.  There will be two types of internships – short term for two months and medium term 
for 6 months. The interns will be provided with stipend (Rwf 50,000 per month) and allowance 
for food, travel and incidental expenses (Rwf 20,000 per month). Thus, the cost per intern-
128 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
month is Rwf 70,000. Every year 6 interns per value chain (3 for short term and 3 for medium 
term), thus in one year 18 inters will get exposure to PSAC value chains. The initiative will be 
implemented for 4 years, starting from year 2.  
305.  NAEB  Knowledge  Management  Specialist  will  take  lead  in  managing  internship 
programme. NAEB and partners will prepare one day PSAC introduction programme for interns 
and share the reading material (VC notes, PSAC programme documents etc.). The interns will 
work with exporters, partners and communities as per the given assignments. NAEB, Partners 
and Exporters will identify the areas in which they will need support of interns and share their 
requests to Knowledge Management specialist. NAEB will release CfP and also engage with 
educational institutes for getting requests for internship. Of the selected candidates, at least 
50% should be women.  
Table 59 Interventions for enabling youth to learn PSAC value chains 
Activity 
Responsibilit
y 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Preparation of one day 
introductory 
programme for interns 
and set of standard 
documents for reading 
along with internship 
rules 
KM specialist 
Submission of 
internship support 
requests from 
exporters, partners and 
NAEB  
Exporters / 
FIs / Partners 
engaged with 
PSAC and 
NAEB teams 
to KM 
specialists 
Announcement of call 
for internship 
KM specialist 
Selection of interns 
KM specialist, 
VC specialist 
18  18  18  18 
Posting of interns  
KM specialists 
129 
One day 
introductory 
programme for 
interns 
prepared. 
Annual demand 
requests for 
internship 
received  
Call for 
internship 
released 
18 interns 
selected and 
posted every 
year 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibilit
y 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Submission of reports 
by interns 
KM specialists 
Annual review of 
internship programme   KM specialist, 
VC specialists 
Annual 
internship 
reports received 
Annual review of 
internship 
programme 
completed 
C.2 Specific support to VC platforms 
C.2.1 Specific Support to VC Platforms - coffee 
306.  Coffee Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR) is membership-based 
organization  of  coffee  farmers  with  24  coffee  exporters  are  its  members.  It  was  formed  in 
2012.  Its  efforts  are  focused  on  the  coffee  production integrated  with  CWS  where  farmers 
promoting  and  supporting  wet  processing,  roasting  and  drying.  The  organization  needs 
capacity building to serve as one of the key stakeholders of exporters and small coffee farmers 
who can address the issues of the members and thereby the sector. PSAC will support this 
business  membership  organization  for  its  capacity  building  based  on  the  annual  plan 
developed by NAEB and the CEPAR members.  
Table 60 Implementation plan for support to VC platforms - Coffee 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Development of 
annual plan 
Capacity building 
for CEPAR in 
Public/private 
dialogue approach 
in advocacy 
NAEB / 
CEPAR 
NAEB/ 
CEPAR 
2 
2 
1 
1 
0 
0 
6 Training Sessions 
on identified issues 
organized. 
C.2.2: Specific support to VC platforms – Tea 
307.  PSAC  will  support  NAEB  to  complete,  deploy  and  review  (as  the  case  may  be)  the 
implementation of the National tea register, National tea census report, National tea brand 
and E-Marketing platform. 
130 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
308.  C.2.2.1:  Review,  completion  and  deployment  of  E-commerce  platform.  Tea 
trade  occurs  in  majority  of  the  countries  although  production  occurs  in  few  countries.  This 
situation gives rise to global and national trade networks that create and sustain demand all 
the way from processing factories in producer countries to supermarket shelves in importing 
countries. Offering Rwanda teas on an online platform as single origin teas will diversify the 
market base and thereby support price stabilization for the benefit of small holder farmers. 
309.  C.2.2.2: Review and completion of National Tea Register (NTR). The success of 
Rwanda tea industry can’t be complete without the participation of small holder farmers who 
produce  the  bulk  of  the  green  leaf  for  processing  in  factories.  Registration  of  farmers  at 
national level will go a step further to assure importers of traceability of Rwanda tea and also 
provide  a  platform  for  mobilizing  and  disbursing  funding  to  support  economic,  social  and 
environmental projects for the benefit of farmers. 
310.  Some  work  has  already  been  done  and  PSAC  will  support  consultancy  services  to 
undertake pending finalization and deployment of the NTR 
311.  C.2.2.3: Review and completion of Tea census report. PRICE supported NAEB to 
undertake a census of tea bushes which was to be the basis of developing the NTR as well as 
the  Performance  Improvement  Program  (PIP)  for  implementation  by  the  beneficiary 
cooperatives. However, this exercise was not conclusive and PSAC will support consultancy 
work to complete, validate and disseminate the census report. The report will then become a 
critical tool for developing and implementing projects/activities in the tea sector including the 
RFS and infilling.  
312.  C.2.2.4:  Support  to  National  tea  brand  program.  PRICE  supported  the 
development of the National Tea Brand and its implementation activities. However, building 
a  brand  is  an  enduring  process  and  PSAC  will  further  support  relevant  activities  including 
international  partnerships  in  commercial  and  sports  fields.  International  benchmarking  on 
brand building practices especially with Sri-Lanka (owners of Ceylon tea brand) will also be 
supported. 
Table 61 Implementation plan for support to VC platform - Tea 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
E- Commerce 
Platform 
Develop necessary 
arrangements to 
initiate tea trade 
through existing E-
platform in the 
country 
Tea 
specialist,  
MINAGRI IT 
unit for e-
soko 
131 
Basic requirements 
to started trading 
through E-platform 
completed.  
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Initiate and continue 
E-commerce for 
Rwanda tea  
Share the information 
in the market circuit 
to strengthen brand 
image of Rwanda tea  
Review the experience 
of e-trade and plan 
next moves 
National Tea 
Register 
Complete the NTR 
preparation (currently 
partly done) through 
CfP 
Deploy the NTR for 
traceability or invite 
investors  
Tea census report 
CfP for remaining 
work of Tea census 
report 
Initiate RFS and 
infilling at national 
level based on the 
information in tea 
census  
National Tea Brand 
Tea 
specialist 
Tea 
specialist 
Initiate brand building 
programme through 
Tea 
specialist 
132 
E-commerce 
platform activated 
The e-commerce link 
and information 
shared website and 
through exhibitions.  
E-commerce 
experience reviewed 
and further plans 
prepared 
NTR prepared after 
selecting expert 
through CfP 
Initiated use of NTR 
CfP invited for Tea 
census 
Based in Tea census, 
RFS and infilling 
activities planned at 
national level. 
Brand building work 
initiated 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
commercial and sports 
field 
C.2.3 Specific support to VC platforms - Horticulture 
313.  For Horticulture, PSAC will form district level VC platforms. It will bring together all the 
actors  in  the  VC  such  as  nursery  producers,  farmers,  processors,  aggregators,  banks, 
exporters and govt. officials etc. in which value chain development is a common thread for 
all. The purpose of such a crop specific value chain will be  – (a) Improve understanding of 
Value Chain and strengthen linkages among different actors through exchange of experiences 
and knowledge.  (b) Find out efficient as well as local solutions to overcome gaps in the chain 
(c) Facilitate support services (d) Prepare common plans to improve efficiency of value chains. 
(e)  Develop  local  leadership  involving  youth  and  women.  These  platforms  will  be  initially 
convened by the District Director of Agriculture and facilitate the process in such a way that 
a natural structure for the platform emerges over a period of time. 
314.  PSAC  will  select  one  platform  facilitator  per  district  as  per  the  standard  process  of 
selection.  The  facilitators  should  be  youth  (more  than  50%  women)  graduates  with  good 
communication skills and more than 50% of the selected facilitators should be women. Their 
role is to manage district level platform office, communicate with members, government and 
PSAC project team, manage information systems and databases, organize regular platform 
meeting, work as first point of contact for all the members etc. They will be based in district 
office.  PSAC  will  provide  furniture  (table,  chair,  rack  etc.)  and  a  computer  system.  The 
facilitator will receive monthly honorarium and allowance for mobile communication.  
315.  Meeting  of  Value  chain  members  will  be  organized  two  times  per  year.  PSAC  will 
provide  support for venue,  food and travel costs of the members.  It is  expected that  each 
meeting will be attended by 20-30 stakeholders.  
Table 62  Interventions on specific support to VC platforms - Horticulture 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
District level VC 
platform 
Preparation of Tender 
document for furniture 
and computer systems to 
set up platform office 
and selection of vendor 
NAEB & SPIU 
Procurement 
officers in 
association 
with NAEB 
133 
Tender 
document 
prepared, 
vendor selected 
and order placed 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Procurement of material 
and setting the office 
Recruitment of platform 
facilitators 
Organization of biannual 
meetings of district level 
VC platforms 
Responsibil
ity 
Horticulture 
specialist  
District 
officials. 
NAEB 
Horticulture 
Specialist 
District 
officials, 
Platform 
facilitator 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Procured 
furniture and 
computer 
systems for all 
the offices 
Recruited 14 
platforms 
facilitators (one 
per each 
district) 
Teo meetings 
per year per 
district 
organized for 
each VC 
PART III: PROJECT PROCEDURES AND PLANNING 
III.1: PLANNING AND SUPERVISION 
316.  Adequate implementation capacity for successful project implementation. The 
SPIU has demonstrated capacity to implement complex and challenging projects. NAEB, the 
implementing  agency,  has  also  gained  relevant  expertise  and  capacity  to  lead  the 
implementation  of  large  projects  and  programme.  Implementation  capacity  support  will be 
provided  right  from  the  onset  of  the  project  to  support  implementing  partners  and 
Government  staff  in  fine-tuning  the  project’s  poverty  targeting/gender  equality  strategy, 
implementation mechanisms and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) tools.  
317.  Planning.  Planning  will  be  guided  by  the  Project’s  strategy,  logical  framework  and 
broader theory of change which will inform the development of annual work planed oriented 
towards planned results with clear identification of how planned activities are expected to lead 
to those results.  
III.1.1. ANNUAL WORKING PLAN AND BUDGET (AWPB) PROCESS 
318.  Principles.  The  document  which  guides  implementation  and  identifies  activities 
required to each the Project objectives is the AWPB. The AWPB will follow the fiscal year, as 
134 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
per  planning  systems  in  Rwanda.  The  AWPB  development  process  is  expected  to  start  in 
Octoberof the fiscal year. AWPBs will be cleared by the Project Steering Committee and sent 
to IFAD 60 days prior to the end of each programme year for no objection. The AWPB will be 
prepared  in  the  format  described  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for  AWPBs  by  the  SPIU  with 
substantial participation of other implementing partners - NGOs and Government agencies. 
319.  The AWPB will be informed by an assessment of current implementation progress and 
will  describe  the  strategic  direction  of  the  project  for  the  coming  year  along  with  results 
expected (targets) under each component and how those results will be achieved. This will 
be complemented by a resource plan, budget and risk analysis for each result. The AWPB will 
include  plans  for  training  and  technical  assistance,  M&E  and  procurement  for  the  year  in 
question. Each AWPB will include a detailed description of planned Programme activities by 
component, sub-component and activity, and a procurement plan for 18 months for the first 
fiscal year, 12 months for the following fiscal years).   
320.  Roll out of the AWPB process. The SPIU/NAEB will establish the funds available for 
the AWPB for a particular year as per cost tables. The Project District coordinator will align 
the  activities  to  the  needs  of  the  beneficiary  sectors  with  due  regard  to  the  performance 
contracts  entered  into  by  the  District.  The  participation  of  District  authorities  and 
representatives of beneficiaries in this exercise will be paramount, and an activity schedule, 
prepared by the project district coordinator and approved by the District Council. It will be 
drawn up in consultation with all stakeholders at district level. There will be meetings between 
the  district  planner  and  service  provider,  they  will  share  project  documents  and  estimated 
budget, and identified activities implemented by each service providers. When activities are 
identified for the fiscal year, they form groups with NSEB, RAB, MINIAGRI, district and service 
providers  start  brainstorming  content  of  action  plan,  and  each  service  provider  proposes 
activities and estimated amount.  
321.  Once  the  consultations and  exchanges  are  done  and  the  first  draft  is produced,  the 
NAEB will ensure that the activities presented for financing are eligible. After consolidation, 
the draft AWPB will be submitted to the PSC for approval and later to IFAD for comments and 
acceptance,  no  later  than  60  days  before  the  beginning  of  the  relevant  financial  Year.  No 
withdrawal of funds shall be made from the Loan/Grant Accounts until the AWPB has been 
approved. If required, the SPIU/NAEB may revise the AWPB half yearly.  
322.  Each AWPB shall include, among other things, a detailed description of planned Project 
activities by component, sub-component and activity, and a procurement plan for eighteen 
months  (for  the  first  fiscal  year,  twelve  months  for  the  following  fiscal  years).  The  NAEB 
together with SPIU will establish the funds available for the AWPB for a particular year as per 
cost tables.  
135 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
AWPB outline 
The AWPB will have three sections: (i) a narrative section (in word) describing the results of the 
previous year and the activities planned for the upcoming year; (ii) a detailed budget (in excel) 
(iii) a procurement plan. This must include as a minimum:  
a.  Executive Summary 
b.  Summary Project Description 
c.  Summary of implementation to date and results achieved  
d.  Proposed Strategic Priorities for the upcoming year 
e.  Description of Expected results and activities (per component and per sector) 
i.  Schedule of implementation (per month) 
ii.  Related procurement plan 
iii.  Links to the results framework  
f. 
Implementation constraints and risks mitigation 
g.  Budget Summary (per financier, per component, per category) 
h.  Detailed table per implementing agency and summary by project activity. E.g. for 
one activity, you may have several implementing agencies contributing to it.  
III.1.2. PROJECT SUPERVISION, MID-TERM REVIEW AND COMPLETION PLANS 
323.  NAEB will have to produce a progress report before the supervision mission, containing 
information  on  the  progress  of  activities,  outputs,  the  status  of  implementation  of  the 
recommendations of the previous mission, the material progress of activities in relation to the 
project indicators and the updated logical framework. 
324. 
 Supervision  and  implementation  support  will  be  organised  jointly  by  IFAD  and 
Governemnt of Rwanda. Supervision will be a continuous process including joint missions, as 
well as continuous desk review to ensure that implementation is on track. The composition of 
supervision and implementation support missions will largely be determined by the prevailing 
circumstances. Implementation support will be provided through the in-country IFAD office, 
the Regional Hub in Nairobi, and Technical Assistance (TA) to be mobilized especially on value 
chain development, M&E and Procurement.  
325.  The  project  will  undertake  a  rigorous  Mid  Term  Review  (MTR)  to  evaluate  efficient 
project spending and whether the project is on course to achieve its goal. It should be agreed 
between the NAEB, SPIU Coordinator, PSAC Manager and IFAD. The MTR will be informed by 
a Mid Term Outcome Survey and will be a key reflection moment to assess implementation 
performance and  recommend adjustments, as  may be  required. The  recommendations will 
take into consideration the likelihood of achieving the project's targets during the remaining 
implementation  period  and  may  modify  these  targets  and  budget  allocation,  if  considered 
necessary.  
326.  The output of the MTR will be a MTR document, together with an Aide Memoire. This 
will  include  a  revised  budget  to  guide  utilization  of  the  remaining  funds;  revised 
136 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
recommendations for the use of TA; and an updated PIM. The exercise should be followed up 
by development of a second 3-year plan for project implementation.  
327.  At the end of the project, a completion review will be carried out jointly and result in 
a by a completion report and a closing workshop in order to report on the results achieved. 
They will highlight not only the results, but effects and impact of the project on the target 
groups, and will allow the capitalization and lessons. The completion report will be prepared 
before the project closure date and will address, among  other things, the following points: 
(a)  the  achievement  of  its  objectives,  (b)  the  benefits  obtained  from  the  Project,  (c)  the 
performance  of  the  parties  involved  in  the  implementation  of  the  project,  (d)  the 
implementation  of  the  costs;  and  (e)  the  lessons  learnt  from  the  implementation  of  the 
project. The PCR will be also completed from different studies and in particular with the end 
of the project outcome survey.  
328.  Project  closure  must  be  planned  6  months  earlier  that  the  IFAD  loan  closing  dates 
(financial  closure),  to  ensure  that  various  assets  are  handed  over,  and  that  all  studies, 
including PCR, are completed on time. Major infrastructure and equipment are expected to be 
handed  over  to  the  communities,  with  a  management  plan  or  following  comprehensive 
operational and management trainings.  
III.2: MONITORING AND EVALUATION, KM, AND COMMUNICATION 
III.2.1 MONITOR AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 
329.  M&E  system.  The  project  will  develop  a  results-based  M&E  system  to  support 
decision-making  and  knowledge  management,  grounded  in  lessons  learnt  from  ongoing 
IFAD  projects  in  Rwanda.  The  system  will  be  based  on:  (i)  a  clear  results  chain,  based  on 
the  logical  framework  and  economic  and  financial  analyses;  (ii)  clear  profiling  (breaking 
down) of each target to act as an outcome prediction system based on output monitoring; 
(iii)  fine-tuning  of  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  data  collection  (survey  included), 
processing,  digitalization,  storage  and  information  sharing;  and  (iv)  quantified  analysis  of 
project  results  and  approaches.  The  system  will  be  based  on  automated  Excel  sheets 
(using formulas and cross-referencing), together  with an electronic library for storing files, 
documents, progress reports, pictures. All the data will be stored on Cloud Based MIS System 
and same information shall be backed up in hard disk. 
indicators 
330.  Log-frame.  The  logical  framework  includes  Core  and  Project  Specific  Indicators 
(Logframe 
IFAD; 
indicators  which  might  be  aggregated  across  projects  for  corporate  reporting;  therefore 
the  Project  should  ensure  to  be  able  to  report  on  them.  As  a  start-up  activity  the  logical 
framework  will  be  reviewed,  internalized  by  all  parties,  baseline  and  target  figures  
established, and any final modifications may be made.  
operational 
indicators) 
proposed 
and 
by 
as 
331.  Indicators. In addition, as a start-up activity, the M&E team should review, further 
develop  and  possibly  add  indicators  useful  for  project  monitoring.  This  includes  defining 
additional  indicators  useful  for  progress  and  results  monitoring.  All  indicators  should  be 
profiled,  ensuring  that  they  are  SMART,  sex  and  age  disaggregated,  that  clear  data 
collection responsibilities have been assigned and that they are broken down per year, per 
sector. This will assist results-based planning. For outcome level indicators, the contribution 
137 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
of  each  of  the  outputs  should  be  established,  so  that  achievement/non-achievement  can 
be predicted, based on the outputs achievement, during each period. 
332.  Data collection. The NAEB Project coordinators could consider introducing the below 
steps to improve data collection systems: 
a.  The administrative forms used to get SPIU clearance to carry out activities could be 
updated to include M&E information; 
b.  Regular  project 
out 
surveys,  by  training  Agriculture  Experts  (extension  workers  on  ground)  and 
Contact Farmers to act as enumerators; 
can  be  used 
coordination 
structures 
carry 
to 
c.  Develop simple monitoring tools and templates to track data over time; 
d.  Pilot  use  of  mobile  based  data  collection  tools  to  improve  efficiency  Which  include 
tablets-based data entry forms, (maybe) use of GPS systems etc. 
e.  The tools and methods used for data collection are inclusive and gender-friendly (in 
terms of enumerators with at least 50% women representation, use of local language 
and simplified questions for easy understanding, gender and age disaggregated data 
collection, interview timings suitable to women farmers and other participants etc.)  
333.  Baseline  and  impact  evaluation.  The  SPIU  will,  as  a  start-up  activity,  determine 
the  impact  evaluation  methodology  of  the  project;  this  methodology  will  for  example 
determine  the  statistic  tools  to  be  used,  the  use  of  control  groups,  the  questions  to  be 
assessed,  the  sampling  framework  (e.g.  to  be  representative  at  district  level),  the  various 
different  target  groups  to  be  represented  etc.  This  methodology  will  form  the  base  for  the 
TOR  to  recruit  a  company  for  both  the  baseline  survey,  and  later  the  end-line  (impact) 
survey.  It  will  be  critical  to  ensure  that  the  methodology  is  well-developed  and  that  all 
data  and  analysis  is  well  documented  and  stored  well  both  on  and  off  line,  to  enable 
analysis. The baseline, mid-line and completion surveys will be conducted in alignment with 
the IFAD guidelines for the measurement of Core Indicators at Outcome level (i.e. as per COI 
guidelines 
334.  Annual  outcome  survey.  To  supplement  the  outcome  forecasting,  and  to  monitor 
likely achievement of outcomes prior to the end line survey, annual outcome surveys will be 
undertaken. These should be quick surveys, asking only a handful of questions, and be easy 
to  administer.  The  surveys  should  be  carried  out  by  agriculture  officers  on  ground  and  be 
consolidated by M&E officers at NAEB. It is recommended that a group be selected at random 
and then followed up upon every year, similar to a longitudinal panel method. The questions 
are likely to be more qualitative in nature and, when analyzed together with the quantitative 
output monitoring, will give a good indication of the trend towards achievement of the project 
results. 
335.  PSAC Evaluation Plan. The PSAC evaluation plan is envisaged as in the table below: 
Table 63 PSAC Evaluation Plan 
Year  Schedule (Quarters)  Nature 
of 
Evaluation 
Responsible 
Person 
of 
Scope 
(Area 
Coverage 
and / or 
Content) 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
138 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Year  Schedule (Quarters)  Nature 
of 
Evaluation 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
of 
Scope 
(Area 
Coverage 
and / or 
Content) 
All the selected  
VCs  in 14 
Districts 
All project 
components 
Baseline Survey 
Supervision 
Missions 
Supervision 
Missions 
All project 
components 
Special Studies 
Specific topical 
area e.g gender, 
nutrition, climate 
change 
Mid-Term Review  All project 
components 
Supervision 
Missions 
All project 
components 
Beneficiary 
Assessments 
and COI Survey 
and other 
special studies 
All project 
activities 
Sample 
sectors in the 
district 
Supervision 
Missions 
All project 
components 
Special Studies 
Specific topical 
area in 
identified 
Supervision 
Missions 
All project 
components 
Final COI Survey 
at completion 
/Impact Evaluation 
All project 
components 
139 
Responsible 
Person 
SPIU Head MIS, 
M&E Specialist 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
Subject matter 
Specialists, 
M&E 
Specialist, the 
Head MIS 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
SPIU Head MIS, 
M&E Specialist 
SPIU Head MIS, 
M&E Specialist,  
District and 
Sector staff 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
Subject matter 
Specialists, M&E 
Specialist, the 
Head MIS 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Year  Schedule (Quarters)  Nature 
of 
Evaluation 
of 
Scope 
(Area 
Coverage 
and / or 
Content) 
Special Studies 
Specific topical 
area in 
identified 
Supervision 
Missions 
All project 
components 
Endline(Completio
n) Survey 
Project Completion 
Review 
All the selected  
VCs  in 14 Districts 
All project 
components 
Special Studies 
Specific topical 
area in 
identified 
6 
Responsible 
Person 
Coordinator all 
component 
heads 
M&E 
Specialist, 
the Head 
MIS District 
and Sector 
staff 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
SPIU Head MIS, 
M&E Specialist 
NAEB Project 
Operation 
Manager, SPIU 
Coordinator 
M&E Specialist, 
the Head MIS 
District and Sector 
staff 
336.  Reporting  and  supervision.  The  different  stakeholders  will  have  specific  roles  in 
progress reporting as follows; 
a)  Quarterly  Reports:  All  PSAC  activities  integrated  into  the  district  development  plans 
will be reported upon every 3 months by respective units implementing them. Where 
the  private  sector  implementers  are  involved  in  PSAC  activities,  the  district  will  be 
responsible  for  monitoring  the  implementation  and  reporting  on  those  activities  in 
liaison with the SPs. 
b)  Semi-annual Progress Reports: Consolidation of quarterly reports will be done by the 
SPIU to prepare consolidated 6-months progress reports to IFAD. The progress reports 
will include an overall assessment of PSAC’s achievements against the targets in the 
AWP & the reports will be submitted within six weeks from the end of each reporting 
period. 
c)  Annual Progress Reports: The annual progress reports will be a consolidation of the 
progress of achievements attained during a financial year and also assess the overall 
performance of the project against set objectives. This will be done by the SPIU with 
input from the district PIU and implementing partners. 
d)  Back to Office Reports: These will be produced on demand and following field visits to 
the  project  area.  The  reports  will  be  submitted  within  one  week  of  undertaking  the 
140 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
field activities. The reports will contain feedback on the purpose of the field visits, the 
people  met  during  the  visits,  the  salient  findings,  the  lessons  learnt  and 
recommendations for improvement. 
e)  NAEB PSAC team will organize annual planning meeting during which deliberations will 
take  place  about  annual  progress  and  lessons  learned  which  will  form  the  basis  for 
annual planning. PSAC will also organize annual learning event for the key stakeholders 
in which project learning will be shared. Some of the practical learnings will be shared 
with  local  cadre  of  communities  such  lead  farmers,  FFS  coaches’  youth  certification 
inspectors, GALS champions etc. Regular sharing with community members and cadre 
of facilitators (lead farmers, GALS champions etc.) will be done during trainings and 
monthly  meetings  with  district  team  members.  The  complex  information  will  be 
simplified  at  community  level.  The  major  information  sharing  will  happen  through 
sharing of relevant data from MIS along with simple analysis.   
f)  Annual  outcome,  and  review  reports:  Outcome  monitoring  will  assess  the  use  of 
outputs and measure their benefits at beneficiary level whereas mid-term review will 
provide the complete status of the project. They will be used effectively in the planning 
process and making the course corrections involving IFAD.  
III.2.2 KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION 
337.  Learning  and  knowledge  management  (KM).  Development  of  Value  Chain 
depends on skills, knowledge and services. With ease of knowledge sharing, communication 
among  stakeholders  open  up  and  strengthens  the  enabling  environment  which  brings 
sustainable changes in policies and practices. Further it facilitates reaching out beyond project 
boundaries.  Being  export  competitiveness  project,  PSAC  needs  strong  Knowledge 
management  to  look  both  within  and  outside  the  country  and  strengthen  value  chain 
development focusing on smallholders.  
338.  While implementing PSAC knowledge generation will happen  through a) experiential 
learning,  b)  sharing  of  knowledge,  c)  well  planned  MEL  (Monitoring  &  Evaluation,  and 
Learning), research and analysis, and d) peer learnings. Capturing these aspects of knowledge 
and creating accessible platforms for knowledge sharing will be the core part of Knowledge 
management.  
339.  Experiential  learning  in  PSAC:  FFS  is  the  central  part  of  the  PSAC.  It  provides  the 
platform at grassroots level for every farmer to share their experience and solve the problems 
together. It shall bring the local experience and experts’ knowledge together, thus planning 
is required to capture the knowledge created through over 1,600 FFS under the programme. 
It may provide a good outlet for capturing grassroots innovations and standardize solutions 
to the common problems of majority by developing effective mechanisms.  Similarly, GALS is 
another  important  area  where  experiential  learning  with  suitable  knowledge  management 
systems are crucial to make progress in the direction of gender equality at household level 
and in the VC.  
340.  PSAC  has  planned  to  develop  district  level  VC  specific  platforms  which  gives 
representation  to  producers,  exporters,  service  providers,  government,  etc.  to  discuss 
practical issues for strengthening VC while bringing in equality among actors. These platforms 
can operate on the basic principles of FFS. More in-depth approach to knowledge management 
of  such  platform  can  provide  inputs  at  national  level  for  VC  development  and  create 
141 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
belongingness where farmers can contribute at par with other actors  as  efficiency  of chain 
depends on the effective role of each stakeholders.  
341.  Knowledge  sharing:  Lack  of  awareness  of  the  export  market  to  both  producers  and 
exporters was known as an obstacle. However, through various programmes, GoR’s efforts 
and  experience  of  export  markets,  some  exporters  have  gained  useful  knowledge  for 
dissemination.  PSAC  is  envisaged  to  be  benefitted  from  these  knowledge  sources  through 
‘innovative trainings’ to be offered by exporters along with agronomists to producers. Such 
attempts  of  knowledge  management  would  be  tapped  while  implementing  the  project  and 
plan for effective use of it.  
342.  MEL,  research  and  analysis:  These  are  more  standard  methods  of  information 
gathering for effective project implementation and they provide the direction on major issues. 
They  come  in  the  form  of  knowledge  package  and  usually  well  resourced.  Timeliness  of 
activity, consistency of its application, regular review with key stakeholders and follow-up are 
the  important  aspects  of  successful  knowledge  management.  PSAC  has  proposed  annual 
mortality of plantation to have a better understanding of the mortality rate and the reasons 
behind  it.  Timeliness  of  this  activity,  consistency  of  information  gathering,  and  analysis  of 
reasons can provide range of options to reduce mortality rate in the future if this knowledge 
is properly managed (in terms of proper knowledge dissemination).   
343.  Peer learning: PSAC has incorporated interventions like developing a cadre of internal 
inspectors,  explore  niche  markets  through  market  facilitators/  agents.  The  aim  of  these 
interventions  is  to  learn  quality  control  processes  and  intricacies  of  export  market  through 
internships for youth with certification agencies in the region and market facilitators based in 
diplomatic missions respectively. Sustaining this knowledge by internalizing is crucial aspect 
of knowledge management.  
344.  The above four points show knowledge management is not a static or single person’s 
work but it is a strategic tool which needs to be effectively used at every level in PSAC, which 
is an important aspect of sustainable VC development. It needs to be used internally by all 
the VC actors to learn as well as to improve their performance and externally to share the 
impact of the project along with adequate rationale. The knowledge management specialist 
along  with  PSAC  VC  specialists  would  play  key  roles  in  providing  the  direction.  This 
background provides the following plan for knowledge management:  
Table 64 Implementation plan for knowledge management 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Identification 
knowledge sources 
in PSAC 
Preparation of KM 
and communication 
strategy for PSAC 
Development of 
implementation 
KM 
specialist. 
PSAC lead 
142 
Sources of 
knowledge for PSAC 
identified 
KM and 
communication 
strategy for PSAC    
prepared 
  KM and 
communication 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Activity 
Responsibil
ity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
plan for KM and 
communication  
Review of 
knowledge 
Management plan   
Organization of 
learning events at 
district and national 
level 
Development of 
knowledge 
management 
products 
implementation plan 
developed 
KM plan and its 
progress reviewed 
annually.  
Learning events 
organized at district 
and national level 
regularly.  
Specific KM products 
developed.  
345.  Communication.  The  project  will  collaborate  with  RAB,  SPIU  within  MINAGRI  to 
produce  relevant  knowledge  products  and  ensure  documentation  of  lessons  learnt,  best 
practices  and  success  cases.  Communication  materials,  such  as  press  releases,  extension 
materials, and radio spots will be prepared and distributed through a PSAC. 
346.  The  NAEB  KM  Specialist  is  responsible  for  preparation  of  an  action  plan  and  a  good 
presentation of the external communication. Whereas the technical coordinators and the M&E 
Specialist  (and  at  times  the  Project  Operation  Manager  and  SPIU  Project  Coordinator)  will 
contribute most of the substance, she/he will structure all standard external communications, 
such as recurrent reports, study reports, website material, factsheets and press releases. This 
includes attention to branding, lay-out and text editing.  
347.  A KM action plan will be prepared to (i) identify knowledge gaps and prioritization of 
knowledge products to be developed; (ii) ease the scaling up of best practices in the different 
sectors and interventions or repackaging of innovative approaches developed elsewhere; (iii) 
disseminate  knowhow  based  on  available  communication  tools  (newsletter,  brochures, 
websites, radio, knowledge gained through FFS trainings etc).  
348.  Website. A simple website will be developed for PSAC, preferably embedded within the 
website of NAEB. The website will provide access to the reports published by the project. Links 
will be provided to relevant information or KM products.  
349.  Factsheets. These provide  succinct summaries  of lessons learned in the Programme 
and shall have a wide circulation. They  are  essentially brief and should lead the interested 
reader to the concerned key informant and the relevant technical documentation. Factsheets 
describe lessons that the PMU thinks should be incorporated into relevant programmes and 
policies; and are produced to influence decisions.  
143 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PART III: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS  
III.3.1: LENDING TERMS OF THE IFAD FINANCING 
350.  Rwanda is a LIC  country. According to the WB-IMF DSA  of January 2022, Rwanda’s 
risk  of  external  and  overall  debt  distress  remains  moderate  with  limited  space  to  absorb 
shocks. Under the replenishment cycle IFAD 12, an IFAD Loan of USD 30 million will be made 
available to Rwanda for PSAC. Rwanda is eligible to borrow PBAS resources for 80% on Super 
Highly Concessional terms and for 20% on Highly Concessional terms.  
351.  Super  Highly  concessional  terms  loans  have  a  maturity  period  of  fifty  (50)  years, 
including a grace period of ten (10) years starting from the date of approval by the Executive 
Board. Highly concessional terms loans have a maturity period of forty (40) years, including 
a grace period of ten (10) years starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board. 
The amortization of the Super Highly Concessional terms loan will be of 2,5% from years 11 
to 50. The amortization of the highly concessional terms loan will be as follows: (i) 2% from 
years  11  to  20;  and  (ii)  4%  from  years  21  to  40.  The  applicable  service  charge  will  be 
determined at the time of approval, based on the currency of the loan (USD, EUR, SDR). 
III.3.2: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES TO THE IFAD 
FINANCING 
352.  The parties to the  IFAD Loan are  IFAD (designated  Lender) and the  Government of 
Rwanda (GoR) represented by MINECOFIN (the designated Borrower) and, under the aegis of 
MINAGRI, by NAEB (the Lead Project Agency). NAEB will be assisted by the SPIU of the IFAD 
funded  portfolio  in  coordinating  PSAC  implementation.  All  parties  all  bear  specific 
responsibility  in  project  execution.  The  responsible  offices  will  be  held  accountable  for  the 
achievement of project objectives within the framework of the law, prevailing constraints, and 
limits of authority and by embracing the best principles of public expenditure management.  
353.  MINECOFIN  will  authorize  the  lead  project  agency  (NAEB)  to  open  designated 
accounts (DA) and project operational bank accounts (PA) for PSAC which will be managed 
by the SPIU of IFAD’s funded portfolio of projects, under the aegis of MINAGRI. MINECOFIN 
will grant all necessary credential to operate into the IFMIS for recording accounting entries 
and process payments. 
354.  MINAGRI will nominate the persons entitled to operate PSAC bank accounts, as well 
as those entitled to withdraw resources from the IFAD financing through the submission of 
withdrawal applications (WA) in the IFAD Client Portal (ICP). 
355.  MINECOFIN,  the  borrower,  will  be  fully  responsible  to  IFAD  for  the  due  and  timely 
performance of all obligations ascribed to in the Project Loan Agreement. Obligations include: 
(i)  ensure  that  all  parties  perform  their  obligations,  (ii)  confirm  to  the  IFAD  that  GoR 
contributions  have  been  availed  and  issued  to  the  project  as  per  AWPB,  (iii)  pay  the  Loan 
service charge and the Principal. 
144 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
356.  NAEB  will  provide  oversight  role  and  policy  direction  to  the  project,  review  the 
project’s AWPB progress against set targets and approve accordingly. It will also ensure the 
funds are used economically and efficiently to deliver project goals. 
357.  The SPIU financial management coordination to PSAC will include: (i) contribution to 
budget  planning  preparation  and  monitoring;  (ii)  budget  execution  and  treasury 
management;  (iii)  financial  reporting  to  Government  and  IFAD;  (iv)  IFMIS  implementation 
and  customization;  (v)  coordination  of  internal/external  audit;  (vi)  compliance  with  IFAD’s 
processes and procedures and (vii) securing FM operational continuity relating the opening 
and the closing of projects. 
358. 
IFAD shall be responsible for: i) extending a loan of USD 30 million; ii) opening a loan 
account in the name of the borrower in its books and crediting with the same amount of loan; 
iii)  advancing  initial  deposit  and  replenishing  the  DA  as  per  Withdrawal  Applications;  iv) 
making  direct  payments  out  of  loan  proceeds  as  requested  by  the  project’s  clients;  v) 
reviewing  and  approving  project’s  withdrawal  applications,  expenditure  justifications,  no 
objection  requests  etc.;  vi)  reviewing  and  approving  AWPB,  expenditure  category  re-
allocation requests, among others; and vii) participating in implementation support missions. 
III.3.3: DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
359.  There will be one designated account (DA) opened at National Bank of Rwanda (NBR), 
opened in USD, to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan. PSAC will also open and maintain 
two separate project operational accounts (PA) at NBR in RWF to receive (i) IFAD resources 
from the DA and (ii) Government cash co-financing. 
360. 
IFAD  financing  will  flow  to  DA  on  the  basis  of  fund  withdrawal  from  PSAC  through 
submission of withdrawal applications (WA) in the on-line IFAD Client Portal (ICP). The Letter 
to the Borrower will specify the format of the WA, the required supporting documentation as 
well as the disbursement methods. The flow of funds and relevant authorization arrangements 
are described in the below figure 5: 
145 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 8 Funds flow and authorization arrangements 
361.  The DA will operate with an advance payment from IFAD (Authorized Allocation) which 
will  be  in  line  with  expected  patterns  of  expenditure,  withdrawal  application  processing 
timeframes, and requirements for financial efficiency. The DA will be replenished following the 
rules set out in the IFAD Disbursement Handbook and the Letter to the Borrower. 
362. 
In order to avoid difficulties in the replenishment of funds, the SPIU Head of Finance 
and Fiduciary Aspects and the Chief Accountant must ensure that all expenditures made with 
PSAC  funds  by  the  various  offices  of  the  SPIU,  NAEB  and  by  the  other  contracted  service 
providers are duly justified by proper documentation on a strict regular basis. To avoid funds 
flow constraints, PSAC should replenish the designated account immediately. To ensure that 
funds are used for intended purposes, PSAC should provide a reporting format for financial 
management in line with IFAD requirements.  
363.  The IFAD PA operated by SPIU and NAEB will be used to make payments directly to 
suppliers, service providers and contractors. The GoR Counterpart PA operated by SPIU and 
NAEB will be used to make payments of local taxes and activities fully funded by government, 
again directly to suppliers, service providers and contractors. 
III.3.4: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
364.  Public  Financial  Management  (PFM).  According  to  latest  PEFA 40  assessment, 
conducted in 2017, most aspect of the PFM system are functioning at a satisfactory level. The 
PFM  system  is  able  to  produce  credible  national  budget  (including  external  donor  support) 
40 Rwanda 2017 | Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 
146 
FUNDS FLOW and AUTHORIZATION ARRANGEMENTS - Project PSAC (Rwanda)GoRCo-financiersRABNAEBWA submission flowFunds disbursement flowMINECOFIN authorization to bank account openingMINECOFIN credentials to operate IFMISMINAGRI authorization to operate bank accountsDAPAPAIFADDASPIU      MINAGRIPAMINECOFIN 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
with  contained  composition  variances  (PI-2)  and  transparent  (PI-4)  comprehensive  (PI-5) 
documentation  available  to  public.  Guidance  to  budget  preparation  is  good  (PI-17).  Cash 
forecasting,  Treasury  Single  Account  (TSA)  consolidation  and  IFMIS  integrated  accounting 
secure  reliable  predictability  of  fund  allocation  to  government  entities  (PI21)  for  budget 
execution.  Financial  integrity  is  secured  through  the  IFMIS  (PI-27),  however  accuracy  and 
timeliness  of  reporting  requires  improvements  (PI-28).  Other  areas  of  improvement  are  in 
capturing/recording of public assets and in the independence of Auditor General (PI-30). 
365.  PSAC is expected to use same financial management (FM) arrangements adopted by 
current IFAD’s funded portfolio of projects, which is fully aligned to FM country systems. 
366.  Organization and staff. Two (2) accountants will be recruited by NAEB and funded 
by PSAC. Both will report hierarchically to NAEB-CFO with a functional reporting line to SPIU-
Head of Finance and Fiduciary Aspects: 1 will be logistically located at NAEB to closely support 
PSAC technical/operational staff and overlooking the related transactions; 1 will be located at 
RAB/SPIU  mainly  to  overlook  all  other  PSAC  transactions  coordinated  by  the  SPIU  and, 
partially, to provide ad hoc support to the SPIU-Head of Finance and Fiduciary Aspects in its 
coordination role of the entire IFAD portfolio. FM capacity on IFAD’s practices will be rapidly 
built counting on the experience of the SPIU and on the learning programmes provided IFAD. 
367.  Budgeting.  PSAC  budget  planning  process  is  aligned  to  national  procedures.  It  is 
generated by PSAC Operational Team with the contribution of the SPIU in its coordination and 
evaluation role. PSAC draft budget, as part of MINAGRI budget, is presented in the national 
envelope  to  Parliament  on  April.  Considering  that,  as  per  standard  IFAD  requirement,  the 
submission of the AWPB for IFAD non-objection is due 2 months earlier than the end of the 
fiscal year, it is crucial that final revisions are immediately agreed for submission to IFAD no 
later than mid-May (about 1 month and a half earlier than the end of the fiscal year). The 
new  AWPB  will  be  prepared  with  a  minimum  quarterly  phasing  (i)  to  sharply  monitor  any 
duplication of activities with the closing AWPB, and (ii) to prepare an adequate liquidity plan, 
by quarters, to support on time and in full the implementation of the project. 
368.  Internal  control.  All  PSAC  transactions  will  be  authorized  by  the  SPIU-Head  of 
Finance  and  Fiduciary  Aspects,  the  SPIU-Coordinator  and  NAEB-CFO  as  ultimate  approver. 
NAEB-CFO  will  eventually  delegate  the  authority  to  approve  transactions  to  the  SPIU-
Coordinator within defined  ceiling amounts.   The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be 
chaired by MINAGRI and co-chaired by NAEB and RAB. Moreover, the financial management 
supporting activities carried out by the SPIU in its coordination role to PSAC will include: (i) 
contribution to budget planning, evaluation and monitoring, (ii) budget execution and treasury 
management,  (iii)  financial  reporting  to  Government  and  IFAD,  (iv)  IFMIS  implementation 
and  customization,  (v)  coordination  of  internal/external  audit,  (vi)  compliance  with  IFAD’s 
processes and procedures and (vii) securing FM operational continuity relating the opening 
and the closing of projects. 
369.  Financial Records. PSAC will keep accurate records of all financial and procurement 
transactions.  All  original  documents  related  to  Project  transactions  should  be  safeguarded, 
and  the  Project  will  continuously  sensitize  NAEB  on  the  need  to  safeguard  all  supporting 
documentation related to Project activities for a period of 10 years following Project closure. 
147 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
370.  Accounting/Reporting. The Project will comply with national accounting/reporting 
procedure  which  are  aligned  to  International  Public  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS).  The 
Financial  Statements  will  be  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  “modified  accrual  basis”  of 
accounting.  PSAC  will  also  prepare  Interim  Financial  Reports  (IFR),  on  a  quarterly  basis, 
inclusive of cash forecast for the next two quarters which will have to be submitted to IFAD 
30  days  after  end  of  period.  The  format  of  the  IFR  will  be  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the 
Borrower. 
371.  The  Government  IFMIS-Accounting  software,  mandatory  for  donor’s  funded  project, 
has  been  customized  in  its  Chart  of  Accounts  to  be  compliant  with  IFAD’s  minimum 
accounting/reporting  requirements  by  component/expenditure  category/financier.  This  is 
expected  to  reduce  the  excessive  manual  accounting/reporting  operations  prone  to 
inaccuracies  and  errors,  with  immediate  impact  on  management  decision  making  and 
bottlenecks in the processing of WA from IFAD. This first customization step is fundamental 
for the short term: it will allow to extract from IFMIS reliable transaction lists which will more 
effectively feed into manual reports. In the medium term, further customization is expected 
to automatically generate reports from the IFMIS (i.e. SOE, WA, DA reconciliations, IFR), as 
a reliable ring-fenced system.  
372.  Investment Grants. Investment grants management is detailed in PART II: Detailed 
Implementation Modalities – II.1 – Section A.2.2. The grants are categorized in various groups 
and are to be disbursed in tranches after the  grantees have met the  stipulated conditions. 
There  will  be  a  detailed  grant  agreement  signed  between  the  project  and  the  grantees  to 
stipulate these conditions including the expected financial reporting by the grantees. At the 
SPIU level, the disbursements to grantees will be included in the expenses at disbursements 
and monitored separately as detailed in section A.2.2.  
373.  Government and beneficiary contributions. These relate to the monetary and in-
kind  contribution  (IKC)  provided  by  governments,  beneficiaries,  implementing  partners, 
financial  institutions  and  the  private-sector  to  a  project.  It  relates  to  direct  provision  of 
asset/services (benefits) to the project or expenditure incurred expenditure by Government, 
beneficiaries or other implementing partners which otherwise would need to be paid for by 
the project meet its objectives. In-kind contributions are crucial as they will translate the real 
contribution of Borrower/Recipient to the project in addition to the contribution in cash and 
tax exemptions.  
374. 
It  is  critical  to  capture  in-kind  contributions  from  all  sources:  Government, 
beneficiaries and other domestic co-financiers. Process must be regular and systematic. The 
IFMIS will be exploited also in its M&E module to capture any in-kind co-financing (IKC) as 
well as those cash contributions (i.e. beneficiaries) which are not materializing through PSAC 
accounts (hence, IFMIS-Accounting).  
375.  As agreed with the Auditor General, and as part of the IFAD funded portfolio in Rwanda, 
PSAC will start a journey to recognize/measure/report any source of in-kind co-financing, for 
reporting into Notes to the Financial Statements. PSAC will start with mapping all concerned 
activities  and  with  preparing  procedural  guidelines  (PIM)  on  the  evaluation  criteria,  data 
collection at site level and reporting. PSAC will set thresholds above which professional valuer 
will be required and below which PSAC technical staff will play a pivotal role, at site level, to 
validate the provision of contribution in kind and to collect its value. Thresholds will be set by 
148 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
the  SPIU  following  the  principle  of  a  lean  evaluation  process  which  should  not  represent  a 
bottleneck to Project implementation and, in any case, which shall stay within the perimeter 
of  national  laws/regulations.  IKC  assessment  will  also  follow  the  indication  outlined  in  the 
IFAD Technical Note on in-kind co-financing.  
376.  Below is a simplified process for IKC:  
Identification 
areas of IKC as 
per PDR/ FA 
(Ideally per 
component)
Development of 
Project’s IKC 
framework tool
(identified IKC, 
basis of valuation, 
and 
responsibilities 
etc.)
Preparation of 
IKC AWPB
(For ease of 
monitoring)
Data collection, 
recording and 
documents filing
Disclosure in 
financial 
statements for 
audit
(Monthly, quarterly 
etc as per the 
framework)
(As a disclosure 
notes)
377.  The IKC should meet the following criteria for recognition: - 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
IKC should directly be related to achievements of PDO  
IKC framework/tool should highlight IKC activities (per component/Sub-component), 
definition  and  measurement,  monitoring  tools,  responsibilities  and  frequency  and 
minimum supporting documents  
IKC  shall  be  recognized  at  the  fair  market  value  and  must  be  duly  justified  by 
supporting documents  
IKC  recording,  documentation  and  filing  should  be  adequate  to  enable  independent 
verification/ audit. Recording should be done regularly, at least monthly or as may be 
applicable  
IKC  should  be  reflected  in  the  Financial  Statement  (as  a  disclosure  note)  and  be 
audited.  It is also an additional schedule/report required for submission to IFAD as 
part of IFR  
378.  The below chart can serve as an example to prepare the IKC mapping: 
149 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
379.  Government  contribution  can  be  in  the  form  of  tax  financing  (i.e.  VAT)  and  is 
normally assessed in Costab at Design. However, during implementation, it may be difficult 
to capture those cases of tax exemption regimes (i.e. associated to services/goods from public 
entities) which count as contribution in-kind but cannot be recorded directly into IFMIS due 
to technical limitations of the system. In these cases, PSAC will prepare an off-line evaluation, 
focused on selected vendor’s transactions, to reflect fully counterpart co-financing. Evaluation 
procedure will be further outlined in the PIM. 
380.  External Audit. The current projects are all being audited by the Office of the Auditor 
General (OAG) as mandated under the Government Act/Law. The Office has legal personality 
and financial and administrative autonomy; hence, while discharging its responsibilities, the 
Office is independent and does not receive any injunctions from other organs. The OAG has 
been a member of INTOSAI and AFROSAI for the past thirteen years, and the financial audit 
methodologies applied conform to international standards. Reviews of the quality of the OAG 
reports  for  existing  projects  indicate  highly  satisfactory  performance  ratings,  with  positive 
comments given for the level of detail of the audits and use of acceptable standards (INTOSAI 
auditing standards).  It is recommended therefore that PSAC will also be audited by the OAG. 
A complete set of Financial Statements specific to PSAC will be prepared in accordance with 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) – modified accrual basis, audited 
by the OAG and submitted to IFAD before 31st December. 
III.4: PROCUREMENT 
381.  General  Principles 
for  Procurement  Responsibilities.  The  designated 
borrower/recipient  (MINECOFIN)  has  the  primary  responsibility  for  procurement  and  its 
management, whereas IFAD has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that its proceeds and the 
funds  it  administers  are  used  solely  for  the  intended  purposes  stated  in  the  applicable 
150 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
financing  agreement(s),  as  well  as  to  ensure  that  its  own  financing  or  the  financing  it 
administers is not used to finance illegal acts connected with money-laundering and terrorist 
financing. 
382.  The  designated  borrower  is  legally  and  operationally  in  charge  of  all  procurement 
transactions for a project, utilizing IFAD proceeds for these purposes. 
IFAD’s fiduciary responsibility is exercised through oversight and advisory roles. In this 
383. 
latter role, IFAD promotes capacity-building to achieve economy, efficiency and social equity, 
primarily through its support activities. 
384.  Applicable procurement framework. Procurement under the PSAC project shall be 
carried  out  according  to  Rwandan  procurement  regulations  to  the  extent  that  they  are 
consistent  with  the  IFAD  Project  Procurement  Guidelines 41 .  The  law  governing  Public 
Procurement in Rwandan is Law no. 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 governing public procurement 42 
and the Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public 
procurement43. A Standard Manual for Public Procurement (Public Procurement User Guide) 
is in place for use by procurement entities44. 
385.  Standard procurement documents and IFAD systems. PSAC project will use the 
full  package  of  standard  procurement  documents 45  released  by  the  Rwanda  Public 
Procurement Authority, which will be adapted to include mandatory references to IFAD policies 
such  as  the  Revised  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption46,  the  IFAD  policy  to 
preventing and responding to sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse47, the Anti-
Money  Laundering  and  Countering  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  Policy 48 and  IFAD’s  Social, 
Envornmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)49. PSAC project will be set up on 
the  No-Objection  Tracking  Utility  System  (NOTUS)  and  Contract  Monitoring  Tool  (CMT) 
function  of  the  IFAD  Client  Portal  (ICP)  from  project  start  up,  thus  ensuring  effective 
supervision and prior review of procurement processes by IFAD. 
386.  Procurement Plan. A procurement Plan will be prepared for the first eighteen (18) 
months  of  the  project  this  will  be  followed  by  successive  twelve  (12)  month  plans 
synchronized  with  the  annual  work  plan  and  budget  (AWPB)  during  implementation.    The 
Procurement  Officer  will  therefore  participate  in  the  preparation  of  the  AWPB.  The 
Procurement Officer will provide guidance on market prices in order to ensure that budgets 
are  realistic.    The  Procurement  Plan  will  be  development  using  the  IFAD  Procurement  Plan 
template. IFAD will provide a no objection to the procurement plan and once the no objection 
is provided, it shall serve as the basis for procurement implementation under the project. 
387.  Institutional  Arrangements. Coordination and central procurement capacities will 
be focused in the Procurement Unit of the existing Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU), 
which has an experienced Sr. Procurement Officer acting as Head of Procurement for all IFAD-
41 Available here:  https://www.ifad.org/en/project-procurement 
42 Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/index.php 
43 Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/index.php 
44 Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/publications 
45 Available here: https://www.rppa.gov.rw/publications 
46 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/policy-on-preventing-fraud-and-corruption-in-its-activities-and-operations 
47Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/ifad-policy-to-preventing-and-responding-to-sexual-harassment-sexual-
exploitation-and-abuse 
48Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/anti-money-laundering-and-countering-the-financing-of-terrorism-policy 
49 Available here: https://www.ifad.org/en/secap 
151 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
funded projects implemented by the SPIU. A Procurement Officer will be recruited to support 
the  procurement  functions  under  the  PSAC  project  and  will  be  reporting  to  the  Head  of 
Procurement  of  SPIU.  The  Procurement  Officer’s  procurement  related  responsibilities  will 
therefore be supervised by the Head of Procurement of SPIU.  At the NAEB institutional level, 
for the purposes of maintaining sound administrative oversight, the Procurement Officer will 
be supervised by the NAEB Chief Finance Officer. 
388.  For better coordination, the Procurement Officer will be stationed at NAEB offices in 
order to coordinate with the rest of the project team.  
389.  Implementation  Arrangements.  The  PSAC  project  will  be  implemented  using 
shared responsibilities between the NAEB and the SPIU. This will ensure that both institutions 
share their synergies for seamless implementation. IFAD will provide fiduciary oversight and 
advice during the implementation.   
•  Chief Budget Manager(CFO) NAEB will approve the final contract awards and also 
sign all the contracts. 
•  SPIU  Coordinator  will  approve  all  processes  from  publication  to  the  provisional 
notification. 
•  Head of Procurement of SPIU will coordinate all the procurement activities ensure 
that they are carried out efficiently to achieve value for money and that all requests 
submitted are eligible and in accordance with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines 
and requirements as well as the National Procurement Law.   She/he will prepare all 
no-objection  request  for  transmission  to  IFAD  and  will  act  as  the  liaison  for  all 
procurement related correspondences with IFAD.   
•  Procurement Officer will support the project team to initiate procurement activities 
starting from the procurement plan, providing inputs to the development of Terms of 
Reference and Specifications and processing all procurement transactions through the 
e-procurement  platform  and  supporting  the  Tender  Committee.  ToR  of  the 
procurement officer is attached in Annex I.  
390.  Tender Committee. A tender committee will be constituted for the PSAC project.  The 
tender committee will be drawn from the technical staff of the PSAC project and will work as 
established  by  the  Law  governing  public  procurement  management  in  Rwanda  Law  n° 
62/2018  of  25/08/2018.    As  provided  in  the  Procurement  Law  Article  10,  Public  tender 
committee  for  the  PSAC  project  will  perform  the  following  functions;  (i)  evaluate  bids;  (ii) 
recommend  tender  award;  (iii)  provide  recommendations  on  all  issues  relating  to  public 
procurement;  (iv)  provide  advice  on  tender  documents  before  their  publication;  (v) 
recommend tenders to be awarded; (vi) make recommendations on any change to be carried 
out on the procurement contract.  
391.  E-Government.  For  more  efficiency  and  transparency,  the  GoR  has  developed  an 
electronic procurement system currently operating under e-government50. All procurements 
for goods, services, works and no-consulting services will be handled through the platform 
50 Available here: https://umucyo.gov.rw/ 
152 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
these  will  include  and  not  limited  to:  advertising,  submission  of  bids,  opening  of  bids, 
evaluation of bids, contract negotiation, contracting etc. 
392.  Contract Management. All contract management activities will be managed by the 
technical staff of the project who will ensure compliance with the conditions of the contract.  
The  project  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that  all  goods  are  delivered  as  agreed  in  the 
contract  and  milestones  are  met  within  the  established  timeline.  Any  amendments  to  the 
Contracts shall be handled by the tender committee as required by the established law and 
also in compliance with IFAD procurement guidelines. 
393.  Supervision. The overall supervision of Public Procurement activities is vested in the 
Rwanda Public Procurement Authority (RPPA). One of the key mandates of the organization 
is  to  ensure  organization,  analysis  and  supervision  in  public  procurement  matters.  In  this 
regard, the RPPA will provide the procurement supervision to the PSAC project as provided 
by law. IFAD will be responsible for supervision of procurement activities through the reviews 
required  for  no-objection  requests.  IFAD  will  also  undertake  post  review  supervision  for 
activities below the applicable prior review thresholds.  Procurement supervision will also be 
done during scheduled project supervision missions.  Day to day supervision of procurement 
activities at the project level will be undertaken by the Head of Procurement of SPIU. Refer 
to Annex IV for the Supervision Plan. 
394.  Capacity  Development.  Capacity  development  in  procurement  is  key  towards  the 
achievement of the fundamental principles of transparency, competition, economy, effective, 
efficient and fast work, fairness and accountability.  IFAD will ensure that new procurement 
staff recruited to the PSAC project receive relevant training while at the same time updating 
the exisiting skills of staff working at the SPIU. The main objectives of capacity building will 
be  to  increase  skills  in  procurement  management  of  IFAD  staff  that  are  involved  in 
procurement. Capacity in procurement will be delivered using the following methodologies:  
1.  Technical Assistance support in procurement which will be provided during scheduled 
project supervision mission as follows: 
•  Ascertain procurement capacity within the PMU, availability of dedicated staff, 
and the adequacy of their experience and qualifications.  
•  Assess  procurement  staff  training  needs  and  ensure  that  relevant  training  is 
planned and provided to them in a timely manner, before or during the project 
start-up  workshop.  Assess  need  for  and  ensure  timely  delivery  of  more 
basic/general training for other PMU staff.  
•  Ensure procurement principles, provisions and procedures as stipulated in the 
IFAD  Project  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Procurement  Handbook,  Financing 
Agreement and Letter to the Borrower, PIM, standard templates (e.g. bidding 
documents for goods,  works and services) and related systems are available 
and fully explained to procurement and project management staff 
2.  Structured  training  which  will  be  organized  and  delivered  by  the  IFAD  East  and 
Southern African Division. 
3.  BUILD PROC Programme, which is a capacity-building programme in procurement for 
agricultural  and 
relevant, 
comprehensive,  accessible  and  sustainable  certification  programme  in 
procurement to procurement officers working for agricultural and rural development.  
New staff will be encouraged to enroll into the programme. 
rural  development.  The  programme  offers 
153 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
395.  Procurement methods and IFAD prior review thresholds. Proposed methods of 
procurement  for  goods,  works,  consulting  services  and  related  non-consulting  services,  as 
well as the IFAD prior-review thresholds will be laid out in the Letter to the Borrower of PSAC 
as may be amended from time to time. 
396.  The  procurement  section  of  this  PIM  has  a  dynamic  nature.  It  will  be  reviewed  and 
updated periodically based on lessons learned during implementation and on developments 
that may occur during the Project’s life. Any changes/amendments to the procurement section 
will be made in order to improve the Project’s efficiency and effectiveness and will be subject 
to IFAD’s No-Objection. See table 62 – Procurement and Prior Review Thresholds. 
Table 65 Procurement and Prior Review Thresholds in USD 
Prior Review Thresholds 
Category 
Goods and 
goods-related 
Non-Consulting 
Services 
Works and 
works-related 
Non-Consulting 
Services 
Threshold 
> US$ 
100,000.00 
> US$ 
200,0000.00 
Consulting Services 
and related Non-
Consulting Services 
and/or 
MoU/Agreements 
> US$ 80,000.00 
Individual 
Consultants 
> US$ 
40,000.00 
Procurement Method Thresholds 
CQS 
QBS/LCS/FBS 
QCBS 
ICS 
≤ US$100,000  < US$200,000 
≥ US$200,000 
Consulting 
Services and 
related Non-
Consulting 
Services 
Shopping 
NCB 
ICS is to be used 
for all selection 
for individual 
consultants, 
regardless of 
value 
ICB 
≤US$3,000 
≥ US$250,000 
>US$3,000 to 
<US$250,000 
Goods and 
goods-related 
Non-
Consulting 
Services 
Works and 
works-related 
Non-
Consulting 
Services 
* All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are Prior Review (in alignment 
with IFAD Procurement Handbook), or based on the thresholds stipulated in the LTB  
** The exchange rate at time of submission will be used for reviews. 
>US$3,000 to 
<US$1,000,000 
≥ US$1,000,000 
≤US$3,000 
SECAP Assessment Risks relevant to Procurement  
397.  Procurement under the PSAC project will be undertaken in such manner to reduce the 
risks identified in the SECAP Guidance to the SPO throughout the procurement cycle. These 
will cover specific actions in procurement process including, but not limited to the following: 
154 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Technical  specifications  to  include  list/reference  to  all  approved  chemicals  in  tender 
documents; Use of ethically sourced materials; use of only allowable chemicals; use of 
WHO-FAO  approved  pesticide  and  WHO-FAO  codes  for  safe  labelling,  packaging, 
handling, storage, application and disposals of pesticide are respected;  
Procurement of raw materials will be carried out in an ethical manner as the instructions 
to be included in the related bidding documents; 
Suppliers of fertilizer and pesticides will be required to operate in accordance with SECAP 
standard  2  (reference  to  the  exclusion  list);  To  include  evaluation  of  proposed  Pest 
Management Plans by the bidders as necessary. 
Integration  of  environmental  and  social  safeguard  criteria  in  the  selection  of  service 
providers, including microfinance institutions. 
Agreements with Participating Financial Institutions should include a requirement for a 
functional ESMS. 
Contractors/suppliers adhere to the relevant labour laws, ensure compliance to national 
and international laws on Labour, including prohibition of child labour by referring to the 
directives of the ILO on the minimum working age and available National Labour Law;  
Compliance to occupational safety and health (OSH) requirements including Safety and 
health training on the proper use and maintenance of personal protective equipment;  
398.  Contractors, suppliers and service providers will be required to respect the IFAD Policy 
to  preventing  and  responding  to  sexual  harassment,  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  and 
mandatory references to safe policies will be included in the bidding documents and contracts 
entered into.  
Integration of SECAP risks into Procurement plans 
Introduction 
399.  This section provides indication to the SPO on the SECAP risks to be incorporated into 
procurement plans. While the general integration of SECAP  requirements into procurement 
documents is described into ANNEX 4, Volume 1 of the SECAP, the project specific risks are 
as identified by the SECAP online tool. The ES specialist has identified, through the SECAP 
environmental and social screening checklist, the issues in the table below that need to be 
mitigated through procurement. In case the SPO has ambiguity as to the guidance provided 
by the ES  specialist in the rightmost  column of the below Results Table, then the SPO  will 
need to collaborate with the ES specialist and relevant members of the PDT in order to reach 
an  agreement  as  to  how  these  ES  issues  can  be  dealt  with  best  through  procurement 
mitigation  measures  that  the  Borrower  must  be  required  to  put  in  place  with  respect  to 
procurement parameters like: 
1.  Technical Specifications 
2.  Bidder Qualification 
3.  Bid Evaluation Criteria 
4.  Contract Clauses 
400.  For Example, if use of harmful types of pesticide is an issue in the project area, then 
it can be dealt with through the specifications of the pesticide and both the ES specialist and 
155 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
the SPO will agree that the project will use a “WHO-FAO approved pesticide and that WHO-
FAO  codes  for  safe  labelling,  packaging,  handling,  storage,  application  and  disposals  of 
pesticide are respected”. If the project involves work in a sensitive cultural heritage area or 
an  area  where  biodiversity  is  to  be  protected,  then  the  successful  past  experience  of  the 
contractor  in  working  in  such  zones  is  critical  and  the  ES  specialist  will  select  “Bidder 
qualification” and “Bid Evaluation Criteria”. If labour conditions or indigenous peoples’ rights 
are  often  compromised  in  the  project’s  area,  then  the  ES  specialist  may  select  “Contract 
Clauses” and give whatever further guidance is possible for SPO. If deforestation or extensive 
use of natural resources in the project area is an issue identified by the ES specialist, then 
the ES specialist will chose “specifications” and “Bid Evaluation Criteria” and agree with the 
SPO to specify legally-harvested timber (or timber certified with the relevant label) and agree 
as to the evaluation criteria to be used to promote resource efficiency (e.g. evaluation criteria 
to favour  energy  efficient pumps, efficient transformer  sub-stations, fuel saving equipment 
etc.). 
401.  The  ES  specialist,  relevant  members  of  the  PDT  and  the  SPO  will  need  to  consult 
together and pool their collective expertise in the various disciplines in order to arrive at the 
right mitigation measures to be reflected in the PRM. In this manner downstream work by the 
SPO  in  prescribing  the  project  requirements  for  the  Procurement  Plan  (PP)  and  PDR  are 
facilitated and can be readily reflected in the PIM and the choice of bidding documents and 
contract provisions. 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution Prevention 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
2.1 Could the project 
involve or lead to the 
release of pollutants to 
the environment due to 
routine or non-routine 
circumstances with the 
potential for adverse 
local, regional, and/or 
transboundary impacts? 
2.4 Could the project 
involve or lead to 
significant consumption 
Moderate  Moderate 
Pollutants may possibly be 
released, either routinely 
or by accident, but 
treatment systems are 
proven and verified. 
Receiving environment is 
highly sensitive.  
Moderate  Moderate 
The project will require 
consumption of raw 
materials, energy, and/or 
156 
Agricultural productivity 
activities in the selected 
value chains will result 
in the increased use of 
agrochemicals.  
Technical specification 
and bid evaluation 
criteria to include list/ 
reference to all 
approved chemicals in 
tender documents.  
Waste handling facilities 
to be included.  
Procurement of raw 
materials will be carried 
out in an ethical manner 
as the instructions to be 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
of raw materials, energy, 
and/or water?  
water. This will be a 
significant component of 
the project, but impacts 
can be appropriately 
managed.  
included in the related 
bidding documents 
2.6 Could the project 
involve inputs of 
fertilizers and other 
modifying agents? 
Moderate  Moderate 
The project requires use of 
fertilizers, but options are 
available to replace 
polluting fertilizers with 
alternatives.  
2.7 Could the project 
involve or lead to 
procurement, supply 
and/or result in the use 
of pesticides on crops, 
livestock, aquaculture or 
forestry? 
Moderate  Moderate 
The project requires use of 
pesticides, but options are 
available to replace 
potentially polluting 
pesticides with 
alternatives.  
Cultural Heritage 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
157 
Agricultural productivity 
activities in the selected 
value chains will result 
in the increased use of 
agrochemicals. 
Suppliers of fertilisers 
will be required to 
operate in line with 
SECAP safeguard 
standard 2  
List/ refer to all 
approved chemicals in 
tender documents  
Agricultural productivity 
activities in the selected 
value chains will result 
in the increased use of 
agrochemicals. 
The project will not 
supply or procure 
pesticides that contain 
active ingredients that 
are banned or restricted 
under applicable 
international treaties 
and agreements, or 
meet the criteria of 
carcinogenicity, 
mutagenicity or 
reproductive toxicity as 
set forth by relevant 
international agencies. 
Refer to the list of 
approved pesticides in 
the tender documents  
Guidance for SPOs 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
3.1 Could the project be 
located in areas that are 
considered to have 
archaeological 
(prehistoric), 
paleontological, 
historical, cultural, 
artistic, and religious 
values or contains 
features considered as 
critical cultural heritage? 
3.4 Could the project 
involve or lead to adverse 
impacts to sites, 
structures, or objects 
with historical, cultural, 
artistic, traditional or 
religious values or 
intangible forms of 
culture (e.g. knowledge, 
innovations, practices)? 
(Note: projects intended 
to protect and conserve 
Cultural Heritage may 
also have inadvertent 
adverse impacts) 
Moderate  Moderate 
The project is thought to 
be close to an area that is 
considered to have 
archaeological 
(prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, 
cultural, artistic, and 
religious values or contains 
features considered as 
critical cultural heritage. 
The site has not been 
surveyed, and so the 
presence of cultural 
heritage is not well known.  
Moderate  Moderate 
The project is thought to 
be close to an area that is 
considered to have 
archaeological 
(prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, 
cultural, artistic, and 
religious values or contains 
features considered as 
critical cultural heritage. 
The site has not been 
surveyed, and so the 
presence of cultural 
heritage is not well known.  
Agricultural production 
may include expansion 
into new areas 
The project will operate 
within SECAP standards 
requirements for 
Cultural Heritage and be 
on the lookout for 
chance finds.  
Agricultural production 
may include expansion 
into new areas 
The project will operate 
within SECAP standards 
requirements for 
Cultural Heritage and be 
on the lookout for 
chance finds.  
Labour and Working 
Conditions 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
5.1 Could the project 
operate in sectors or 
value chains that are 
characterized by working 
conditions that do not 
meet national labour laws 
or international 
commitments? (Note: 
Substantial  Moderate 
The project operates in 
sectors or value chains 
that have, in the past, not 
met national labour laws, 
or international 
commitments, but is now 
158 
Measures relating to 
working conditions, 
labour laws, and 
international 
commitments will be 
included in the technical 
specifications of bidding 
documents and 
contractors will be 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
required to abide by 
them. 
adequately nationally 
regulated. However, 
international value chains 
are not regularly audited 
for environmental or social 
performance.  
Substantial  Moderate 
The project operates in a 
sector, area, or value 
chain where workers are 
occasionally exposed to 
significant OSH risks, and 
where regulation is known 
to be weak or non-
existent.  
Measures relating to 
OSH, aimed at 
protecting project 
workers from injury, 
illness or impacts 
associated with 
exposure to hazards 
encountered in the 
workplace or while 
working will be included 
in the technical 
specifications of bidding 
documents and 
contractors will be 
required to abide by 
them 
this may include 
discriminatory practices, 
high gender inequality 
and the lack of equal 
opportunities, denial of 
freedom of association 
and collective bargaining, 
labour migrants) 
5.4 Could the project: (a) 
operate in a sector, area 
or value chain where 
producers and other 
agricultural workers are 
typically exposed to 
significant occupational 
and safety risks, and/or 
(b) promote or use 
technologies or practices 
that pose occupational 
safety and health (OSH) 
risks for farmers, other 
rural workers or rural 
populations in general? 
(Note: OSH risks in 
agriculture might include: 
dangerous machinery and 
tools; hazardous 
chemicals; toxic or 
allergenic agents; 
carcinogenic substances 
or agents; parasitic 
diseases; transmissible 
animal diseases; confined 
spaces; ergonomic 
hazards; extreme 
temperatures; and 
contact with dangerous 
and poisonous animals, 
reptiles and insects. 
Psychosocial hazards 
might include violence 
and harassment.) 
159 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Community Health, 
Safety and Security 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
6.7 Could the project 
lead to the potential for 
gender-based violence, 
including sexual 
harassment, exploitation 
and abuse, as a result of 
labour influx, land 
redistribution, or other 
actions that alter 
community dynamics? 
6.8 Could the project 
lead to increases in traffic 
or alteration in traffic 
flow? 
Moderate  Minor 
Minor changes to 
community dynamics. 
Resulting serious recorded 
cases of gender-based 
violence and/or sexual 
exploitation. Gender-based 
violence protocols in place.  
Low 
Negligible 
The project will not lead to 
an increase in traffic, or 
alteration of traffic flow.  
6.9 Could the project 
lead to an influx of 
project workers? 
Moderate  Moderate 
The project is partly 
dependent on an influx of 
project workers, but the 
majority of workers are 
local. Risks of impacts 
have been planned for, 
and protocols are in place  
Contractors, suppliers 
and service providers 
will be required to 
respect the IFAD Policy 
to preventing and 
responding to sexual 
harassment, sexual 
exploitation and abuse 
and mandatory 
references to safe 
policies will be included 
in the bidding 
documents and 
contracts entered into 
The increased 
productivity and roads 
to access the market 
may lead to increased 
traffic. Traffic rules 
applicable in the rural 
road network will need 
to be adhered to and 
road signs installed 
according to the 
national regulations.  
Moderate risks are 
associated with seasonal 
labour for the value 
chains of the project 
which can be managed 
through adherence to 
labour laws and labour 
management plan of the 
project 
Physical and economic 
resettlement 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
7.4 Could the project 
result in impacts on or 
changes to land tenure 
arrangements and/or 
community-based 
property 
rights/customary rights 
Moderate  Moderate 
The project will result in 
moderate changes to land 
tenure arrangements 
and/or community-based 
property rights/customary 
160 
The project will not 
operate in areas where 
land tenure issues will 
be prevalent but will 
operate within SECAP 
standards requirements 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
to land, territories and/or 
resources? 
rights. Legal recourse and 
other forms of 
arbitration/conflict 
resolution are available.  
Financial intermediaries 
and direct investments 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
8.1 Could the investment 
be granted to an 
institution that does not 
have an environmental 
and social policies and an 
associated environmental 
and social management 
system (ESMS) in place 
(transparent, publicly 
available)? 
8.2 Could the investment 
be granted to an 
institution with 
insufficient capacities 
(i.e. unqualified 
personnel e.g. ES Officer) 
to implement the ESMS? 
Moderate  Minor 
The institution has an 
ESMS in place. Reports are 
not publicly available.  
Moderate  Minor 
The institution employs an 
ES Officer, and employs 
field staff to implement the 
ESMS.  
for resettlement 
procedures. 
The grievance redress 
mechanism should be 
communicated to 
contractors and 
communities  
Guidance for SPOs 
Integration of 
environmental and 
social safeguard criteria 
in the selection of 
service providers, 
including microfinance 
institutions. 
Agreements with 
Participating Financial 
Institutions should 
include a requirement 
for a functional ESMS  
Agreements with 
Participating Financial 
Institutions should 
include ensure the 
institution has capacity 
to effectively implement 
ESMS 
161 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PART IV: ANNEXES  
ANNEX 1: DRAFT TORS OF PROJECT STAFF 
The following ToRs are to complement the PSAC project staff that to be recruited by NAEB.  
(1)ToRs for Operation Manager 
Roles and responsibilities 
•  Main duties: Under the direct authority of the CEO/NAEB and the Project National 
Steering Committee of the Project, the Operations Manager is in charge of the overall 
management of PSAC's activities. S/he will respect all financing agreements signed 
between the Government of Rwanda, SPIU MINAGRI and the External International 
Donors and any subsequent official documented agreements related to the 
management of the Project (Aide mémoires of missions, back-to-office reports, 
evaluation reports, mid-term reviews, etc.). S/he will report to the authorities 
mentioned in the above agreements and will issue the financial statements and 
physical progress reports timely and in the recommended formats. 
•  Specific Duties: 
a)  Project development, including: 
-  providing  orientations  for  the  development  of  the  Project  strategy  and 
methodology; 
-  guiding  the  development  of  the  most  appropriate  implementation  tools  and 
management methods to ensure Project performance, in accordance with national 
policies and with the financing agreements; 
-  ensuring  coordination  and  team  working  of  PSAC  staff,  local  actors  and 
- 
programme partners within RAB and outside; 
liaising  with  SPIU  team  and  coordinate  with  district  teams  for  smooth 
implementation of the project; 
-  ensuring  appropriate  synergies  between  Project  components  to  maximise  their 
impact; 
-  ensuring timely programme reviews, preparation of draft AWPB as well as draft 
exit strategy for PSAC. 
b)  Project implementation, including: 
-  supervising  the  implementation  of  Project  activities  in  accordance  with  the 
financing agreements, with the decisions of the National Steering Committee and 
with the agreements with IFAD; 
-  ensuring that project targeting strategy is properly implemented; 
-  supervising  the  preparation,  negotiation  and  oversight  of  memoranda  of 
understanding, agreements and other contracts with project partners and services 
162 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
providers; 
-  ensuring  and  overseeing  the  implementation  of  the  gender  action  and  youth 
engagement plan; 
-  preparing annual work plans and budgets, and progress and thematic reports; 
-  executing the approved budget, and ensure payments; 
- 
identifying areas which require support from external consultants, and recruiting 
them; 
-  guiding the efforts of consultants, experts and contractors towards the realization 
of planned Project outputs and evaluating their performance; 
-  providing  overall  leadership  to  eight  specialists  (M&E,  coffee,  tea,  horticulture, 
gender  and  social  inclusion,  access  to  finance,  environment  and  KM)  and 
coordinate accounts and procurement division. and coordinate with accounts and 
procurement officers to ensure their timely inputs to meet the project objectives 
and outputs; 
in association with KM specialist, organize regular learning programme events and   
- 
-  coordinating  and  managing  the  inputs  of  the  PSAC  staff  into  preparation  of  the 
AWPB,  monitoring  activities  and  supporting  supervision  and  follow-up  missions 
and the mid-term review. 
c)  Project monitoring, including: 
-  overseeing the setting up process and effective operation of the M&E system;  
-  ensuring the solid internal use of the M&E system; 
-  ensuring the timely preparation of progress and financial reports; 
-  Project  external  relations,  including  the  coordination  of  activities  with  other 
projects pursuing similar objectives, within and outside Rwanda;  
-  Project  administrative  management,  including  i)reviewing  and  approving  pre-
selection  of  project  partners,  bidding  documents,  job  descriptions  and  terms  of 
reference  for  PSAC  staff  and  external  services  providers;  ii)supervising  and 
managing PSAC staff (up to their full integration in the RAB units);iii) maintaining 
internal transparency for the most important technical and project management 
decisions through regular meetings with PSAC staff; iv) ensuring proper use and 
conservation  of  Project  assets,  in  line  with  the  national  legislation  and  financial 
agreements. 
Outputs (expected results): 
•  Project general objective, specific objectives and project activities timely and 
progressively reached within the frame of the financial agreements; 
•  Planning and budgeting process implemented timely on a participatory approach; 
•  Project financial and physical progresses available to the MINAGRI Programme 3 and 
to all project partners on a regular basis as per national rules and regulations and in 
accordance with the provisions of the financial agreements; 
•  Disbursement procedures respected and adequate and appropriate percentage of 
disbursement of funds per year, per component or sub-component compared to the 
AWPBs and to the indicative final design report; 
•  Project impact information regularly updated and available to all project partners for 
measuring the results of the project for all components; 
163 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Good communications with all project partners, including the project staff; 
•  Faculty of development and argumentation of new strategies to reach the global 
objective of the project and the mission or vision statement of RAB; 
•  Excellent relations with the parent ministry, donors and other ministries sector. 
Qualifications 
•  A university degree, preferably in economics, agricultural economics, management or 
business administration. Practical experience of at least 10 years in project 
management and planning, in or with internationally financed multi rural sectorial 
projects. Proven skills in commercial negotiations, communications and management 
of human resources. Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) with 
a very good knowledge of the second language (French or English). Fluent in 
Kinyarwanda. Sound computer skills in major software (MS Office, email and 
internet). Working under pressure and meet deadlines in an interdisciplinary team. 
(2) ToRs for Coffee Specialist 
Main duties:  
•  The  Coffee  Specialist  reports  initially  to  the  Program  Manager  of  Value  Chain 
Development. S/he will have the responsibility of all activities related to the Coffee VC 
and provide technical and institutional support to its implementation.  Specifically, s/he 
will: 
-  Guide and participate in the preparation of the component Annual Work Plan and 
Budget (AWPB); 
-  Provide  technical  support  to  project  partners  in  coffee  development,  market 
analysis  and  capacity  building  to  establish  strong  organisational  structures  and 
effective marketing systems; 
-  Ensure  project  targeting  strategy  is  properly  implemented  in  Coffee  VC 
interventions. 
-  Provide support to cooperatives and groups with regard to market orientation; 
-  Support establishment and functioning of public private producer partnerships (4 
Ps); 
-  Ensure timely availability of quality and affordable inputs (seedling, fertilizer etc.) 
to farmers; 
-  Facilitate  development  of  innovations  to  transform  smallholder  production  and 
marketing into sustainable and resilient profitable enterprises; 
-  Facilitate  empowerment  of  key  actors  in  the  coffee  value  chain  to  operate 
efficiently and profitably; 
-  Facilitate systems for the generation and dissemination of market information; 
-  Facilitate the establishment and strengthening of producer and trade associations 
to increase their bargaining power in the input-output market continuum; 
-  Facilitate the establishment and functioning of coffee Coordination Platforms; 
-  Facilitate  the  provision  of  financial  services,  input  supply  and  other  business 
164 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
services to coffee actors; 
-  Participate in developing and operating the Project M&E activities and the project 
learning system (PLS). 
Minimum Qualifications: 
•  Masters  degree  in  the  relevant  field  (agronomy,  agriculture,  international  rural 
development), preferably MBA Marketing; 
•  5 years of experience in a similar  job specifically in the coffee sector; experience in 
project management, implementation, M&E, research, value chain development and 
business oriented approach for economic development; 
•  Proven  experience  working  with  the  private  sector  to  build  and  sustain  mutually 
beneficial market linkages, preferably with experience working in the private sector; 
•  Strong coordination, networking and relationship building skills; 
•  Excellent communication, presentation, writing and negotiation skills; 
•  Organized, punctual and attention to detail oriented; 
•  Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) with very good knowledge 
of the Second language (French or English). Fluent in Kinyarwanda; 
•  A  team  player  and  have  ability  to  work  in  team  setting,  taking  initiatives  and 
performing multiple tasks; 
•  Proficient in use of MS Office (Word, Excel and PowerPoint); 
•  Able to travel to project sites. 
(3) ToRs for Tea Specialist 
Main duties:  
•  The  Tea  Specialist  reports  initially  to  the  Program  Manager  of  Value  Chain 
Development.  S/he  will  have  responsibility  of  all  activities  related  to  the  Tea  VC 
development  and  provide  technical  and  institutional  support  to  its  implementation. 
Specifically, s/he will: 
-  Guide  the  participatory  preparation  of  the  component  Annual  Work  Plan  and 
Budget (AWPB); 
-  Provide technical support to project partners in tea development, market analysis 
and  capacity  building  to  establish  strong  organisational  structures  and  effective 
marketing systems; 
-  Ensure project targeting strategy is properly implemented in tea VC interventions. 
-  Provide support to cooperatives and groups with regard to market orientation; 
-  Support  to  the  establishment  and  functioning  of  public  private  producer 
partnerships (4Ps); 
-  Ensure timely availability of quality and affordable inputs (seedlings, fertilizer etc.)  
to farmers; 
-  Facilitate  development  of  innovations  to  transform  smallholder  production  and 
marketing into sustainable and resilient profitable enterprises; 
-  Facilitate empowerment of key actors in the tea value chain to operate efficiently 
and profitably; 
-  Facilitate systems for the generation and dissemination of market information; 
165 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
-  Facilitate the establishment and strengthening of producer and trade associations 
to increase their bargaining power in the input-output market continuum; 
-  Facilitate the establishment and functioning of Tea Coordination Platforms; 
-  Facilitate  the  provision  of  financial  services,  input  supply  and  other  business 
services to tea actors; 
-  Participate in developing and operating the Project M&E activities and the project 
learning system (PLS). 
Minimum Qualifications: 
•  Bachelor  degree  in  the  relevant  field  (agronomy,  agriculture,  international  rural 
development); 
•  5 years of experience in a similar nature of jobs specifically in tea sector: experience 
in project management, implementation, M&E, research, value chain development and 
business-oriented approach for economic development; 
•  Proven  experience  working  with  the  private  sector  to  build  and  sustain  mutually 
beneficial market linkages, preferably experience working for the private sector; 
•  Excellent writing skills; 
•  Strong coordination, networking and relationship building skills; 
•  Excellent communication, presentation and negotiation skills; 
•  Organized, punctual and detail oriented; 
•  Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) with very good knowledge 
of the Second language (French or English). Fluent in Kinyarwanda; 
•  Ability to work in team setting, taking initiatives and performing multiple tasks; 
•  Proficient in use of MS Office (Word, Excel and PowerPoint); 
•  Able to travel to project sites. 
(4) ToRs for Horticulture Specialist 
•  The  Horticulture  Specialist  reports  to  the  Operations  Manager.  S/he  will  have 
responsibility of all activities related to the Horticulture VC development and provide 
technical and institutional support to its implementation. S/he will: 
-  Participate  in  the  participatory  preparation  of  the  component  Annual  Work  plan 
and Budget (AWPB); 
-  Provide technical support to project partners in horticulture development, market 
analysis  and  capacity  building  to  establish  strong  organizational  structures  and 
effective marketing systems; 
-  Ensure  project  targeting  strategy  is  properly  implemented  in  horticulture  VC 
interventions; 
-  Provide support to cooperatives and groups with regard to market orientation; 
-  Support  to  the  establishment  and  functioning  of  public  private  producer 
partnerships (4Ps); 
-  Ensure timely availability of quality and affordable inputs (seedlings, fertilizer etc.)  
to farmers; 
-  Facilitate  development  of  innovations  to  transform  smallholder  production  and 
marketing into sustainable and resilient profitable enterprises; 
166 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
-  Facilitate empowerment of  key  actors in the horticulture  value chain to  operate 
efficiently and profitably; 
-  Facilitate systems for the generation and dissemination of market information; 
-  Facilitate the establishment and strengthening of producer and trader associations 
to increase their bargaining power in the input-output market continuum; 
-  Facilitate  the  establishment  and  functioning  of  Value  Chain  Coordination 
Platforms; 
-  Facilitate  the  provision  of  financial,  input  supply  and  other  business  services  to 
value chain actors; 
-  Participate in developing and operating the Project M&E activities and the project 
learning system (MIS). 
Minimum Qualifications: 
•  Master’s  degree  in  the  relevant  field  (agronomy,  agriculture,  international  rural 
development), preferably MBA Marketing; 
•  3 years of experience in a similar nature of jobs specifically in coffee/tea/horticulture 
sector;  experience  in  project  management,  implementation,  M&E,  research,  value 
chain development, and business-oriented approach for economic development; 
•  Proven  experience  working  with  the  private  sector  to  build  and  sustain  mutually 
beneficial market linkages, preferably experience working for the private sector. 
•  Excellent writing skills; 
•  Strong coordination, networking and relationship building skills; 
•  Excellent communication, presentation and negotiation skills; 
•  Organized, punctual and detail oriented; 
•  Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) with very good knowledge 
of the second language (French or English). Fluent in Kinyarwanda; 
•  Ability to work in team setting, taking initiatives and performing multiple tasks’; 
•  Proficient in use of MS Office (Word, Excel and PowerPoint); 
•  Able to travel to project sites.  
(5) ToRs for Gender and Social Inclusion Officer 
Roles and responsibilities 
•  Under the general supervision of the project director, the project targeting and 
gender specialist will perform activities in five main areas to mainstream social 
inclusion. 
Project implementation 
•  Advise and support the project manager, other members of the PMU and field 
officers in the effective mainstreaming of targeting, gender and social inclusion in 
project activities. 
In close collaboration with the PMU, develop full targeting and gender strategies and 
action plans to be updated regularly.  
• 
167 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Work with each specialist in the PMU in critically reviewing project design to see how 
each component or subcomponent addresses gender issues, and identify 
opportunities for strengthening implementation from a gender perspective. 
•  Review basic project implementation processes to provide feedback and suggestions 
on how to achieve the best possible project outcomes with respect to targeting, 
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and social inclusion.  
•  Ensure that activities of the targeting and gender strategies are reflected in the 
following: i) Preparation of the AWPB; ii) Design and implementation of the project 
M&E system; iii) Project progress reports; iv) Project supervision  
•  Participate in the development of detailed TORs and tender documents of national 
and local service providers to various project components to ensure that target 
groups will be able to participate effectively in all components and meet the project’s 
targets. 
M&E and knowledge management  
•  Together with M&E and knowledge management staff, establish an M&E system that 
captures and analyses disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion.  
•  Document and share M&E, learning and communication products.  
•  Analyse data to ensure that there are no adverse impacts on target groups as a 
result of project implementation, and suggest remedial measures if necessary. 
Capacity-building 
•  Undertake regular capacity assessment on gender and social inclusion issues and 
provide capacity-building for staff at the field level, PMU, implementing partners and 
service providers. 
Communication 
•  Liaise with the IFAD country office and gender team on questions regarding gender 
in implementation, knowledge-sharing and other aspects.  
•  Serve as a channel of communication between the project and others working on 
gender issues in government, implementing agencies, other development projects 
and IFAD.  
•  Help project colleagues access the information they may need on gender issues and 
share good practices. 
Advocacy and networking 
•  Be familiar with gender policies of the institutions linked to the project, including 
national policies and those of ministries, implementing institutions and financing 
agencies, including IFAD.  
•  Establish linkages with other gender, women’s or social inclusion programmes 
implemented by national, international and intergovernmental agencies.  
168 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Present evidence-based information on good practices in gender equality and 
women’s empowerment in national forums. 
(6) ToRs for Procurement Officer 
Place of assignment: Kigali, Rwanda 
Duties and reporting lines: Reporting to the Head of Procurement Department of the 
SPIU, the Procurement Specialist will be in charge of all procurement processes carried out 
under PSAC Project, from the identification of the need to the completion of the contract.  
Tasks and responsibilities 
•  Establish and regularly update a data base of technical specifications of goods to be 
acquired by the project and a data base on suppliers, service providers, contractors 
for tendering process; 
•  Prepare bidding documents and requests for proposals; 
•  Undertake publication formalities and/or send the bidding documents to prospective 
bidders; 
•  Attend any bid opening sessions and establish attendance and opening session 
reports in close collaboration with project parties and with project internal tender 
committee; 
•  Organize the panel of evaluation of bids or proposals; 
•  Attend the evaluation team of bids as non-scoring member and assist with the 
elaboration of evaluation reports; 
•  Communicate with RPPA, NAEB and IFAD through the Head of Procurement Unit for 
all problems pertaining to the procurement process; 
•  Organize the reception of goods and works delivered by the suppliers and contractors 
(Client’s certificate of reception); 
•  Carry out any other assignment or relevant duties in the field of his/her competences 
as may be assigned by the PC and the Authorities. 
Outputs 
•  Effective and efficient procurement process of acquisition of goods services and 
works at the PMU level and respect of the basic principle of the best value for money. 
•  Pragmatic and systematic filing system of procurement documents at the PMU level; 
•  Reception of goods and works in accordance with the technical specification and the 
bidding documents; 
•  Full satisfaction of participants in workshops, seminars, travels on the practical 
dispositions taken for their organization including payment of allowances and board 
and lodging conditions. 
Competencies 
•  Possess competencies in public procurement and contract management;  
169 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Possess the ability to give sound advice on procurement issues that would impact on 
the project’s financial and physical performance; 
•  Good communication and interpersonal skills required;  
•  Strong personal management and communication skills; 
•  Excellent knowledge of MS Office, internet use and procurement databases. 
•  Displays cultural, gender, religion, race, nationality and age sensitivity and 
adaptability; 
•  Highest standards of integrity, discretion and loyalty 
Qualifications and experience 
Education 
•  Bachelor’s Degree in Procurement/Supply Chain 
Management/Economics/Accounting/Finance or other relevant degree; 
•  Master’s Degree in Procurement or any related field is an advantage; 
•  Professional qualification in procurement from an internationally recognised and 
accredited institution (i.e. CIPS) desired. 
Experience 
•  At least 8 years of experience in project procurement funded by international 
organizations, preferably international development partners;  
•  At least 5 years’ experience in effectively managing teams; 
•  Extensive knowledge of IFAD procedures is an advantage. 
Language Requirements 
•  Fluency in written and spoken English and Kinyarwanda;  
•  Demonstrated capacity to produce high quality technical reports. 
Duration of the assignment: The duration of the assignment will be one year, renewable 
depending on satisfactory performance. 
(7)ToRs for Environment Specialist 
Tasks and Responsibilities 
Specific responsibilities and duties will cover four main areas of activity: 
Area (1):  
•  Support, manage and co-ordinate the project’s SECAP risk management issues to 
ensure the implementation of the Environmental,Social and Climate Management 
Framework (ESCMF), Climate Risk Assessment (CRA), sub-project site specific 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Environmental Checklists, 
Integrated Pest Management Plans (IPMPs), etc.  
•  Evaluate needed updates as necessary to ensure that the project SECAP risk 
management instruments are always up to date, and  
170 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Manage procedures including the establishment of an appropriate field structure in 
conjunction with the district level environmental officers, to ensure the appropriate 
level of support to technical personnel;  
Area (2):  
Establish a Grievance Redress Mechanism/ feedback mechanism and advising the NAEB and 
key  stakeholders  in  the  best  practice  of  monitoring  and  reporting  on  the  social  and 
environmental impact of the project.  
Area (3):  
Support in the co-ordination of capacity building and training activities to ensure the principles 
and procedures for Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) are 
well understood and complied with by stakeholders.  
Area (4):  
Advise/guide  the  consultancy  firms  recruited  to  develop  the  SECAP  risk  management 
Instruments  (ESCMF,  ESMPs,  IPMP,  ERA,  etc)  on  appropriate  standards  in  line  with  IFAD’s 
SECAP  and  the  Government  of  Rwanda  Environmental  standards.  Detailed  responsibilities 
under each area are listed below:  
Area (1): Project SECAP risk management instruments Implementation support  
•  Continuously review and update the developed project SECAP risk management 
instruments in line with current SECAP developments;  
•  Support the NAEB in the co-ordination, management and implementation of the 
project SECAP risk management instruments in compliance with the SECAP Policies 
and the Government of Rwanda Environmental standards. 
•  Support the NAEB in the development and rolling out of a SECAP risk management 
monitoring and reporting system against the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESCMF) provisions. 
•  Support the project line ministries, and all responsible parties to achieve the 
maximum SECAP risk management efficiency in their assigned tasks;  
•  Support the project to ensure that safety and health concerns of the workers and the 
general public are addressed during pre- construction, construction and 
implementation phases of the project civil works;  
- 
Provide assistance to NAEB and applicant communities in screening of proposed 
sub-projects and assigning environmental category;  
-  Visit proposed sub-project sites to assess baseline conditions and potential site-
specific impacts; 
-  Advise on anticipated environmental impacts and possible mitigation measures, 
and on the relevant type of environmental review to be undertaken and 
documentation to be prepared (e.g. sub-project specific Environmental 
Assessment and/or Environmental Management Plan);  
171 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
- 
- 
review sub-project specific environmental documentation and give 
recommendations as needed, to applicant communities and designers, for 
finalizing the documents; 
Participate in evaluation of sub-project proposals and advise on environmental 
eligibility and acceptability of proposals, based on guidance provided in the 
ESCMF and on personal experience; 
-  Working with NAEB Procurement staff, ensure that environmental compliance is 
incorporated as appropriate in contracts for goods and services (mainly civil 
works contracts) and ensure that contractors are fully aware of their 
responsibilities in this regard; 
-  During implementation of the approved sub-projects, undertake regular 
environmental monitoring and supervision in order to verify whether and how 
provisions of the project ESCMF and sub-project specific ESMPs are followed by 
all relevant stakeholders (designers, contractors, beneficiaries); 
-  Report regularly to the NAEB Coordinator in writing on the results of monitoring 
visits, promptly identify any environmental issues or cases of incompliance, and 
make recommendations for dealing with those issues. In conjunction with the 
NAEB Coordinator, discuss compliance status and measures to re-establish 
compliance with contractor s and/or beneficiaries as appropriate, including 
agreeing on specific steps and timing for any remediation/corrective actions; 
-  Closely collaborate with technical staff and engineers of the PIU to ensure that 
environmental measures are incorporated at all stages of sub-project preparation 
and implementation, including site selection, sub-project design, preparation and 
evaluation of bidding documents and bids, preparation and supervision of 
contracts; 
Provide contribution to the NAEB’s regular progress reports on the project 
implementation. 
- 
Area (2): Establish a Grievance Redress Mechanism in Line with the ESCMF 
requirements. 
•  Develop the project grievance redress/feedback mechanism and design the 
complaints register using an established methodology in consultation with the NAEB;  
•  Co-ordinate the formation of Grievance Redress Committees before the 
commencement of construction or any identified potentially impactful activities to 
resolve issues; 
support the establishment and training of a selected focal person within the NAEB to 
handle Grievance Redress issues and facilitate the resolution of issues;  
• 
•  Technically support the NAEB in creating awareness of the Grievance Redress 
Mechanism amongst all the stakeholders through public awareness campaigns; and 
support dissemination of information to the concerned local communities as 
proposed in the ESCMF.  
•  Develop a system to document information on grievances and redress and progress 
for monthly/quarterly reporting.  
172 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Area (3): Support in the co-ordination of training and awareness raising activities  
•  Support in the efficient co-ordination regarding SECAP Instruments considerations to 
be taken into account in the sub-project preparatory activities;  
•  Support the identification of the capacity and training needs of the NAEB, the 
- 
- 
Ministry, District Offices and other Responsible Parties regarding: 
- 
Training all farmers in proper Fertiliser application regimes and encouragement 
to use organic fertilizers 
Training the Farmers in climate change adaptation approaches 
Training the cooperatives in Group Dynamics, Gender equality, youth 
engagement and other socially related subjects. 
Training of SPIU, NAEB, NAEB District Focal Persons, District Administration 
Staff, Proximity Extension Staff and farmers in Environmental and natural 
resources Management, Waste management, etc 
Training in Pesticides, and integrated pest management 
•  Advise on the co-ordination of the delivery of the requisite training. 
- 
- 
Area (4): Advise/guide the consultant firms firms recruited to develop the SECAP 
risk management Instruments (ESCMF, ESMPs, IPMP, ERA, etc) on appropriate 
standards in line with IFAD’s SECAP and the Government of Rwanda 
Environmental standards 
•  Supervise the development of the requisite SECAP risk management Instruments 
(ESCMF, ESMPs, IPMP, ERA, etc) for the PSAC. 
•  Provide guidance to the firms to ensure that the SECAP risk management 
Instruments identify and assess social and environmental impacts of the project and 
its area of influence; evaluate alternatives; consider appropriate avoidance, 
mitigation, management, and monitoring measures; address all relevant issues 
related to the SECAP Policies and Standards;  
Qualifications and Experiences   
Key Qualifications: 
To adequately address the core issues of this position, the Environmental Specialist should 
possess the following:   
•  Master’s degree or above in environment, sociology, economics, development, or a 
closely related field.  
•  At least seven years of experience related to social and environmental standards and 
impact assessment in an international development context.  
•  Technical background and experience in developing safeguards for agriculture, land 
use and management projects.  
•  Knowledge of Human rights (including human rights-based approach and human 
rights impact assessment); gender equality and women’s empowerment (including 
gender mainstreaming and gender analysis).   
173 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Demonstrated knowledge of cultural heritage (including chance find procedures, 
physical and intangible cultural resources). 
Competencies 
Functional Competencies:   
•  Excellent drafting, documentation and communication skills in English.  
•  Knowledge of Climate Change and project management skills. 
•  Proven record on similar documentation work at the National level. 
Corporate Competencies:   
•  Promote the highest standards of ethics and integrity.  
•  Support creativity and innovation.   
•  Help create an enabling environment for open communication.   
•  Share knowledge and support a culture of learning.   
•  Demonstrate fairness and transparency. 
Language:   
•  Fluency in written and spoken English and Kinyarwanda;  
•  Demonstrated capacity to produce high quality technical reports. 
(8) ToRs for Accountant 
Key responsibilities and scope of work: 
Under direct supervision of the Chief Accountant, the specific duties of the Accountant are as 
follows: 
•  Keep the petty cash;  
•  Capture in the books and file all supporting documents of expenditures paid from the 
petty cash;  
•  Prepare  all  documents  that  are  required  for  the  payment  of  suppliers’  invoices  duly 
approved by his supervisors;  
•  Take delivery of documents forwarded to the Accounting Department for payment;   
•  Monthly declaration of withholding tax deducted from suppliers’ invoices; 
•  Any other assignment or relevant duties in the field of his/her competences as may be 
assigned by his supervisors. 
•  Verification of supplier’s invoices for payment; 
•  Timely posting of all project accounting vouchers on the accounting software; 
•  Exercise proper custody of all posted vouchers and other accounting documents; 
•  Verification and checking of bank statements and accounting software printouts; 
•  Supervise and direct the accounting and logistical functions, to ensure efficiency; 
•  Preparation and submission of periodical financial reports on deadlines; 
•  Preparation of Withdrawal Applications; 
•  Regular spot check of petty cash fund and other reconciliation reports; 
•  Timely replenishment of operation account with project bank account; 
174 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Authorisation of payments vouchers; 
•  Acting on the position of  the Chief Accountant in his absence; 
•  Facilitate financial audits and implementation support missions; 
•  Regular follow up of smooth functioning of the accounting software, and make contact 
with ICT staff and software suppliers; 
•  Submission  of  account  printouts  by  components  to  the  heads  of  components  for 
analysis and comments; 
•  Give advice to management on accounting and administration matters; 
•  Liaise with bankers for bank matters; 
•  Any other relevant duties as may reasonably be assigned by the Chief Accountant. 
Qualifications:  
•  At least a specialized degree in accounting and finances from a recognized high school;  
•  Practical  experience  of  at  least  5  years  in  a  project  financial  management  unit  and 
acquainted with accounting procedures in the public administration sector in or with 
internationally financed projects;  
•  Previous experience with IFAD procedures and financial regulations would be an added 
advantage;  a  good  knowledge  of  computer  applications  in  accounting  would  be 
essential; 
•  Fluency  in  English  or  French  (reading,  writing  and  speaking)  with  a  very  good 
knowledge  of  the  second  language  (French  or  English).  Fluency  in  Kinyarwanda  is 
essential; 
•  Able to work under pressure and meet crucial deadlines. 
Duration:   2  years  renewable  upon  positive  performance  assessment  with  a  probation 
period of 6 months. 
(9) ToRs for Access to Finance Specialist 
a)  Access to Finance Specialist 
Main duties  s/he will: 
•  Guide the participatory preparation of the component  Annual Work plan and Budget 
(AWPB); 
•  Negotiate  agreements  (and  be  the  contract  manager)  with  BRD  Development  Fund 
(BDF) for the performance-based grant facility and the guarantee facility and monitor 
their implementation; 
•  Supervise and monitor service providers hired to implement the component. This will 
include  organising  the  annual  panel  of  clients  to  assess  quality  and  pertinence  of 
services provided; 
•  Manage partnership with Financial service providers in Tea Facilitate development of 
innovative financial services in the Coffee, Tea and Horticulture VCs; 
•  Ensure project targeting strategy is properly implemented in Coffee VC interventions. 
•  Provide  technical  support  to  project  partners  in  value  chain  development  to  ensure 
access to financial services; 
•  Participate in Component Steering Committees; 
•  Participate  in  developing  and  operating  the  Project  M&E  activities  and  the  project 
learning system (PLS). 
175 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Minimum Qualifications: 
•  Master’s degree in finance, management, economy or related field; 
•  10 years of experience in banking/microfinance sector or in financial services 
project; experience in project management, M&E, research, value chain 
development, and business oriented approach for rural economic development;  
•  Proven experience working with the private finance sector; 
•  Excellent writing skills coupled with strong coordination, networking and relationship 
building skills; 
•  Excellent communication, presentation and negotiation skills; 
•  Organised, punctual and detail oriented; 
•  Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) with very good knowledge 
of the second language (French or English). Fluent in Kinyarwanda; 
•  Ability to work in team setting, taking initiatives and performing multiple tasks; 
•  Proficient in use of MS Office (Word, Excel and PowerPoint); 
•  Able to travel to project sites.  
Duration:   2  years  renewable  upon  positive  performance  assessment  with  a  probation 
period of 6 months. 
(10) 
ToRs for M&E Specialist 
Main duties: The M&E Specialist will be responsible for monitoring project progress and 
reporting the project performance, targets in the logical framework for the project. M&E 
specialist reports to the operation manager. In particular, s/he will: 
• 
•  Develop and establish a pragmatic and participatory learning system (PLS) within 
NAEB/SPIU to capture input-output data as well as impact on project development 
objectives;  
Identify appropriate monitoring indicators for each component (disaggregated data 
by sex, age) and ensure that they are used in measuring the project progress;  
•  Systematic collection of monitoring data provided by concerned specialists, collation 
of the information and compilation of quarterly comprehensive M&E and progress 
reports;  
•  Providing feedback to concerned specialists for onward transmission to the 
cooperatives;  
•  Analysing data (linking activities to outputs, and outputs to impact) and preparing 
analytical reports for project management on implementation progress, performance 
and impact;  
•  Measuring achievements against targets and measuring the impact of project 
activities on beneficiaries through agreed indicators and using both data that flows 
regularly from the MIS system and additional data collected through COI surveys, 
participatory workshops with the beneficiary groups and participatory impact 
assessment studies that s/he will organize;  
176 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Coordinating activity planning through AWPBs within NAEB/SPIU in collaboration with 
relevant project staff, and also monitoring performance of all project stakeholders 
including service providers;  
•  Ensuring that all participating institutions and project staff maintain updated records 
on their activities and ffed this information into the overall PLS in accordance with 
MIS;  
•  Carrying out regular internal evaluations, so as to give early warning on project 
performance; 
•  Assist in the preparation of the experience-based Annual Work plan and Budget 
(AWPB). 
Qualifications:  
•  Advanced degree in project management, rural development, agricultural economics 
or business administration. Proven knowledge and practical experience of at least 5 
years in project M&E. Fluent in English or French (reading, writing and speaking) 
with very good knowledge of the second language (French or English). Fluent in 
Kinyarwanda; Excellent oral and written communication skills; Sound computer 
literacy (Microsoft office and statistical software), prepared to work in an 
interdisciplinary team, under pressure and meet crucial deadlines.  
Duration: 
period of 6 months. 
2 years renewable upon positive performance assessment and with a probation 
(11) 
ToRs for Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist 
Main duties: The Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist will be 
responsible for capturing and sharing information on SPIU and NAEB activities. In particular, 
s/he will: 
•  Develop and implement processes to ensure that lessons learned and good practice 
are captured systematically, shared, and used to improve project implementation; 
•  Ensure documentation and wide sharing of project results; 
•  Support advocacy efforts through providing evidence of impact gathered through the 
project learning system (PLS), closely linked to knowledge management activities;  
•  Set up and facilitate regular feedback to participating cooperatives (separate per 
value chain) and institutions on project and partner institution performance; 
•  Establish capacity building needs of key staff, including private and public service 
providers; 
•  Develop or adapt relevant tools and processes for SPIU staff to collect, process, 
analyse, store and share information and knowledge, and ensure relevant staff have 
the capacity to use them; 
•  Use information technology for effective knowledge management; 
•  Develop relevant guidelines for building an institutional culture of learning and 
sharing; 
177 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
•  Ensure that innovative experiences, learning and good practices are captured, 
synthesized, documented and shared continuously within the project, within 
MINAGRI, NAEB and RAB, with the IFAD Country Programme Team (CPT) and with 
in-country partners, other partners; 
•  Ensure that lessons and good practice emerging from the project support decision 
making and policy dialogue; 
•  Assist the Planning and M&E Officer in the preparation of the experience-based 
Annual Work plan and Budget (AWPB); 
•  Provide communication support to project participants, including building 
understanding of the project objectives and potential benefits; 
•  Foster broad knowledge-sharing and learning within the Component Steering 
Committees. 
Qualifications:  
•  Bachelor degree in Information/ Knowledge Management, Information Science or 
agronomy; At least 5 years of relevant experience in information management. 
Demonstrated experience in developing and managing information systems and in 
training users in their use; Sound understanding and awareness of issues relating to 
the access and use of information and knowledge in Africa and a good understanding 
of the development environment; Strong analytical and problem solving skills 
(creative, innovative, persistent and resourceful) to develop and build functioning 
information system and monitoring tools; Excellent oral and written communication 
skills; Demonstrated knowledge and experience of team building concepts; a team 
player with excellent interpersonal skills and ability to work within a multicultural and 
multidisciplinary environment. Knowledge of databases is an asset, but not a 
requirement. 
Duration: 
period of 6 months. 
2 years renewable upon positive performance assessment and with a probation 
178 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 2: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR RECRUITMENT OF THE SERVICE PROVIDERS TO 
IMPELMENT ENCHANCED GALS+ IN PSAC  
I.  Background and context 
The  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC)  is  a  project 
implemented  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI)  under  the 
National  Agricultural  Export  Development  Board.  The  project  is  co-financed  by  the 
International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  and  the  Government  of  Rwanda 
(GoR). PSAC intends to be a transformative project focused on selected export-driven value 
chains  (coffee,  tea  and  various  strategic  commodities  in  the  horticulture  sector).  As  an 
integrated export value chain and rural development project, its focus will be on improving 
the  competitiveness  of  agricultural  export  driven  value  chains  through  promoting  climate 
smart productivity enhancing technologies,  reduction of post-harvest losses, infrastructural 
development,  use  of  climate-resilient  agricultural  practices,  backward  and  forward  market 
linkages,  enhanced  quality  control/assurance  to  ascertain  compliance  with  export  market 
requirements, and access to financial services by using a value chain approach. This approach 
is  also  expected  to  enhance  women  and  youth  leadership  and  advocate  for  smallholder 
sensitive policy formulations.   
Two main categories of beneficiaries will be targeted through complementary interventions 
meant  to  support  their  participation  in  commercial  and  inclusive  value  chains:  (i)  rural 
smallholder farmers grouped as much as possible along Producer Organizations (POs), with a 
strong  focus  on  women  and  youth;  (ii)  off-takers  processors/exporters,  who  can  be 
cooperatives, individuals or rural SMEs.  
The project will be implemented in fourteen (14) districts distributed across Rwanda, with a 
particular emphasis on the Western region, that is also including some of the most vulnerable 
rural population. The intervention Districts are: Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, Nyabihu and 
Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe, Nyanza and Ruhango in Southern 
Province;  Rulindo  and  Musanze  in  Northern  Province  and  Kayonza*,  Rwamagana  and 
Bugesera in Eastern Province.* Kayonza is only for trials of essential oils. 
In  this  framework,  PSAC  wishes  to  recruit  an  organization  with  expertise  in  the 
implementation of the enhanced Gender Action Learning System (GALS+). The organization 
should be familiar with the use of GALS methodology in the agriculture sector, including value 
chains, climate change and nutrition with focus on women’s economic empowerment. 
The  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  is  a  structured  community-led  empowerment 
methodology aiming at economic, social and political transformation.  It gives women, men 
and  youth  more  control  over  their  lives  to  catalyse  a  movement  for  gender  justice.  GALS 
includes  a  wealth  of  instruments,  visual  diagramming  tools,  principles  and  peer-to-peer 
learning  mechanisms  that  can  be  adapted  in  many  ways  for  empowerment  in  rural 
development programmes. Using the power of symbols and principles of inclusion, it uses a 
set of tools that enable individuals and households to plan their lives and enterprises, identify 
and  negotiate  their  needs  and  interests  for  gender-equitable  livelihoods  improvement  and 
179 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
value  chain  development.  For  the  enhanced  GALS,  aspects  of  youth  inclusion,  improved 
nutrition  outcomes  as  well  as  climate  adaptation  have  been  incorporated  into  the 
methodology. The main trainers are community members themselves based on self-interest 
and business cases. The tools are also used by cooperatives and other value chain actors and 
by organisations, enabling them to change gender and power relations that constrain them 
from  achieving  their  visions.  GALS  provides  a  structured  process  for  multi-stakeholder 
negotiation for gender equality and improved livelihoods. 
PSAC envisaged training of 4,599 FFS lead farmers, 250 FFS coaches and upscaling GALS 
into 24,495 Households from 15 districts (including Kayonza). 
The project will integrate GALS into the Farmer field school (FFS) to foster behavioral 
change of farmers and household members. FFS, in fact, will be used as entry points to 
develop the GALS methodologies with the target groups.  
II. Objectives of the assignment 
The  main  objective  of  this  assignment  is  to  implement  the  Gender  Action  learning  System 
(GALS) catalyst phase51, Mainstreaming phase and Movement building Phase to RDDP context 
with integration of the methodology into at least 1,633 FFS groups to foster behavioral change 
of farmers and household members.  
The training will target directly 4,599 individuals who can reach 24,495 individuals in their 
respective 1,633 FFS groups. 
Targeted Champions to be trained per value chain, (2-3 lots) could be used 
Value chain 
Number of FFS 
Coffee 
Tea 
Horticulture 
1300 
108 
225 
1633 
Number of FFS 
Coaches 
172 
Number of lead 
farmers 
3900 
36 
25 
233 
324 
475 
4699 
51 The Catalyst phase is GALS phase 1. It includes: The Change catalyst workshops, The Individual reflection and Community Action 
Learning (CAL), The Participatory Gender Review (PGR) workshop. 
180 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Description of Services The GALS methodology adapted to PSAC will be used to build the 
capacity of PSAC FFS to implement the approach across the intervention zones of the 
project. The recruited organizations (2-3 Organizations) will be responsible to: Phase III 
(Movement building Phase): Developing networks and collaborative structures to increase 
participation and influence of marginalised groups for more gender equitable and inclusive 
policies, decision making and planning). Tasks include:  
•  Organize exchanges visits between champions from different FFS groups and district 
(Number of exchange visits to be defined) 
•  Establish linkages with other GALS networks 
•  Apply the GALS methodology (catalyst phase tools, process peer-to-peer learning 
mechanisms and monitoring) adapted to PSAC in the selected project’s areas; 
•  Facilitate change catalyst workshops to develop a pool of local “champions”: who make 
changes in their own lives and emerge as change makers who will influence others; 
•  Allow FFS lead farmers and coaches to grasp the distinguishing gender, participatory and 
leadership principles of GALS and build/strengthen their skills as GALS facilitators 
•  To respect all the steps of GALS for ensuring that the trainees will be able to understand 
all the tools and the process and are ready to change other group members and their 
community; 
The recruited service providers will be responsible to deliver GALS training respecting the 
following phases: 
Phase I (Catalyst phase): Strengthened capacities of community champions into FFS groups 
to apply the first phase of GALS. Tasks include: 
• 
• 
Induction workshop for introduction of the methodology to the facilitators and core team 
Identification of FFS groups and GALS champions 
•  Prepare and organize the change catalyst workshops of 4 to 6 days for FFS lead farmers 
and coaches. (Number to be defined) 
•  To organize some Community Action Learning workshops (This is one of the step of the 
phase 1 (Catalyst phase). This is a peer training where people trained will introduce the 
methodology into their groups. 
•  To organize Participatory Gender review workshops. 
Phase II (Mainstreaming phase): Integrating GALS into PSAC interventions; strengthening 
negotiation power of marginalized actors and negotiation win-win strategies between 
marginalised and powerful stakeholders for gender equality, social inclusion and sustainable 
livelihoods. Tasks include: 
•  Prepare and organize workshops (Number to be defined) introducing GALS 
mainstreaming tools (workshops at National level and workshop at each district (Number 
to be defined) 
III.  Duration of the assignment 
181 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
The duration of the assignment is for two years and half with a one-year renewable contract 
starting from the time of signing the contract. (The contract can be renewable upon the 
progress and performance of the service provider). 
182 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Time schedule of activities to be performed 
Activities 
Year 1 
Year 2 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1
0 
1
1 
1
2 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1
0 
1
1 
1
2 
Inception meeting 
Induction and 
introduction workshop 
to the  facilitators and 
the core team  
Identification of FFS 
groups and GALS 
champions 
x   
x   
x   
Change catalyst 
workshops at 
community level 
Community action 
learning  
Participatory Gender 
review workshops (For 
staff and core team) 
Participatory Gender 
review workshops (At 
community level) 
Participatory Gender 
Review: Consolidation 
workshop. 
Develop localized 
manual or adjust it 
based on the process 
followed. 
Roll-out Change 
Catalyst Workshops 
facilitated by 
champions from the 
pilot and facilitators 
(staff/service 
providers) 
x  x   
  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
x 
x 
x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
  x   
  x  x   
  x   
  x   
  x  x   
183 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Time schedule of activities to be performed 
Activities 
Year 1 
Year 2 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1
0 
1
1 
1
2 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1
0 
1
1 
1
2 
Roll out individual life 
planning and 
community action 
learning, supported by 
champions and 
facilitators 
(staff/service 
providers) 
Roll out PGR 
Replication of the 
catalyst phase in 
multiple target 
communities  
Reflection meeting and 
refining plans for next 
year 
Prepare and organize 
workshops introducing 
GALS mainstreaming 
tools  for community 
Organize exchanges 
visits between 
champions from 
different FFS groups 
and district 
Establish linkages with 
other GALS networks 
IV. Reporting Requirement 
- Deliverables for Year 1 
  x  x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  x  x   
184 
  x  x  x  x 
x  x 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
No  Description 
Timeline 
1 
2 
Inception report with detailed methodology, tools, 
timeline and monitoring plans. 
7 days after effective date of 
the contract 
Report of the Induction and introduction of the 
methodology to the core team including GALS 
facilitators who will be assigned to the training of the 
community (FFS groups). 
One month after effective date 
of the contract 
3 
List of identified of FFS lead farmers to be trained 
Two months after effective 
date of the contract 
4 
5 
Report of Change catalyst workshops at community 
level and Progress on Community action learning 
Report on Participatory Gender review workshops (For 
staff and community) 
10 months after signing the 
contract  
6 
Annual Report (final consolidated report) 
After completion of the 
assignment (12 months) 
Note: Deliverables for the Year 2 shall be determined based on the performance of the 
service provider. 
V.  KEY PERSONNEL 
Requirement and qualification of Key staff 
Per each lot the bidding Organization should have 1 Team leader familiar with GALS and at 
least 3 facilitators who are able to facilitate trainings and follow up.  
No 
Position   Qualification 
Experience 
1 
2 
Team 
Leader (1) 
TBD 
Facilitators 
(3-5)  
TBD 
the 
number of 
facilitators 
to be 
defined 
later 
TBD 
TBD 
More than 5 years of work experience of 
GALS implementation as team leader 
 Working experience as GALS facilitator (3 
year) 
 Working experience as GALS facilitator (3 
year) 
Working experience as GALS facilitator (3 
year) 
185 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 3: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE BASELINE SURVEY  
I. 
PROJECT INFORMATION 
These Terms of Reference are elaborated with regard to the baseline study of IFAD funded 
‘Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-export 
and  Government  of  Rwanda 
Competitiveness Project (PSAC)’. The purpose of the ToR is to provide background information 
on the Project, to define the scope of work, the services and results to be rendered by the 
Consultant as well as the format and manner in which the reports should be prepared. 
implemented 
GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT COMPETITIVENESS 
PROJECT (PSAC) 
The  project  goal  is  ‘to  increase  incomes  of  the  rural  poor,  by  supporting  inclusive  and 
sustainable agri-exports value chains’. The project development objective is ‘to support the 
inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted  export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate 
resilient  productive  capacity  and  market  access’.  The  project  outcomes  will  be  achieved 
through  the  implementation  of  three  inter-related  components:  (i)  Enhance  smallholders’ 
climate smart production and productivity in selected export-driven value chains; (ii) Enabling 
business environment along selected export-driven value chains; and (iii) Policy support and 
coordination. 
 Due  to  the  specific  features  of  each  export-driven  VC,  their  respective  interventions  and 
implementation modalities across the components will be adapted to close identified gaps and 
ensure optimum competitiveness.  
PSAC’s targeting strategy is made up of geographical targeting and social targeting. In terms 
of geographical targeting, the project will cover 14 Districts in Rwanda. 
The  project  aims  to  reach  out  to  56,695  households.  Its  main  target  groups  are:  (i) 
smallholder farmers involved in the production of target export oriented crops including; tea, 
coffee and horticulture; (ii) women; and (iii) youth. Different measures have been foreseen 
to target these groups. They include direct targeting (e.g. using quotas for women and youth), 
self-targeting  (e.g.  promoting  group  activities),  empowerment  and  capacity  building  (e.g. 
leadership training), enabling measures (e.g. policy strengthening) and procedural measures 
(e.g. allowing realistic in-kind beneficiary contributions). 
The  result  matrix  of  the  project,  which  includes  all  project  indicators,  is  annexed  to  these 
TOR.  
Theory  of  change  -PSAC  Theory  of  Change  (ToC)  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  poor 
smallholder farmers are able to equitably increase their productive capacity, their resilience 
to  economic,  environmental  and  climate-related  risks  and  their  access  to  markets  through 
their direct inclusion in export-driven value chains in 14 districts of Rwanda. In addition to 
these,  women  and  youth  face  additional  challenges  given  their  low  access  to  productive 
assets, skills, services and limited participation and capacity to influence decisions in groups 
which  also  need  to  be  considered.  PSAC  aims  to  support  smallholder  organized  in  groups 
(including  women  and  youth)  by  equipping  them  to  enhance  their  knowledge,  skills  and 
practices  to  participate  at  different  levels  of  the  coffee,  tea,  and  horticulture  value  chains. 
PSAC will address the needs of its target group through a comprehensive support package 
186 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
that includes technical and financial literacy skills development packages, as well as linkages 
to  markets  and  financial  services.  As  the  project  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the  broader 
development  of  the  target  value  chains,  it  will  tap  into  the  ecosystem  created  by  the 
Agribusiness Hub grant in the country to provide support to individual youth to access wage 
and  self-employment.  This  will  be  done  through  a  partnership  with  Kilimo  Trust  and  its 
partners. In doing so, the project will cater to the specific needs of youth of different ages.  
Five different pathways for women’s empowerment and gender transformative outcomes are 
included  in  the  PSAC  TOC.  Firstly,  the  project  will  create  economic  opportunities  (e.g. 
community-based  nurseries),  expand  plantation  areas  dedicated  specifically  to  women  and 
improve women’s access to finance. These interventions will improve women’s access to and 
control over productive assets, inputs, produce, financing and capacity building opportunities. 
Secondly,  PSAC  will  strengthen  business  management  capacity  of  Rural  Producer 
Organisations, which is expected to also improve women’s positioning and bargaining power 
within the selected value chains. These interventions are assumed to enhance women’s voice 
in  producer 
increase  their  representation  and 
in  decision-making  and 
organizations.  Thirdly  the  introduction  of  gender  sensitive  and  climate  smart  productivity 
enhancing  technologies  will  address  women’s  time  poverty  and  enable  their  enhanced 
participation in productive activities. Fourthly, the enhanced Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS+) will be implemented to tackle discriminatory social norms and to generate gender 
transformative changes and improved intra-household gender relations. GALS+ will also be 
used  to  address  livelihood  challenges  related  to  nutrition,  climate  adaptation  and  youth 
inclusion. Lastly, promoting an inclusive policy environment in the coffee, tea and horticulture 
sector will aim to tackle structural gender inequality on an institutional level 
leadership 
II. 
OBJECTIVES OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
National Agricultural Export development Board (NAEB) is commissioning a Baseline Survey 
to  collect  quantitative  and  qualitative  baseline  data  from  the  various  target  groups  to  be 
supported through the PSAC programme. All services of the Consultant described herein shall 
be  performed  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MoA),  the  beneficiaries 
and relevant implementing partners in the target districts.  
The main objective of the study is to develop the sample design, conduct the data collection 
and analysis and report writing of the baseline survey to be used for the project evaluation 
process.  
The purpose is to determine the status quo of all data feeding into definition of indicators of 
the project as per the results matrix and collect all other relevant information in the project 
locations. These will be used as the reference points to progressively measure and evaluate 
the  PSAC’s  performance  against  the  set  targets  during  and  at  the  end  of  project 
implementation. The baseline survey will be conducted on a sample of beneficiaries from the 
eligible population. Baseline data provide information on beneficiaries and comparison groups 
before the project is implemented and are important for measuring pre-intervention outcomes 
and establish benchmark information for selected indicators. The analysis of baseline data will 
also be used to assess targeting effectiveness, that is, whether or not the PSAC is going to 
reach its intended beneficiaries. 
Collected data will also provide  verifiable information on the current  status of the targeted 
households.  Information  collected  during  the  survey  may  also  be  used  to  re-design  the 
project’s targets in order to allow more effective implementation where possible. 
187 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
In  addition,  the  baseline  information  should  allow  the  project  to  further  understand  the 
starting point of key elements of the work against which later progress will be measured and 
tracked.  Finally,  the  study  should  also  provide  information  on  the  stakeholders  and 
beneficiaries  to  inform  decision  making  and  to  further  strengthen  contribution  of  PSAC 
towards poverty reduction and food and nutrition security of rural households.  
Specific objectives 
The specific objectives for the consultancy are as follows: 
•  Determine the baseline values of the outcome level indicators, and when necessary, of 
the output indicators in the program result matrix (based on a sample). 
•  Validate the current proposed set of indicators and make necessary adjustments. 
•  Understand the status of the existing agricultural production infrastructure in the target 
localities,  utilization,  gaps  and  natural  resources  which  contribute  to  increased 
agricultural production in the target areas. 
III.  METHODOLOGY AND TOOLS TO APPLY 
The  scope  of  the  services  required  under  these  ToRs  include  the  collection  of  data  at  the 
appropriate  levels  of  analysis.  The  set  of  indicators  to  be  collected  will  be  based  on 
Programme's log-frame indicators. The study will follow a quasi-experimental approach.  
Please note that tenderers are invited to comment and suggest strategies to comply with the 
tools and methodologies mentioned in this ToRs. 
Tools 
For this Consultancy the following tools are to be applied at minimum: 
•  Questionnaires, surveys, interview guidelines (based on IFAD Core Outcome Indicators 
guidelines) 
•  Any tools considered appropriate according to industry best practice. 
The type and application of the tools will be discussed during the contract negotiations and 
inception phase. 
Methodology and consultant responsibility 
The following overarching principles should be respected: 
•  Participation  of  men  and  women  from  the  targeted  communities  will  be  considered 
instrumental in the study. Whenever possible the consultant (or consultant team) will 
make use of focus groups and emphasize on community inputs as much as possible. 
•  The consultants (consultant team) should ensure that gender and youth are duly taken 
into  account  and  analysed,  taking  into  account  IFAD’s  Gender  and  Social  Inclusion 
Framework. 
•  The consultants (consultant team) shall conduct and perform all necessary training, 
planning,  field  investigations  and  related  works  as  described  herein  with  due  care, 
diligence and with due regard to the overall and project goals. The data collection tools 
need to be adapted to the context and tested in the field. 
•  The  consultants  (consultant  team)  is  required  to  liaise  and  collaborate  with  the line 
ministry and relevant implementing partners. The consultants (consultant team) will 
188 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
be expected to make use of / include consultants with local knowledge of Rwanda. 
•  The  consultants  (consultant  team)  shall  assess  social  aspects,  legal  background, 
financial  and  economic  as  well  as  institutional  aspects  and  a  review  of  the  current 
technical  design  to  ascertain  how  the  results  of  the  study  and  recommendations  fit 
into PSAC’s log frame. 
Inception  phase:  During  the  inception  stage  the  consultants  shall  review  all  the  relevant 
project documents. These shall include but not limited to: PSAC’s log frame, Project Design 
Report,  Gender  and  Social  Inclusion  Framework  among  others.  The  consultants  will 
summarise all available data and carry out a gap analysis to better define, which data they 
will need to collect to provide a full set of baseline data for the project as a whole as well as 
for each sub-component.  
The consultant/s will prepare an Inception Report containing the proposed detailed work plan, 
Survey  methodology  including  study  design,  determination  of  suitable  sample  size  for  the 
different  components)  and  methodologies  for  each  component  of  the  assignment. 
Furthermore, the report will contain the developed questionnaires (HH and FGDs), surveys, 
interview  guidelines  and  the  training  material which  will be  used  by  the  enumerators.  This 
Inception Report will be submitted to NAEB who shall review and transmit with comments for 
IFAD no objection  
Literature  Review:  The  consultants  will  carry  out  literature  review  comprising  reading  of 
project  materials,  secondary  data  including  the  proposal,  result  matrix  and  other  relevant 
project documents. 
Survey Design: The Consultants will draft the survey design, including sampling design and 
sample size. This project will benefit approximately 56,695 households of whom 40% will be 
women  and  30%  youth.  The  design  will  also  include  preparation,  field  testing  of  the 
questionnaires and finalization of the survey tools (questionnaire and data entry templates) 
and survey manuals. Furthermore, the consultants will prepare data tabulation and analysis 
plan. Data entry and quality control processes should also be described to ensure reliability 
of the data.  
Overall,  the  consultants  will  provide  detailed  methodological  guidance  on  preparation  and 
design,  data  collection  and  management,  training  of  enumerators,  data  analysis  and 
compilation  of  draft  report  and  proposal  for  final  baseline  survey  report.  All  the  tools  and 
reference materials developed will require translation and should reflect local context.  
The consultants will be required to design the following: 
a)  Quantitative research methodology and tools: Results from this methodology 
and tools will provide responses to all the indicators to set out the project baseline 
data  while  also  supporting  program  staff  to  test  and  make  the  required 
adjustments to the project milestones or strategies indicated in the result matrix. 
The result matrix will be used by the consultants to develop questions that would 
provide  all  the  required  data  and  information  accordingly.  Data  will  be 
disaggregated  according  to  project  relevant  groups  by  considering  women  and 
youth in the target area. 
b)  Qualitative  research  methodology  and  tools:  The  consultants  will  develop 
identify  the  most  appropriate  participatory 
qualitative  questionnaire  and 
189 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
methodology  to  provide  detailed  understanding  about  the  current  agricultural 
techniques used, widely used agricultural inputs and sources, market linkages and 
& climate-resilient technologies &practices. The information from these will be used 
to fine-tune the quantitative data collection tools and determine the baseline data 
for the current practices and types of techniques while verifying the milestones of 
the project by the end of the project.  
•  Sampling:  The  Consultants  will  provide  details  on  the  sample  frameworks 
and sample size based on the project proposal and the nature of indicators in 
the result matrix. For both qualitative and quantitative samples, the sampling 
frameworks  should  be  of  a  sufficient  size  and  representativeness  to  allow: 
reasonable  levels  of  certainty  that  the  findings  are  representative  for  the 
target population. 
c)  Survey Implementation: The consultants will train selected enumerators (survey 
team)  on  the  survey  tools,  manuals  and  methodology.  Training  will  cover  data 
collection, data entry. The consultants will ensure the smooth implementation of 
the survey with a quality control and backstopping strategy (to be detailed in their 
proposal).  The  consultants  will  be  responsible  for  data  quality,  data  cleaning, 
management and analysis.  
d)  Survey Report: The Consultants will undertake data analysis and provide baseline 
survey report according to the consultancy purposes and the result matrix indicator 
requirements. 
IV. 
SCOPE OF WORK 
Outcome of Baseline Study 
The main outcomes of the study are to: 
•  The  validation  of  the  indicators  on  outcome  and  output  level  as  proposed  in  the 
approved result matrix of the project; 
•  The Baseline values and verification of the target values for outcome and output level 
indicators; 
•  The proposition of possible modification of indicators and values for outcome and output 
level; 
The result matrix (see appendix 4) is the key reference to obtain the expected outcomes of 
the baseline study. Project documents and study reports will provide further information of 
the project.  
Key deliverables 
For the purpose of this study, the consultant is expected to deliver the following 
• 
Inception Report: The consultant is expected to submit Inception Report one week after 
the  inception  meeting  with  the  project  team.  The  inception  report  should  include  a 
working calendar and delivery schedule.  
•  Methodology and Sampling (as part of the inception report): The consultant is expected 
to  develop  the  methodology  and  sampling  tools  in  English  which  must  get  SPIU’s 
approval before the actual data collection starts. 
190 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
o  Development of the survey questionnaire based on the draft provided by the 
project.  
o  Development of the sampling design  
o  Clearance  by  Project  Team  and  IFAD  of  pilot  sampling  design  and  the 
questionnaire.  
o  Develop interview manuals and instructions for field staff 
o  Training of interviewers for the pilot study. 
o  Pilot study fieldwork.  
o  Revision of the pilot study questionnaires.  
o  Analysis  of  pilot  study  results,  introducing  adjustments  to  the  draft 
questionnaire.  
o  Development of the Final Questionnaire.  
o  Development  of  an  appropriate  data  management  system  with  adequate 
quality controls.  
o  Clearance of the final questionnaire and sampling design by Project Team and 
IFAD.  
•  Fieldwork  activities:  including  field  work  preparation  (recruitment  of  interviewers, 
printing),  staffing  and  enumerator  training,  administrative  approvals,  qualitative  and 
quantitative data collection and data quality control. The training manual for field staff 
and enumerators should be included in the final package.  
•  Data  processing,  Analysis  and  Final  Report:  The  consultant  is  expected  to  address 
feedbacks  by  SPIU,  IFAD  while  preparing  the  final  report.  The  final  report  shall  be 
submitted  within  15  days  once  a  complete  feedback  and  comments  received  are 
addressed. While writing the report, the institution will work in close collaboration with 
the Project Team and other implementing partners, to enable a learning process and 
to maximise transparency and accountability. Once the surveys have been conducted 
and their quality controlled, the analysis of the results should be presented in a report. 
The  report  summarizes the conclusions emerging from the analysis and includes the 
following elements:  
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
the description of the methodology used  
the questionnaire (including electronic format) 
the list of villages/communities surveyed  
the results of the survey  
the updated log frame (at least CIs at outcome levels)  
the ToC and its description based on the results of the survey  
the analysis and interpretation of the results (detailed analysis with statistical 
significance and summarized tables for each indicator) 
Datasets:  the  raw  data  set  collected  during  the  study  should  be  annexed  to  the  report. 
The  expected  tasks  for  the  institution  should  be  performed  in  accordance  with  a  mutually 
agreed schedule. Final deliverables should be submitted according to this schedule and within 
the limits of the contract duration. 
Deliverables are subject to agreement by the Project Team and IFAD and preliminary versions 
should therefore be submitted by the institution in time allowing for comments to be shared 
and if required changes to be introduced by the institution. 
191 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
V. 
COMPETENCIES  
Institution expertise and required qualifications 
The selected institution shall possess the following qualifications: 
•  Previous experience in carrying out evaluation surveys is a compulsory 
requirement, including demonstrated experience in designing and conducting 
evaluations and of organizing surveys on the scale of this project (including 
survey and sampling design)  
•  Strong capacity and experience in planning and organizing survey logistics 
•  Good network of experienced enumerators, supervisors and data entry clerks 
•  Strong capacity in data management and statistics 
•  Strong capacity in survey analysis and reporting of results 
•  Strong interpersonal skills and a team-oriented spirit 
•  Experience doing household survey work and carrying out evaluations in the 
relevant sector. 
•  Strong background in statistics and econometrics.  
Key staff 
The  proposed  team  should  consist  of  reasonable  number  of  qualified  and  experienced 
professionals having proven track record in designing and implementing socio-economic and 
baseline studies and/ or evaluation studies and having good depth of understanding of rural 
development  as  well  as  of  and  gender  and  social  inclusion.  The  bidders  are  expected  to 
propose  a  study  coordinator/Team  Leader  and  appropriate  number  of  experts,  field 
supervisors, enumerators and support staff.  
Minimum key professional staff positions (recommended): 
•  One study coordinator/team leader: Advanced degree in economics, statistics, 
agricultural economics or related field. At least five years relevant experiences in 
conducting impact evaluations, large quantitative survey implementation and 
analysis, experience in household and agricultural data collection and analysis 
required, ability to coordinate teams and ensure timely reporting. General 
understanding of targeting, gender and social inclusions issues in the area of IFAD’s 
work. 
•  The study coordinator/Team Leader will be in charge of coordinating the planning, 
implementation of the studies and ensuring that the work is conducted following the 
highest professional standards. The individual will be in charge of ensuring that the 
quality control and supervision mechanism in place for the survey is effective, 
manage the data collection team and ensure that each member performs their 
specific scope of work.  
•  One expert in survey implementation and field supervision: Minimum five 
years’ experience with large survey implementation, experience in implementing 
household and agricultural surveys required. Preferably with previous experiences in 
conducting surveys in Eritrea.  
•  One socio-economic researcher: Advanced degree in economics, agricultural 
economics or related fields, at least five years' experience in analysing survey data 
using SPSS/STATA or equivalent software. Strong background and experience in 
192 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
statistics and econometrics is required. Ability to write clearly and concisely in 
English. Previous experience in impact evaluation is preferred.  
•  One computer specialist in data entry and data bases: Minimum experience of 
three years with large survey data sets and data entry software required. The data 
specialist will develop appropriate data management system with adequate quality 
controls, and finalize the data management system before the data collection team 
moves to the field. The data management system would also be organized in such a 
way as to deliver partial datasets on a regular basis to the Project Team. 
Minimum key support staff positions (recommended):  
•  Field supervisors: Minimum of 2-3 field supervisors should be hired (best ratio 
would be 1 supervisor every 4 enumerators). They should be chosen based on the 
institution’s best practices. Some degree of knowledge of local languages is expected 
at least from a sufficient number of the supervisors. At least two years’ experience in 
conducting or managing household surveys is required.  
•  Survey enumerators: Minimum of 8-10 enumerators should be hired. Minimum 
qualifications include knowledge of local language. Preference should be given to 
candidates with experience in quantitative data collection in rural Eritrea, namely, on 
the themes of the questionnaire.  
•  Data entry technicians: Minimum qualifications include knowledge of local 
language and advanced computer skills. Preference should be given to candidates 
with experience in quantitative data entry and/or previous experience in survey 
work.  
VI. 
PROPOSAL CONTENT  
Interested consulting companies should submit their applications consisting of the following 
documents/information to demonstrate their qualifications:  
•  Technical Proposal will include: the profile of the company, relevant experience for 
the assignments, staffing (CV of each team member), proposed methodology to 
perform the assessment, the size of the sample to be analyzed, the work plan and 
schedule (activities) and resources (including number of person-day).  
•  Financial proposal will obligatory include the consulting fee and operational 
expenditures related to the assignment. The survey company will provide a break-
down of the budget by the activities mentioned in the Activities section above.  
Expression of Interest (EOI) 
Interested and qualified institutions must submit the following documents:  
•  Declaration of Understanding of the Terms of Reference 
•  Approach and methodology 
•  Proposed detailed budget 
•  Detailed CV 
•  Copies of Academic and Professional Certificates  
•  Samples of similar deliverables from previous experiences 
•  References letters 
193 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Budget 
The institutions shall provide its technical and financial proposals, with detailed estimates of 
the budget including staff charges, travel, equipment, hardware, software, ground surveys, 
technical meetings, report preparation, and other related activities.  
The  Technical  and  Financial  Proposals  must  be  submitted  to  IFAD,  as  per  the  rules  and 
procedures of competitive bidding. 
194 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 4: PROCUREMENT SUPERVISION PLAN  
1.  Introduction 
The overall supervision of Public Procurement activities in Rwanda is vested in the Rwanda 
Public  Procurement  Authority.  One  of  the  key  mandates  of  the  organization  is  to  ensure 
organization, analysis and supervision in public procurement matters.   In this regard RPPA 
will  provide  the  procurement  supervision  to  the  PSAC  (Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-export 
Competences)  project  as  provided  by  law.  IFAD  will  be  responsible  for  supervision  of 
procurement activities through the reviews required for no-objection requests. IFAD will also 
undertake post procurement supervision for prior review thresholds.  Procurement supervision 
will also be done during scheduled project supervision missions.  Procurement activities at the 
project level will be supervised by the Head of Procurement of SPIU on a day to day basis.  
2.  IFAD’s Project Supervision Role for the PSAC Project  
The review of project procurement processes during project implementation is an essential 
part of IFAD’s fiduciary responsibility. In supervising projects and providing implementation 
support,  IFAD  aims  to  ensure  that  project  procurement  processes  conform  with  national 
procurement  laws  and  regulations  and  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  Project  Procurement 
Guidelines 
Procurement 
Documents/Templates, and other applicable policies, guidelines and procedures.  
Procurement 
Handbook, 
ancillary 
IFAD 
and 
any 
3.  Scope of Supervision 
The  Procurement  Risk  Assessment  undertaken  during  the  PSAC  project  design  mission 
returned  a  rating  of  Low  Risk  and  therefore  the  extent  and  intensity  will  be  based  on  a 
standard supervision scope as provided in the IFAD procurement Manual and will include the 
following: 
i.  PRM Reviews 
ii.  Prior review 
iii.  Post review 
iv.  Project Supervision 
v.  Review of the Procurement Plan 
vi.  Internal Supervision 
3.1 PRM Reviews  
The PRM is a tool that underpins IFAD’s risk-based approach to project procurement oversight. 
Its  principal  aim  is  to  ensure  adequate  mitigation  of  key  risks  of  a  project  implementing 
agency failing to perform the procurement processes it will be responsible for in a sound and 
efficient manner.  During the design of the Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competences 
(PSAC) project a Procurement Risk Assessment was undertaken which entailed updating the 
previous  PRM  assessment  country  level  dimensions  and  conducting  an  institutional  level 
dimension assessment of the National Agricultural Export Development Board (NAEB) which 
is the project the implementing agency.  
195 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Determination  of  the  scope  and  intensity  of  procurement  reviews  will  follow  a  risk-based 
approach informed by PRM assessments, issues identified in previous procurement reviews, 
and taking into account the project’s stage of implementation. For every ongoing project, the 
PRM assessment will have to be updated once a year during project supervision.  
3.2 Prior review 
Conducted when a CD is required to provide a NO to a procurement document and process 
undertaken by the designated borrower. Prior review is an additional risk mitigation measure 
during the various stages of a procurement process. For the PSAC project prior review will be 
include a review of the following documents: the Procurement Plan, bid documents, evaluation 
reports and award recommendations, draft contracts and its amendments.  
CD  and  PMU  are  required  to  use  NOTUS  to  manage  NOs;  through  NOTUS,  PMUs  submit 
documentation to IFAD for prior review and issuance of NOs.  
Prior review will address the following: 
1.  Compliance with Financing Agreement and Letter the Borrower, or any subsequent 
changes reflected in mission reports (e.g. Supervision, Mid-Term Review, Back-to-
Office Reports, Aide-Memoires, correspondence, etc.) and consistency with the 
approved AWPB and PP 
2.  Adequacy and Quality of the Bidding Documents  
3.  Review  of  compliance  with  relevant  provisions  in  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  for 
Agricultural  Development  Financing,  Project  Procurement  Guidelines,  Procurement 
Handbook,  any  ancillary  IFAD  Procurement  Documents/Templates,  IFAD  Policy  on 
Preventing Fraud and Corruption, the Financing Agreement and Letter to the Borrower  
4.  The evaluation was done in compliance with IFAD guidelines and in compliance with 
applicable laws of the country.   
5.  Draft Contract consistency between the draft contract and the contract form provided 
as part of the bidding document, and between the price contained in the contract and 
that in the evaluation report (to which IFAD provides its NO)  
Refer  to  checklist  appendix:  No-Objection  Checklists  for  Prior  Review  of  the  IFAD 
Procurement Manual 
3.3 Post Review 
This is the assessment by IFAD in the context of supervision and implementation support or 
desk-based  reviews  of  procurement  conducted  by  the  Borrower/Recipient  for  a  sample  of 
contracts  or  ongoing  procurement  activities.  The  assessment  will  ensure  procurement 
principles, provisions and procedures as stipulated in the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines 
and Procurement Handbook, Financing Agreement and Letter to the Borrower, PIM, standard 
templates (e.g. bidding documents for goods, works and services) and related systems are 
available and fully explained to procurement and project management staff.  A minimum of 
ten percent of ongoing contracts should be reviewed. The sampling should be risk-based and 
take  into  consideration:  (i)  the  PRM  assessment,  with  the  riskier  projects  having  a  larger 
sample, and (ii) the contract risk rating, to ensure that riskier contracts constitute a higher 
proportion of the sample. The following will be assessed: 
196 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
1.  Bidding Process (for each procurement)  
2.  Evaluation Process (for each procurement)  
3.  Award and Negotiations (for each procurement)  
4.  Contract, Contract Administration and Management Process (for each 
procurement)  
5.  Identify issues and weaknesses (and the relevant underlying causes of these 
issues and weaknesses) in contract administration and management and 
recommend improvements.  
6.  Review of issues identified in the previous review and aide-mémoire and 
procurement related issues identified in project audit reports.  
7.  Review of project’s procurement filing system and the ease of document 
retrieval.  
8.  Periodic review of any significant changes in the Borrower/Recipient’s 
procurement system and practices, and ensure project procurement procedures 
and systems are updated accordingly.  
9.  Ascertain procurement capacity within the PMU, availability of dedicated staff, 
and the adequacy of their experience and qualifications.  
10. Assessment of further procurement staff training needs and ensure relevant 
training is planned and provided to project management and procurement staff in 
a timely manner.  
11. Field visits as necessary to complete the above tasks, especially when an issue is 
identified in contract management.  
Refer  to  checklist  appendix:  No-Objection  Checklists  for  Prior  Review  of  the  IFAD 
Procurement Manual 
3.4  Project Supervision 
As part of a procurement review undertaken during supervision, a project’s PRM will need to 
be reviewed and updated in light of evolving conditions or circumstances, for example, with 
respect  to  the  national  procurement  system,  improvement/deterioration  of  project 
procurement performance, overall implementation progress and results delivery. As a result, 
procurement and prior review thresholds may be revised, and other existing risk mitigation 
measures  may  be  adjusted  or  new  ones  implemented.  The  procurement  plan  will  also  be 
reviewed during supervision and any updates that may be agreed will be done and the revised 
PP sent for No-objection. 
Supervision missions will spot check the procurement documentation associated with prior 
reviews as well as assess procurement processes conducted by the Borrower/Recipient for a 
sample of contracts not subject to prior review as shown below: 
1.  Review Procurement Plan (PP)  
2.  Review of the procurement process  
3.  Review of final contract  
4.  Review of contract implementation  
5.  Review of project’s procurement filing system and the ease of document retrieval 
Refer to checklist appendix No-Objection Checklists for Prior Review of the IFAD Procurement 
Manual 
3.5  Procurement Plan reviews 
197 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Procurement Plans should be reviewed on a periodic basis (preferably quarterly), such as 
when a PP Update52 is submitted, prior to giving a NO for a PP Upgrade53, and at any other 
point in time as determined by the CD e.g. when supervision and/or implementation support 
activities take place. Review of a PP will assess the following:  
Consistency with the latest approved AWPB:  
1.  Nature and quantity of goods/works/services is consistent with the activities in the 
AWPB 
2.  Procurement schedule is consistent with the implementation schedules in the AWPB 
(the delivery of goods, works and services correspond to targets in the AWPB)  
3.  Procurement budget is adequate   
4.  Selection  of  procurement  methods  are  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Letter to the Borrower  
5.  The estimates indicated seem realistic  
6.  Adequacy of procurement packaging:  
7.  Procurement  activities  are  systematically  and  logically  grouped  according  to  the 
categories of the procurement (goods/works/services)  
8.  Packaging has been done in a way that generally facilitates the use  of the most 
competitive  and  efficient  procurement  method,  that  ensures  the  best  value  for 
money and that avoids pseudo-packaging  
9.  Progress in implementing and updating and upgrading the PP, including identifying 
significant delays and causes, proposing adjustments to the PP and recommending 
improvements  relating  to  planned/ongoing  procurement  processes  (e.g.  in  the 
preparation of the bidding documents).  
3.6  Internal Supervision 
The  Head  of  Procurement  of  SPIU  will  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  all  day  to  day 
procurement activities of the PSAC project.  She will undertake the following activities: 
1.  Review the Procurement Plan 
2.  Monitor the day to day implementation of the PP  
3.  Review the following documents before they are submitted for no-objection: 
•  TORs/Specifications  
•  Requests for expressions of interests 
•  Request for proposals 
•  Bidding documents 
•  Evaluation reports 
•  Draft contracts 
Refer to Procurement Performance Indicator for Supervision Reporting
52 An “update” of the PP entails solely the addition of actual items in the PP. This includes actual dates, amounts and methods. The 
planned items are not affected.  
53 An “upgrade” to the Procurement Plan entails the addition of new procurement items, the change of the procurement method 
from a more to less competitive method, or the (upward or downward) modification of the budget estimate in the Plan that exceeds 
10%   
198 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 1. Supervision Plan 
S/N  Type of 
Purpose of the supervision 
Responsibility 
Outputs 
Frequency 
supervision 
1 
PRM Reviews   PRM assessments, issues identified in 
previous procurement reviews, and 
taking into account the project’s stage 
of implementation  
For every ongoing project, the PRM 
assessment will have to be updated 
once a year during project supervision.  
Senior 
Procurement 
Officer (SPO) or 
Consultant54 
2 
Prior review    Review procurement documentation 
associated with prior reviews as well as 
assess procurement processes 
conducted by the Borrower/Recipient 
for a sample of contracts not subject to 
prior review.  
Senior 
Procurement 
Officer  (SPO)  or 
Consultant 
CD55 will issue the 
no objection based 
on the  
Once 
every year 
•  A summary of the 
project’s main 
procurement risks and 
corresponding 
mitigating actions to 
address and minimize 
their impact/likelihood  
•  Assigned Ratings 
•  Write up for the Aide 
Memoire  
No-objection by concerned 
CD/CPM 
Based on 
Requests  
54 Whenever SPOs do not conduct a PRM assessment update or procurement review themselves, they will be responsible to review and  clear the following items prior to their 
finalization and recording in the Operational Results Management System (ORMS) or in other procurement management systems:  
PRM assessment updates; Procurement indicator ratings and supporting justifications; Procurement review summaries; recommended actions for improvement; Procurement related 
inputs for Supervision Aide Memoires and Management Letters; and Procurement Review Working Papers to be annexed to Supervision Reports.   
55CD may delegate this responsibility to SPOs only, on a case-by-case and time-bound basis (e.g. when on annual leave or duty travel with limited internet connectivity) upon written 
request to the SPO by email, copying the Regional Division Director and the Lead Procurement Adviser, OPR.  
199 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
S/N  Type of 
Purpose of the supervision 
Responsibility 
Outputs 
Frequency 
supervision 
3 
Post review 
The purpose is the assessment by IFAD 
of the procurement processes 
conducted by the Borrower/Recipient 
for a sample of contracts that are not 
subject to prior preview.  
recommendation 
from SPO 
Senior 
Procurement 
Officer  (SPO)  or 
Consultant 
Procurement 
Working Paper56 
Review 
As 
scheduled  
4 
Project 
Supervision 
Spot check the procurement 
documentation associated with prior 
reviews as well as assess procurement 
processes conducted by the 
Borrower/Recipient for a sample of 
contracts not subject to prior review  
Update the PRM (see 1 above) 
Senior 
Procurement 
Officer  (SPO)  or 
Consultant 
Supervision Aide Memoire 
and the Management 
Letter. 
As 
scheduled  
5 
Review of 
Procurement 
Plan  
Procurement Plans should be reviewed 
on a periodic basis (preferably 
quarterly), such as when a PP Update3 
is submitted, prior to giving a NO for a 
PP Upgrade4, and at any other point in 
Senior 
Procurement 
Officer  (SPO)  or 
Consultant 
Updated procurement plan   Quarterly 
56 The Procurement Review Working Paper will be attached to the Supervision Report as Annex 6, and will serve to complete the following actions within the supervision reporting 
process:  
Assign a rating for the procurement performance indicator supported by a short justification for the rating (Annex 1 to this module details the rating criteria for this indicator);  
Prepare a summary of the procurement review’s findings and conclusions;  
Formulate any necessary recommended actions for improvement; and, Prepare any necessary procurement related inputs for the Supervision Aide Memoire and the Management 
Letter.  
200 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
S/N  Type of 
Purpose of the supervision 
Responsibility 
Outputs 
Frequency 
supervision 
time as determined by the CD/CPM, 
e.g. when supervision and/or 
implementation support activities take 
place. 
201 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 5: PROCUREMENT RISK MATRIX 
202 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
203 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
204 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
205 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
206 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
207 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ANNEX 6: REFERENCE OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU) TEMPLATE 
REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
RWANDA AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
Rwanda 
Memorandum of Understanding 
“MoU” 
Between 
XXX 
Through 
SPIU of IFAD Funded Projects 
And 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
For 
208 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
This Memorandum of Understanding, hereunder referred to as “MoU” is entered into by and between: 
XX through SPIU of IFAD Funded Projects, having its principal place of business at …… 
And 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI),….  represented by …., the Acting 
Coordinator of SPIU/MINAGRI, here under referred to as “the Service Provider”; 
WHEREAS 
To  this  effect  and  for  the  implementation  of  the  ……  the  client  and  the  Service  Provider,  collectively 
referred to as “PARTIES” and individually as “PART”. 
HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOW: 
Article 1: Purpose of this MoU and Scope of activities 
Article 2: Value of the activities and Terms of Fund Disbursements. 
2.1 Value of activities to be executed 
The total estimated amount for all activities to be done by the Service Provider  is…… Rwandan Francs 
taxes exclusive. 
Details related to the activities and related budget are on the annex. 
209 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
2.2 Terms of Funds Disbursements 
The client shall transfer the funds for activities/works to be executed by the Service Provider in accordance 
with following installments: 
All payment will be done on the following bank account: 
Article 3: Documents forming this MoU 
Parties in this MoU hereby acknowledge being in possession of the following MoU documents listed below 
in the order of their priority. 
1)  This MoU; 
2)  … Narrative Text. 
Those documents are considered as complementary and explanatory to each other. In case of conflict or 
ambiguity between any of the above listed documents, priority shall be given in the order as listed above. 
Article 4: Partnership Mechanisms 
This MoU expresses a convergence of will between “Parties”, it indicates an intended common line of 
action and parties imply legal commitment. 
210 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Parties agree that, upon execution of this MoU, completion of planned activities and their execution shall 
be done based on availability of required resources and funds. 
Parties intend to use their best efforts in good faith to work together to achieve the Project Objectives. 
Whenever necessary during the implementation, parties shall hold several meetings to discuss any issue, 
and the Service Provider shall accept any invitation to participate in the Project management-meeting if 
need be. 
Article 5: The use of funds 
The funds shall be exclusively received by the Service Provider for the activities performed and described 
in this MoU and other supporting documents. 
The client is entirely and fully responsible and accountable of the disbursement of funds under this MoU. 
Article 6: Execution of activities 
The Service Provider shall execute the activities and/or perform the services as set out in the approved 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for…… Financial Year (FY) and in accordance with this MoU. 
For activities  related to the  acquisition of  maize and beans grains, the  Service Provider will work with 
………… 
Activities to be done under this MoU are subject to revision in consideration of any revision done on the 
approved AWPB. 
211 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Article 7: Reporting requirement 
The Service Provider shall submit ….. financial and progress reports to the project. 
Article 8: Performance evaluation 
The performance evaluation of the implementation status shall be carried out by client/project staff in 
accordance with performance indicators and Project’ targets, quantity and quality of the work, timeframe 
as well as the terms in particular to this MOU.  If necessary, the evaluation report shall be discussed during 
a joint meeting where parties will be agreed on the findings and way forward to address issues highlighted 
in the report. 
If needed, a participative workshop to identify Service  Provider’s weaknesses and strengths, based on 
which parties will agree on measures to be taken to improve the situation or to replicate the successful 
operations in other sites. 
Article 9: Coordination of activities under this MoU 
The Client appoints following staff to ensure the coordination of activities under this MoU: …………. 
The team will be responsible and accountable for: 
Article 10: Force Majeure 
No party shall be liable for breach of any aspect of this Agreement where this breach can be reasonably 
ascertained to have been occasioned by an act of Force Majeure including but not limited to Acts of 
212 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
War, Rebellion, Lockouts, Strikes or Blockades, Government Policy, Pandemic, Natural Disaster or any 
other Act which was not reasonably foreseen at the date of signing of this MoU. 
In case of force majeure, parties shall make a joint assessment aiming at analyzing the case and agreed 
on the way forward. 
Article 11: Governing Law, privileges and conflict of interest 
This MoU is governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Rwanda. 
Nothing in this MoU or relating thereto shall be construed: 
(i) 
As relieving the Service Provider from conforming to any national law applicable in its relations to 
third Parties, including its employees, or to any national law applicable to it by reason of trade, 
business or activities. The Service Provider shall comply with applicable laws and shall keep the 
client informed of any conflict or problem arising in relation to national authorities. 
(ii) 
As constituting a waiver of privileges or immunities that may be conferred on the client, or as 
conferring any privileges or immunities on the Service Provider or its employees. 
Article 12: Settlement of disputes 
Any dispute between the parties arising out of the interpretation or implementation of this MoU shall be 
settled amicably through consultations and negotiations between the parties. In the event after ten (10) 
days amicable settlement of a dispute has failed, either party shall be at liberty to exercise its option to 
terminate this MoU. 
213 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
However,  in  the  event  such  dispute  is  subject  to  liability  or  to  any  other  unfulfilled  obligation,  the 
concerned party shall be held responsible to the other. 
Articles 13: Termination 
The client reserves the right to terminate this MoU or a part thereof (one or several activities of the 
AWPB) if it considers that the continued implementation of the MoU is impossible or impractical for 
either of the following reasons: 
•  Unforeseen causes beyond the control of the client such as, the lack of funds from the donor, the 
revision of the AWPB, the cancellation of termination of the financing agreement for KIIWP2; 
• 
In the event of repeated default, delay or unsatisfactory performance on the part of the Service 
Provider; 
If some activities under this MoU should be terminated, the following shall apply: 
•  The client shall complete all payments that may be due up to the effective date of termination; 
•  The Service Provider shall take all reasonable measures in order that any work/activity in progress 
is delivered to avoid any loss or damage; 
•  Adjustments to amounts due and any claims arising from or connected to termination of this MoU 
or part thereof shall be dealt with in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this MoU. 
The notices of termination shall specify the reasons for termination and take effect starting from the 
date indicated in the notice. However, it is understood that the provisions of this MoU applicable to the 
winding up of the MoU, the liquidation of claims and the settlement of disputes shall remain in force for 
such additional period as may be necessary. 
214 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Article 14: Change and amendments 
No modification of or change in this MoU, waiver of any of its provisions or additional provisions shall be 
valid or enforceable unless previously approved in writing by the parties to this MoU or their duly 
authorized representatives in the form of an amendment to this MoU duly signed by the parties hereto. 
The client may, at any time, give written notification of change agreed between the GoR and the donors 
in the activities of the AWPB of KIIWP2 to be executed and/or their delivery schedule, even if such 
changes do increase the activities under this MoU, involve additional expense, or reduce the time frame 
within which the activity must be completed. 
215 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Article 15: Duration and Annual Addendum to this MoU 
Subject to the provisions of article 6, this MoU is concluded for a period of … (X) months from the effective 
date. 
If needed, this period can be extended to allow the Service Provider to finalize all activities; 
Also, this MoU can be subject to annual addendum in accordance with approved AWPB. 
The annual addendum shall base on the following: 
-  Approved annual work plan for the next fiscal year; 
-  Quality of activities completed; 
-  Comply with MoU provisions and other supporting documents; 
Article 16: Confidentiality 
Each party agrees that it shall not, at any time, after executing the activities of this MoU, disclose any 
information in relation to these activities without consent of both parties. 
Article 17: Notices 
Any notice affecting the rights or obligations of either party to this MoU shall be given in writing and 
delivered in person, physical address or by email to the addressee given below: 
216 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Article 18: Procurement 
All procurement activities to be carried out under this MoU shall be in conformity with the …. Letter to 
the ...................... as may be amended from time to time, and shall be conducted in accordance with the 
Law No. 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 governing public procurement and the Ministerial Order No. 
002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement, to the extent such are 
consistent with the IFAD Projects Procurement Guidelines, as may be amended from time to time. 
Article 19: Corrupt and Fraudulent Practices 
19.1  The  Revised  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  Its  Activities  and  Operations 
(hereinafter, the "Revised Policy") applies to individuals and entities that receive, apply to receive, are 
responsible for the deposit or transfer of, or take or influence decisions regarding the use of proceeds 
from IFAD financing or financing managed by IFAD, including, but not limited to, implementing partners, 
Project  Partners,  contractors,  suppliers,  subcontractors,  sub-suppliers,  bidders,  consultant  and  any  of 
their agents or personnel (all such individuals and entities are collectively referred to as "Third Parties" or 
"Third Party"). Pursuant to the Revised Policy, Third parties shall refrain from engaging in the following 
practices,  which  are  considered  to  be  prohibited  practices  when  engaged  in  connection with an  IFAD- 
financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
a “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of 
anything of value in order to improperly influence the actions of another party; 
a  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that 
knowingly  or  recklessly  misleads,  or  attempts  to  mislead,  a  party  in  order  to  obtain  a 
financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation; 
a “collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including improperly influencing the actions of another party; 
a “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to improperly influence the actions of 
that or another party; 
217 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
(v) 
an “obstructive practice” is 
(aa)  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering  or  concealing  evidence  that  may  be 
material  to  an  investigation  by  IFAD  or  making  false  statements  to  investigators  in 
order to materially impede an investigation by IFAD; 
(bb)  threatening,  harassing  or  intimidating  any  party  in  order  to  prevent  that  party 
from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to an investigation by IFAD or from 
pursuing such an investigation; and/or 
(cc) the commission of any act intended to materially impede the exercise of IFAD's 
contractual rights of audit, inspection and access to information, provided for under 
article 19.2 below. 
19.2 In pursuance of this policy: 
(i) 
Third Parties shall disclose, in the course of a procurement process or any time thereafter, 
information relating to themselves or any of their key personnel concerning: 
relevant  criminal  convictions,  administrative  sanctions  and/or  temporary 
(a) 
suspensions; 
(b) agents engaged in connection with a procurement process or the execution of a 
contract, including the commissions or fees paid or to be paid; and 
(c) any  actual  or  potential  conflict  of  interest  in  connection  with  a  procurement 
process or the execution of a contract; 
(ii) 
Third Parties shall promptly report to IFAD any allegations or other indications of prohibited 
218 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
practices that come to their attention by virtue of their involvement in an IFAD-financed 
and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity; 
IFAD  possesses  jurisdiction  to  investigate  allegations and  other  indications of  prohibited 
practises and to impose sanctions on Third Parties for such practices in connection with an 
IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity; 
Third Parties shall fully cooperate with any investigation conducted by IFAD, including by 
making  personnel  available  for  interviews  and  by  providing  full  access  to  any  and  all 
accounts, premises, documents and records (including electronic records) relating to the 
relevant  IFAD-financed  and/or  IFAD-managed  operation  or  activity  and  to  have  such 
accounts, premises, records and documents audited and/or inspected by auditors and/or 
investigators appointed by IFAD; 
Third  Parties  shall  maintain  all  accounts,  documents  and  records  relating  to  an  IFAD- 
financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity for a period of 3 (three) years after 
completion of the bid; 
should IFAD determine that a Third Party has engaged in any of the prohibited practices 
defined under article 19.1 above, it may impose on the Third Party any of the administrative 
sanctions provided by the Revised Policy, Section F, (ii); 
during  the  course  of  an  IFAD  review  or  investigation,  or  pending  the  conclusion  of  a 
sanctioning process, IFAD may decide, at any time, to temporarily suspend payments to a 
Third Party or to temporarily suspend its eligibility to participate in IFAD-financed and/or 
IFAD managed operations and activities for an initial period of six (6) months, subject to a 
possible extension of that suspension for an additional period of six (6) months, as provided 
by the Revised Policy, Section F, (i); 
(viii) 
public  entities  receiving  IFAD  financing  or  financing  managed  by  IFAD  and  any  of  their 
agents or personnel and private entities receiving IFAD financing or financing managed by 
IFAD and any of their agents or personnel shall terminate or suspend the contract if such 
termination  or  suspension  is  required  as  a  consequence  of  a  temporary  suspension  or 
sanction imposed or recognized by IFAD; 
(ix) 
furthermore, Third Parties' attention is drawn to IFAD's policy of unilaterally recognizing 
debarments imposed by other International Financial Institutions if such debarments meet 
the requirements for mutual recognition under the Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of 
219 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Debarment Decisions.69 
Article 20: Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
24.1 The Fund requires that all beneficiaries of IFAD Funding, including the employer and any bidders, 
implementing  partners,  Project  Partners,  suppliers,  sub-suppliers,  contractors,  sub-contractors, 
consultants, sub-consultants,  and any of their agents (whether declared or not) and personnel comply 
with IFAD's Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. 
For  the  purpose  of  this  provision,  and  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Policy  on  Preventing  and  Responding  to 
Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse as it may be amended from time to time, the terms set 
forth below are defined as follows: 
Sexual harassment means “any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favour or other verbal, non-
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature that unreasonably interferes with work, alters or is made a 
condition of employment, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. 
Sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  means  “any  actual  or  attempted  abuse  of  a  position  of  vulnerability, 
differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially 
or politically from the sexual exploitation of others (sexual exploitation); the actual or threatened physical 
intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions (sexual abuse)”. 
24.2 Employers, suppliers and bidders shall take all appropriate measures to prevent and prohibit sexual 
harassment  and  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  on  the  part  of  their  personnel  and  subcontractors  or 
anyone else directly or indirectly employed by them or any of subcontractors in the performance of the 
contract. Purchasers, suppliers and bidders shall immediately report to the purchaser or IFAD any incidents 
of  sexual  harassment  and  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  arising  out  of  or  in  connection  with  the 
performance  of  the  contract  or  prior  to  its  execution,  including  convictions,  disciplinary  measures, 
220 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
69 The Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of Debarment Decisions, dated 9 April 2010, was signed by five of the leading International Financial 
Institutions, namely, the African Development Bank Group, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank Group. 
221 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Article 21: Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing 
The  Fund  requires  that  all  beneficiaries  of  IFAD  funding  or  funds  administered  by  IFAD,  including  the 
employer,  any  bidders,  implementing  partners,  Project  Partners  and  suppliers,  observe  the  highest 
standards of integrity during the procurement and execution of such contracts, and commit to combat 
money laundering and terrorism financing consistent with IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering 
the Financing of Terrorism Policy. 
For the Client: 
For the Service Provider: 
Acting Coordinator 
SPIU/MINAGRI 
Email:  info@minagri.gov.rw 
Notice shall be considered as effective as of the date of delivery to the addressee. 
Article 22: Entry into Force and effectiveness 
This MoU comes into force on the date of its signature. 
Date: ………. /……… / 2021 
222 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
For MINAGRI: 
For RAB – SPIU/IFAD 
Funded Projects: 
For Approval: 
223 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/17
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Stakeholders
2/17
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Over the last 20 years, Rwanda has enjoyed political stability which, combined with
good governance and policy consistency, has created an enabling policy
environment ensuring successful delivery of development programs. However,
counterpart funding in some previous IFAD-supported projects has been below the
expected levels. In addition, improving participatory approach will be required in
order to increase ownership of project’s beneficiaries in its areas of intervention.
Mitigations:
GoR has already demonstrated strong commitment in co-financing PSAC and in
attracting additional co-financiers (CORDAID, Heifer International, etc.). GoR has
also committed to provide cash contribution for taxes on a timely basis and report
promptly on any in-kind contributions. For the latter, GoR has recruited a valuer to
work with on-going and future IFAD-supported projects including PSAC. In
addition, NAEB management is committed to improve coordination with partner
institutions at district and national level in order to avoid any deviation from agreed
implementation arrangements.
Governance
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Since the year 2000, the GoR has been implementing comprehensive and
ambitious decentralization reforms, which materialized by the adoption of the
National Decentralization Policy in May 2000 and thereafter revised in 2012. The
Policy's objective is to promote good governance, reduction of poverty as well as
efficient, effective, and accountable service delivery. While progress has been
achieved through strengthening the capacities of districts and the territorial
reorganization of decentralized state entities, some challenges still persist. In some
areas, farmers seem to ignore that it is both their right and duty to participate in the
planning and evaluation of local administrative entities’ performance contracts
(Imihigo). It is therefore a real challenge for leaders and civil society to make sure
those citizens are aware of their rights and duties.
Mitigations:
The GoR has enhanced its efforts to prevent corruption by identifying and reducing
vulnerability to corruption. A number of multi stakeholder consultative bodies have
been established, including the National Council to fight against Corruption and
Injustice and Corruption Advisory Councils at national, district, sector, and cell
levels. In order to mitigate the COVID-19 related risks (lockdowns, etc.), over 68%
of the population have been already vaccinated as at July 2022, and the process is
ongoing. This will facilitate implementation of the project and gatherings of
stakeholders for better consultations on emerging issues and possible solutions. In
addition, PSAC and implementing partners (including local administration) will
involve beneficiaries in planning and evaluation of their achievements based on a
grievance redress mechanism.
Macroeconomic
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
3/17
Rwanda’s public-sector led development model has shown limitations, as public
debt has increased significantly in recent years. Rwanda’s heavy reliance on large
public investments (12.3% of GDP in 2019) led to substantial fiscal deficits
financed mainly through external borrowing. Consequently, the debt-to-GDP ratio
rose to 56.7% in 2019 (from 19.4% in 2010) and is estimated to have reached
71.3% of the GDP in 2020. Low domestic savings and high energy costs are some
of the major constraints to private investments. Growth is expected to accelerate to
8.1% in 2022 if the effect of the pandemic on households and businesses wanes,
and to 8.5% in 2023 as the financial services sector and agricultural output pick up.
However, COVID-19 restrictions will likely keep headline growth below trend.
Mitigations:
Regional integration offers significant benefits for the project in particular and for
the country in general including greater potential for economies of scale,
opportunities for learning to export and produce higher-quality goods, and
cooperation to improve trade facilitation. Regional trade will be enhanced by
boosting trade with non- East African Community (EAC) members. The African
continental free trade area (AfCFTA) can boost growth and trade integration. In
addition, experience gained from PRICE in access to international markets will
benefit to PSAC beneficiaries through NAEB as the implementing agency for
PRICE and now for PSAC.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The low bankability of smallholder farmers may lead to financing only those more
familiar with the financial sector, and would deviate the project benefits to the less
vulnerable people (elite capture). 
In addition, while the long-term impact of the Ukraine war is still unknown, the rise
in the cost of fertilizers, fuel and equipment costs like greenhouse materials has
already affected the country and may continue in the next few years. This may
reduce the investment capacity of the target beneficiaries, and at the same time
erode their take-home income if the international selling prices are not adjusted
accordingly.
Mitigations:
It will be critical to work with service providers who have expertise in the promotion
of the interests of the most vulnerable in the financial sector. The project and NAEB
will explore partnerships with those who have a strong experience in Rwanda.
Besides, a strong targeting strategy will be put in place, with favourable conditions
for more vulnerable groups (women, women-headed HHs, youth). 
PSAC will also strive to promote systematically the use of manure vs. inorganic
fertilizers, which should help reduce the burden of increased fertilizers costs. The
greenhouse equipment, foreseen to be co-funded in PSAC through matching
grants, has been budgeted on a high side right at design to avoid under-estimation
and low uptake in the next years.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
The policy environment surrounding PSAC is relatively favorable as laws and
strategies in place are fully supportive of the development of export crops unless
there is another outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic that may limit consultations
among stakeholders.
Mitigations:
The PSTA4 (priority area 3 related to inclusive markets and value addition) as well
as the NAEB Strategic Plan offer an excellent enabling environment for the project.
Policy Development and Implementation
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
4/17
Rwanda being a landlocked and developing country with limited land availability
(0.4ha per HH), faces difficulties in managing logistics issues (such as high air
freight, limited space availability etc. which are important for developing
competitive value chains) and ensuring basic food security (especially for coffee
producers) while justifying exports. Also, smallholders and exporters face
difficulties in accessing affordable as well as easy finance. All these issues pose
risks in developing competitive value chains.
Mitigations:
As a mitigation measure, PSAC will work on critical issues of VC development
through need-based research and creating evidence-based solutions which can be
shared widely as well as used for policy dialogue. While creating evidences
through interventions like HEGF, PBGF, capacity building of PFIs in value chain
financing, developing new financial products etc., it also engages with multiple
stakeholders, including GoR to work on developing smallholder friendly and
competitive value chains through policy advocacy initiatives. A set of policy issues
identified to work towards these aspects cover cost of financing, creating cargo
facility, effective use of development fund for tea farmers, etc.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The environmental vulnerabilities for PSAC activities include erosion, which may
increase due to cultivation on slopes. This will lead to land degradation and
possible siltation of water channels. The current soil fertility conditions entail
increased use of agro-chemicals for the desired levels of production, which will lead
to point pollution in some locations. Current land uses will also pose a risk to
PSAC, as changes will be required in some areas to allow for the infrastructure
development and expansion of cultivation areas.
Mitigations:
The risks resulting from environmental conditions will be managed through the
capacity building of smallholders in environmental management and efficient
resource use, including agro chemicals, erosion control measures such as
vegetated contours, shade trees in cultivation, crop diversification and inter-
cropping and water conservation and focus on rehabilitation and rejuvenation of
existing production areas.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The main climate change risks to reaching the PSAC objectives include rising
temperatures and rainfall variability with more intense rainfall in some areas,
shorter rainy seasons and potential droughts in some locations. High temperatures
may lead to decreased yields and quality, increased pests and diseases
incidences, poor drainage in low-lying areas and soil erosion that results in
reduced water holding capacity and soil fertility.
Mitigations:
Climate change adaptation measures under PSAC include capacity building for the
producers on land husbandry activities and resource use efficiency, agroforestry
belts in tea plantations, protective agriculture for some of the horticulture value
chains, water use efficient irrigation systems and use of improved tea clones and
coffee varieties.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
5/17
Coffee, Tea and selected value chains in Horticulture are identified as priority for
exports by GoR. Tea and coffee are traditional export crops of Rwanda whereas
Horticulture oriented value chains are emerging. Each value chain poses different
kind of risks for smallholders due to certain internal and external factors. Coffee is
prone to high price fluctuation and may have negative impact on food security due
to limited intercropping opportunities and international price fluctuations. Tea takes
longer time to reach to production with full potential and so initial investment in
maintenance is high. Also, the poor road conditions combined with limited means
of transport lead to high post-harvest losses. In case of horticulture, exporters as
well as producers have limited experience of markets and still suffer from limited
quantities of produce demanded by the markets (e.g. macadamia, avocado).
Besides, along all value chains, access to financial services remain a challenge for
smallholder farmers, often limiting their capacity to invest to improve their
competitiveness. PFIs may not consider the proposed PSAC support relevant to
their business model, and the PFIs would continue business as usual and would
not be interested in the support offered.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: PSAC has planned to mitigate potential risks considering all available
opportunities. Its planned interventions include policy advocacy (e.g. for
intercropping banana in coffee plantation), improving infrastructure facilities (e.g.
feeder road in tea pockets), developing backward and forward market facilitation
(e.g. market intelligence, mechanisms to recover part of the loss due to price
fluctuations, enhanced quality assurance to comply with international market
standards), increasing the availability of raw materials through new or rehabilitated
plantations, and formulating appropriate investment schemes to improve the
financial inclusion of smallholder farmers (e.g. matching grants, export guarantee
facilities, credit lines, development of adequate loan products for specific value
chains, revolving fertilizer scheme for tea producers) 
In order to manage critical interventions and build capacity of stakeholders in the
value chain, partnerships with strong and experienced technical support agencies
(Cordaid, Heifer International, etc.) are identified.
Technical Soundness
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
6/17
Risk: 
Price fluctuations in the international markets: Price fluctuations in the international
markets affect exporters as well as smallholders. Rwandan value chain actors are
not using specific mechanism to deal with it. Also, they have limited experience of
horticulture exports. Thus, chances of facing risks related to price fluctuations are
more. The price fluctuation observed in export price of Rwandan coffee from 2012
to 2020 under PRICE project was in the range of -23% to +35%. Some exporters of
chili stopped exporting after experiencing high price fluctuations. Thus, it may pose
a risk against generating sustainable income if negative fluctuation remains
frequently high. This also applies in tea as prices are sensitive to trade volumes
that in turn depend on weather conditions in producing countries. Moreover, prices
are also affected by political stability and policies of importing countries especially if
the exports markets are not concentrated as is the case in Rwanda. For example, it
is notable that Rwanda has not diversified its tea markets as the following
destinations are buying over 68% of total tea i.e. Pakistan (39.8%), United Kingdom
(15.18%), and Kazakhstan (13.8%) 
High mortality of horticulture seedlings: High mortality rate of horticultural seedlings
may jeopardize the plans of development of plantation mainly mango, avocado and
macadamia and thereby affect the Value chain development. The mission has
particularly noted that the existing macadamia seedling survival rate is low,
possibly due to climatic reasons specific to Rwanda 
High cost of packaging materials in horticulture market remains an important issue
raised by the exporters. 
High cost of fertilizers: Fertilizer costs are subject to disruptions in global value
chains as well as fluctuations in exchange rate of local currencies. (see also
fragility and security section) 
Access to finance: For the rural finance activities implemented with PFIs, the
project in its initial years up to MTR will have an inherent risk of limited evidence for
farm-level impact due to the medium/long term nature of the work. 
Limited uptake of HEGF: BRD has been managing PRICE supported Horticulture
Export Guarantee Facility. The fund was set up to contribute in reduction of
collateral related risks and also provided subsidized loan for OPEX. However, the
fund encountered the challenge of low uptake by exporters in spite of the fact that
many exporters showed interest in it. There is a risk if the uptake of the HEGF
continues to remain low reflecting limited scope to engage smallholders in the
export value chains of Horticulture subsector. 
Foreign Currency Exchange fluctuations: Tea is normally traded in USD but
farmers receive payments in RWF. This poses a major risk to their earnings when
the exchange rate is unfavourable.
Mitigations:
7/17
Price fluctuations in the international markets: The issue of price fluctuation can be
mitigated as the exporters develop sufficient experience as well as if they are
provided with sufficient market information / facilitation support. The project plans to
review the horticulture market exploration study conducted under PRICE to
understand comparative advantage for Rwandan exporters for key products - chili,
mango, avocado, French beans etc. This study if updated and shared with
exporters can provide a good idea about right time to put product in market. Also,
two more interventions are planned to address the issue – i) Provision of a market
facilitators who will be posted in key diplomatic missions (UK, Belgium, Dubai,
DRC) to facilitate in-country market intelligence and trade procedures; ii) Promotion
of brands of tea, coffee and horticulture products that display the uniqueness of the
Rwandan produce.
High mortality of horticulture seedlings: This point had been highlighted as one of
the important ‘lessons learnt’ during the PRICE project and also raised during the
mission. Following mitigation measures are suggested and need to considered
during the design phase: (i) Facilitate development community-based nurseries to
reduce risks during transportation and improve accessibility. It will also KM develop
local skills and remedial actions can be available within community; (ii) Nursery
raising will not be stand-alone activity but well linked with plantation demand from
the identified target group; (iii) Considering poor survival rate of Macadamia
seedlings, nursery raising will be split into community as well as private nurseries
with the support of an international expert (from regular and good quality
macadamia seedlings producing country like RSA); (iv) Maintenance of orchards
will be an in-built component of the project, at least for first two years to ensure
critical care of plants at early stage, including with grant support to invest in
Efficient Irrigation Technologies; (v) The plantation work will be properly phased
and plant mortality rates will be reported on annual basis to keep appropriate plan
for mitigation. 
High cost of packaging materials in horticulture: this issue will be addressed
through the Rwanda Horticulture Working Group strategies to organize bulk
purchases and storage. 
High cost of fertilizers: This risk is mildly mitigated by the fact that disruption in
supply chains will also lead to increase in tea prices since tea is normally traded in
USD. At the local level, the industry will be supported to make decisions on whether
the prices in each year are at a level that can guarantee economic returns. In a
year where the benefits cannot be realized, it would not be prudent to import the
fertilizers. Tea farmers will also be encouraged to routinely apply manure on their
farms based on soil analysis results. In addition, a strong emphasis will be put on
the use of manure as opposed to inorganic fertilizers in the horticulture
interventions (see also fragility and security section) 
Access to finance: To ensure appropriate targeting and ability to measure results of
PSAC activities implemented with PFIs, the targeting and lending products will be
in full alignment with the PSAC value chain activities, and a specific M&E approach
will be developed to measure Access to Finance short term and medium-term
outputs and outcomes. 
Limited uptake of HEGF: BRD has already started working on this challenge. It has
conducted a survey of 22 exporters (out of 40 horticultural exporters in the country)
and identified issues as well as provided recommendations. The recommendations
include - awareness generation among PFIs about banking facilities for exporters,
technical support to exporters (on issues such as cost structuring, book keeping,
business management, preparation of bankable proposals etc.) and multi
stakeholder response for policy advocacy on high air freight and sufficient
availability of airline transport / cargo facility. PSAC will support BRD to address
these issues, enhance experience of exporters in dealing with markets, build
capacity of PFIs in value chain financing to exporters and also engage with multi-
stakeholders for advocacy. It has proposed to extend HEGF for CAPEX, thus
covering major needs of exporters. 
Foreign Currency Exchange fluctuations: this is another topic to be addressed at
policy level. PSAC will leverage on the optimization of the farmers’ 5% contribution
to the tea development fund, so as to ensure stabilized take-home income when the
RWF/USD exchange rate is not favourable.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Substantial
Moderate
Implementation Arrangements
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Limited technical capacity, governance and institutional capacities of project
stakeholders can lead to slow disbursement, lower project benefits as well as
delays in implementation. 
Restrictions related to COVID-19 pandemic may prevent movement to target areas
and sustained in-field presence.
8/17
Mitigations:
Overall, NAEB has already acquired a solid experience of implementing IFAD
projects through the 9-year PRICE project. 
The PSAC team at NAEB will be filled with competent and experienced staff
recruited on competitive basis. Proximity services and monitoring will be ensured
via NAEB Focal Persons in each target district, as well as direct engagement with
local authorities, esp. district and sector agronomists. Besides, NAEB and other
Government institutions have put in place mechanisms to hold virtual meetings in
case of COVID-19-related restrictions. Vaccination rate in Rwanda is among the
highest in Africa, and the Government is aiming at 100% vaccination among public
servants.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The PRICE M&E showed following constraints and risks: 
(i) The focus of the M&E system was on generation of quantitative data where as
project had to depend on external studies for qualitative data and there was no
specific plan for compiling qualitative data. Therefore, the team continued
implementation without clear idea about qualitative progress. For a large project
with centralised M&E system, not having key qualitative data poses risks e.g. high
mortality of horticultural seedlings came to light almost at the end of the project and
the team missed a chance to take corrective actions. 
(ii) The increased load at SPIU (one officer managing multiple projects) led to weak
M&E of PRICE 
(iii) Lack of organized sharing of information in terms of regular learning events with
external agencies/stakeholders to explore the possibilities of engaging with others
and awareness generation among selected target group for promotion of
successful ideas.
Mitigations:
9/17
The lessons learned from PRICE have guided the implementation modalities and
organizational framework of PSAC: 
(i) A comprehensive system with regular compilation of quantitative as well as
qualitative data which can guide the implementation team will be developed. The
qualitative data collection method will have appropriate tools to maintain
consistency of data collection and analysis e.g., Annual performance assessment
of enterprise-oriented producer organizations 
(ii) A dedicated M&E Specialist will be allocated to the project, who will work closely
with the implementation team. 
(iii) Knowledge management and sharing will have a plan to include annual learning
events, spread of project messages for wider audience and ensuring key learnings
to be put into practice on regular basis. NAEB team will benefit from other IFAD
learning events within the country and region through exchange of learning and
developing better understanding about systems and M&E aspects. 
(iv) The project will build the capacity of M&E Staff as well as entire programme
implementation team through training and on the job learning (during initial period)
to make them well versed with the system and data collection and its use. The team
will need IFAD support to learn IFAD M&E manual, good practices in other
countries which could be tried out under PSAC (use of ICT), IFAD COI guidelines in
planning the exercises. 
(v) Inclusion of periodic qualitative information collection methods in the M&E
system can allow a full understanding of the reason behind some quantitative
results and facilitate planning of timely appropriate remedial measures. Some
specific qualitative tools will be used such as annual assessment of cooperatives
(to understand capacity building needs - to be carried out by Cordaid), annual
survey on horticulture plant mortality along with analysis of reasons and remedial
actions etc. Considering the need, additional FGDS may be conducted. During the
PRICE project, high mortality of horticultural seedlings came to light almost at the
end of the project and the team missed the chance to take corrective actions. If
periodic quantitative information on mortality percentages are linked with qualitative
analysis to identify the reason, the risk will be reduced.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Under the aegis of MNAGRI, NAEB will be the LPA. However, the SPIU of IFAD
funded portfolio is currently established under RAB (the LPA for all other on-going
IFAD’s projects). Each on-going project has 1 dedicated Accountant, hired and
located at RAB, reporting the SPIU-Finance Manager. Moreover, PSAC will enlarge
the portfolio managed by the SPIU bringing extra workload. Considering the above,
there is a risk that un-clarity in the reporting lines as well as logistical set up and
increasing portfolio complexity may lead to non-adequate FM organizational
arrangements.
Mitigations:
2 accountant will be hired by NAEB and funded by PSAC. Both will report
hierarchically to NAEB-CFO with a functional reporting line to SPIU-Finance
Manager: 1 will be logistically located at NAEB to closely support PSAC
technical/operational staff and overlooking the related transactions; 1 will be located
RAB mainly to overlook all other PSAC transactions coordinated by the SPIU and,
partially, to provide ad hoc support to the SPIU-Finance Manager in its coordination
role of the entire IFAD portfolio. FM capacity on IFAD’s practices will be rapidly built
counting on the experience of the SPIU and on the learning programmes provided
IFAD
Project Budgeting
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low budget credibility due to unrealistic estimates and un-clarity in roles and
responsibilities in the planning process. Moreover, risk in timely budget submission
to IFAD due to alignment to country procedures for national budget submission to
Parliament.
Mitigations:
10/17
the budget planning process is generated by PSAC Operational Team with the
contribution of the SPIU in its coordination and evaluation role. PSAC draft budget,
as part of MINAGRI budget, is presented in the national envelope to Parliament on
April. Therefore, it is crucial that final revisions are immediately agreed for
submission to IFAD no later than mid-May (about 1 month and a half earlier than
the end of the fiscal year). The new AWPB will be prepared with a minimum
quarterly phasing (i) to sharply monitor any duplication of activities with the closing
AWPB, and (ii) to prepare an adequate liquidity plan, by quarters, to support on
time and in full the implementation of the project.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The complex organizational structure impose operational clarity to ensure timely
flow of resources to PSAC. Moreover, the lack of a solid liquidity plan associated to
the AWPB as well as prompt/regular submission of WA may disrupt access to
funds and delay implementation.
Mitigations:
the Funds Flow chart (annexed to Design Reports) clearly outlines key
responsibilities (i) to authorise opening of bank accounts (MINECOFIN), (ii) to
authorise signatories to operate bank accounts (MINAGRI), (iii) to authorise
persons entitled to submit WAs to IFAD via the ICP portal, (iv) to provide credentials
to operate the IFMIS for accounting entries and payments approval (MINECOFIN).
Moreover, quarterly submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFR) inclusive of cash
forecast for next two quarter will ensure prompt liquidity phasing along both solar
and fiscal year. 1 DA (in USD) and 1 PA (in FRW) will be opened at National Bank
of Rwanda (NBR). Similarly, 1 additional PA (in FRW) will be opened at NBR to
receive GoR cash contribution. Implementing partners, through MoUs and strong
reporting framework, will secure that funds finance by IFAD will flow to beneficiaries
for the intended purposes of the programme and that any residual fund will be
returned to IFAD through PSAC.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The organizational set up with cross reporting lines may pose challenges to the
internal control flow.
Mitigations:
All PSAC transactions will be authorised by the SPIU-Finance Manager, the SPIU-
Coordinator and NAEB-CFO as ultimate approver. NAEB-CFO will eventually
delegate the authority to approve transactions to the SPIU-Coordinator within
defined ceiling amounts. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be chaired by
MINAGRI and co-chaired by NAEB and RAB. Moreover, the supporting activities
carried out by the SPIU in its coordination role to PSAC will include: (i) contribution
to budget planning, evaluation and monitoring, (ii) budget execution and treasury
management, (iii) financial reporting to Government and IFAD, (iv) IFMIS
implementation and customization, (v) coordination of internal/external audit, (vi)
compliance with IFAD’s processes and procedures and (vii) securing FM
operational continuity relating the opening and the closing of projects.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
11/17
The government IFMIS, mandatory for donor’s funded project, has just been
customised (May 2022) to be compliant with IFAD’s minimum accounting/reporting
requirements by component/expenditure category/financier. This is expected to
reduce the excessive manual accounting/reporting operations prone to
inaccuracies and errors, with immediate impact on management decision making
and bottlenecks in the processing of WA from IFAD. The SPIU is not capturing yet
in-kind co-financing and this may lead to an underestimation of the targets as well
as of the overall resources mobilised by PSAC.
Mitigations:
PSAC will benefit from the on-going IFMIS customization led by MINECOFIN. The
Chart of Account has just been modified and tested to receive entries by
component/categories/financier, and the SPIU will start to use it on June. This first
step is fundamental for the short term: it will allow to extract from IFMIS reliable
transaction lists which will more effectively feed into manual reports. In the medium
term, further customization is expected to automatically generate reports from the
IFMIS, as a reliable ring-fenced system. As shared with the Auditor General, during
the mission, the SPIU will start a journey on IKC mapping/evaluation/reporting,
based on criteria/procedures incorporated into PIM, in order to report IKC in the
Notes to the Financial Statements.
Project External Audit
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that PSAC accounts and internal controls are not adequately audited is
low
Mitigations:
The internal audit to PSAC will be secured by the Internal Audit Office dedicated to
the SPIU, established at RAB under the aegis of MINAGRI. The IA function will
report to the PSC. Concerning the external audit, PSAC will follow the example of
the ongoing projects that are all being audited by the Office of the Auditor General
as mandated under the government act/law. IFAD’s review on the quality of the
OAG reports for existing projects indicate highly satisfactory performance ratings,
with positive comments given for the level of detail of the audits and use of
acceptable standards (INTOSAI).
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
The PSAC Procurement Risk Matrix did not identify any specific risks connected to
the legal and regulatory framework. Public procurement in Rwanda is subject to
Law no. 62/2018 governing public procurement, Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC
of 19/05/2020 establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, Standard Bidding
Documents and Standard Contracts. In addition, the Rwanda Public Procurement
Authority (RPPA) has prepared a Standard Manual for Public Procurement (Public
Procurement User Guide) for the benefit of procuring entities, and it sets out all the
public procurement guidelines, procurement methods to be applied and the
thresholds.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
12/17
The 2017 PEFA assessed the effectiveness of the procurement systems, which
was deemed to be aligned to international standards and acceptable to IFAD. The
only limitation relating to procurement was on ‘public access to procurement
information’, which has now been addressed with the recent introduction of
Rwanda’s online E-procurement system (UMUCYO, accessible here:
umucyo.gov.rw). This is an online portal and a point of access for Rwanda PEs,
allowing to negotiate better contractual terms, realize savings and achieve value for
money. It enhances transparency and standardization of electronic documents,
supplier registration, authentication of information and streamlines all elements of
public procurement transactions. The SPIU is now registered into the E-
procurement system, where the procurement plan is uploaded, and all procurement
related actions are posted online for interested parties to view. The programme will
support the SPIU in terms of technical assistance through supervision and
implementation support missions.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Transparency International scored Rwanda 53/100 on the Corruption Perception
Index for calendar year 2021.
Mitigations:
Accountability and transparency risks will be mitigated by IFAD supervision and
implementation support missions. Additionally, all procurement entities, as well as
bidders, suppliers, contractors, consultants and service providers, shall observe the
highest standard of ethics during the procurement and execution of contracts
financed under IFAD funded Projects, in accordance with paragraph 69 of the IFAD
Project Procurement Guidelines. The Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud
and Corruption in its Activities and Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors
and third parties, in addition to the relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
IFAD requires that the Government agency should have a Procurement Unit with at
least 2 staff members at the design stage. The National Agriculture Export
Development Board (NAEB) has a Procurement Unit which is under the Chief
Finance Officer (CFO). The Unit has one Procurement Officer who handles all
procurement related work and is also secretary to the Tender Committee.
Mitigations:
A Procurement Officer will be recruited to support the procurement functions for
PSAC and will be reporting to the Head of Procurement of the SPIU. The
Procurement Officer’s procurement related responsibilities will therefore be
supervised by the Head of Procurement of SPIU. At the NAEB institutional level, for
the purposes of maintaining sound administrative oversight, the Procurement
Officer will be supervised by the NAEB Chief Finance Officer.
Risk:
Procurement Methods
The procurement methods for goods and works are generally consistent with
IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines except at the level of thresholds for
shopping. According to the national thresholds, any procurement activity whose
value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be
carried out via open competitive bidding.
Low
Low
Mitigations:
The thresholds are established under law i.e. the Ministerial Order no.
002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement.
Efficiencies will be realized through use of e-procurement to reduce paperwork
turnaround.
13/17
Risk:
Procurement Planning
A small issue noted is that the procurement plan in the e-procurement platform is
different from IFADs format and does not have provision for planned and actual
rows.
Mitigations:
The PSAC project will use IFAD procurement plan framework in developing the PP
for the project
Low
Low
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The Tender Committee of NAEB is not ad-hoc but has been established according
to the law governing public procurement management in Rwanda is Law n°
62/2018 of 25/08/2018 and Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020
establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, which establishes that the Chief
Budget Manager of every procuring entity must appoint a public tender committee
for a term of 3 years, which may be renewed only once.
Mitigations:
For the PSAC project, there will be a specific Tender Committee which will be
constituted to serve the project. It is expected that the Committee will comprise
technical staff that are key in the implementation of the project. Tender Committee
will be appointed as per the law governing public procurement
Risk:
Procurement Methods:
The procurement methods for goods and works are generally consistent with
IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines except at the level of thresholds for
shopping. According to the national thresholds, any procurement activity whose
value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be
carried out via open competitive bidding.
Mitigations:
The thresholds are established under law i.e. the Ministerial Order no.
002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement.
Efficiencies will be realized through use of e-procurement to reduce paperwork
turnaround.
Risk:
Procurement Planning:
A small issue noted is that the procurement plan in the e-procurement platform is
different from IFADs format and does not have provision for planned and actual
rows.
Mitigations:
The PSAC project will use IFAD procurement plan framework in developing the PP
for the project
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk:
Procurement Processes:
14/17
The Tender Committee of NAEB is not ad-hoc but has been established according
to the law governing public procurement management in Rwanda is Law n°
62/2018 of 25/08/2018 and Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020
establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, which establishes that the Chief
Budget Manager of every procuring entity must appoint a public tender committee
for a term of 3 years, which may be renewed only once.
Mitigations:
For the PSAC project, there will be a specific Tender Committee which will be
constituted to serve the project. It is expected that the Committee will comprise
technical staff that are key in the implementation of the project. Tender Committee
will be appointed as per the law governing public procurement.
Risk:
Contract Administration and Management:
Approval thresholds for contract amendments are established in law and only
amendments of up to 20% are therefore allowed. 
The other contract management issue observed is that works contracts are
supervised by the relevant Departments of the Ministry of Infrastructure as the work
involved may apply. An important point noted is that most works contracts are
undertaken using force Account.
Mitigations:
For the PSAC project IFAD will require that Force Account be used only when the
size, nature and location of the works make competitive bidding unsuitable; the
Fund is satisfied that the construction facilities of the borrower are adequate and
efficient; and the borrower has the capability to do the work expeditiously at a
reasonable cost.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Moderate
Moderate
The expansion of cultivation areas is likely to have adverse impacts on biodiversity
conservation depending on the current use of the land to which the expansion will
occur. Additional risks also result from the infrastructure development that will also
potentially entail land use change and clearance of vegetation.
Mitigations:
The expansion of cultivation areas will target degraded areas that can be
rehabilitated as much as possible. The expansion and infrastructure development
will be in non-sensitive areas and rehabilitation will be promoted in areas where
vegetation will be removed.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Activities targeting improved productivity will result in increased use of agro-
chemicals and water resources for the different value chains. The increased use of
agro-chemicals will result in point pollution for the land and some water sources.
Mitigations:
The capacity building for the smallholders will include optimal use of agrochemicals
with safe handling and disposal. Water resource use efficiency will be promoted
through the soil and water conservation activities as well as the efficient irrigation
systems.
15/17
PSAC will comply with FAO international Code of Conduct on Pesticide
Management as well as national pest management standards, whichever is the
more stringent.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The expansion of agricultural production areas envisaged for the different PSAC
value chains may result in encroachment on areas of cultural heritage.
Mitigations:
The project will focus on the rejuvenation and rehabilitation of areas already under
production. The screening of any areas for expansion will ensure that project
activities are not undertaken in any cultural heritage areas.
Indigenous People
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The PSAC areas do not include Indigenous peoples areas. The project target
communities will include vulnerable and marginalized groups.
Mitigations:
The targeting approach of the PSAC will ensure the inclusion of vulnerable and
marginalized community members. The GALS has been applied in the Rwanda
portfolio and can contribute to ensuring social inclusion in PSAC.
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The working conditions for the seasonal labour are reportedly sub-optimal in most
locations. The working conditions of any migrant workforce for the infrastructure
development may also be below expected standards.
Mitigations:
Efforts will be made through the project ESMP to monitor the working conditions of
the seasonal labour. The contracts for the infrastructure development contractors
will include specific clauses on ensuring adequate working conditions.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Seasonal labour in some of the PSAC value chains may be exposed to health and
safety risks. While potential migrant labour for the infrastructure development may
increase the risks on community health.
Mitigations:
Capacity building will be provided for the seasonal labour that may be engaged in
PSAC activities. The Environment and Social Management Plans at the
infrastructure sites will include monitoring on health and safety aspects.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
No physical resettlement is expected to result from the PSAC activities. Economic
resettlement may occur in areas where land use change will result from PSAC
activities.
16/17
Mitigations:
The screening of the PSAC activities will ensure no physical resettlement occurs
and any economic resettlement will be minimized. Besides, PSAC is actually
expected to reduce migration to some level as more people will get jobs locally and
follow comparatively less risky work due to project interventions, including capacity
building.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
The PSAC activities will not result in any significant increase in greenhouse gases.
Mitigations:
The use of shade trees, agro-forestry and perennial tree crops that are targeted
under PSAC will contribute to greenhouse gas reduction. The capacity building for
the smallholders will ensure optimal use and therefore minimal GHG emissions.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
The PSAC activities will not increase the vulnerability of the target populations and
their ecosystems to climate change.
Mitigations:
Climate change adaptation measures such as protective agriculture, use of shade
trees and resource use efficiency have been integrated in PSAC and therefore the
project is expected to improve the resilience of the target beneficiaries and the
ecosystems in the target areas.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Producer organizations, exporters and PFIs are the key stakholders that project is
focusing on. Some of the identified risks for each of these are: 
Performance of producer organization may remain poor due to – weak internal
governance in some of the groups, limited experience of managing enterprises and
engagment with exporters, lack of knowledge about product quality requirements,
neglection to role of women and youth, limited access to finance and poor
infrastructure (road and transportation facilities) 
PFIs may not respond to improving access to value chain financing due to – their
risk averse nature, lack of knowledge and tools for value chain financing, issues of
liquidity, limited or no expeience of dealing with exporters (especially true for MFIs).
Performance of exporters may not be competitive due to - limited experience of
export (esp. true for horticulture), weak enterprise management systems (e.g.
record keeping), limitations in handling issues of logistics, weak market information,
financial constraints, diffculties in producing product of export quality and at scale. 
As the project is moving ahead from PRICE and focusing on competitiveness of
value chains, the response of GoR as a major stakeholder is crucial. Gaps in its
response may lead to poor outcome.
Mitigations:
17/17
PSAC has planned mitigations through capacity building of stakeholders along with
market oriented coordination and facilitation. It is engaging technical partner
agencies (e.g. Cordaid) to strengthen skills and capacities. It will carry out regular
assessment of producer organizations and also develop capacity building modules
(around possible risk causing issues). It will attempt to create smallholder power in
markets through aggregation and reduce vunerability of individual / small groups of
smallholders. It is also ensuring representation of smallholders in multiple
stakeholders forums (such as sector working groups). 
The project will work with identified PFIs and build their capacity of assessing value
chains and develop understanding about financing needs. To reduce risks, it has
created performance based grant facility, horticulture export guarantee facility and
also helping PFI to try out innovative finnacial products. It is also enagaging PFIs
with diffrerent credit lines to reduce the risks of liquidity. 
For exporters, the plan is to provide market facilitation to reduce the risks of
unsettled bills from unscrupulous buyers and provide market inteligence. It
provides opportunity for exporters to directly engage with producers / producer
groups and train them about produvct quality, export requirement, certifications etc.
so that strong and sustainable supply chain developed. 
The project will be operated in close association with Ministry of Agriculture and
NAEB which will help in influencing key stakeholders to address key policy
advoccay issues in line with National Agricultural policy and PSTA 4.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Potential conflicts may arise among members of Producer Organizations, between
outside workers and local community, between smallholder producers and off-
takers/exporters, etc. In this situation, Grievance procedures are required to ensure
that Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are able to lodge complaints or concerns,
without cost, and with the assurance of a timely and satisfactory resolution of the
issue. The procedures also ensure that the entitlements are effectively transferred
to the intended beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) will be put in place at PO level
(cooperatives, community-based nurseries, outgrower schemes, Coffee Washing
Stations CWS, tea factories, etc.). The entry point for GRM will be NAEB focal
persons at district level and the Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will be
appointed to follow up the GRM process. A Free Prior and Informed Consent
(FPIC) process will be conducted with those POs ahead of any project investment
that may affect the target beneficiaries.
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 10: Exit strategy 
A. Approach towards the exit strategy:  
The Project’s Exit Strategy is embedded in the strategic approach of:  
(i)  working  directly  with  the  Government’s  National  Agricultural  Export  Development 
Board in charge of PSAC target value chains, as well as with agricultural structures at 
district  and  sector  levels  to  maintain  proximity  services.  The  strategic  partnership 
NAEB with other donor agencies (World Bank, KOICA, USAID etc.) will help to develop 
synergy of interventions benefiting PSAC participants during and after its completion.  
(ii)  identifying  critical  areas  of  strengthening  in  the  value  chain  at  the  planning  stage 
itself.  In  the  market  chain,  it  will  build  capacity  of  each  category  of  stakeholder 
(empowered  producers’  organizations  through  improved  governance  operational 
effectiveness  and  participation  of  women  and  youth.  proximity  service  providers, 
strengthened exporters etc.), so that they can gain and apply knowledge, access to 
resources and interconnect to develop a strong chain. It will promote gender equality 
and youth engagement in terms of their participation and representation as leaders in 
the VC through proper targeting mechanism and effective application of GALS+ in FFS. 
(iii)  improving the competitiveness of export-driven value chains while creating power (or 
is it reliability) in markets for smallholders to provide the direction for sustainability 
of  its  interventions.  Towards  this,  it  plans  to  work  on  enhancing  productivity, 
production at scale, quality and strong market linkages development. These tangible 
indicators  will  be  realized  through  enabled  (or  empowered)  human  resources  (as 
indicated in point 2) supported by appropriate  infrastructure and  equipment, tailor-
made financial services and smallholder friendly policies. The project interventions will 
play  the  role  of  strengthening  and  stabilizing  market  forces  using  appropriate 
mitigation measures and climate-smart technologies  
(iv) developing  a  plan  of  completing  major  project  activities  in  the  4th  and  5th  year  of 
implementation. It will leave a window of 1 - 2 years for consolidation of activities and 
start a “gradual exit” process which can be completed by the end of the 6th year. This 
window shall ensure that there is sufficient technical and managerial capacity as well 
motivation  of  the  project  beneficiaries  and  service  providers  to  continue  with  the 
activities after the project is over. In order to facilitate the process, PSAC will develop 
its draft exit plan and share during the mid-term review.  
Thus, as an exit strategy, it will leave behind enabled (empowered) community, efficient 
and effective institutions (at local and national level), mainstreamed project 
interventions with government institutions and markets as well as developed positive 
policy environment for smallholders.  
B. Sustainability of the Exit Strategy: 
The details of PSAC’s sustainability plan considering five dimensions is explained below:  
1. Institutional sustainability: PSAC interventions are well aligned with NAEB’s mission, 
and government’s development strategies. The main VCs viz. Tea, coffee and Horticulture 
along with essential oils supported through PSAC are  on priority list of NAEB’s  strategic 
plan  (2019-24)  -  ‘Increasing  Agro-Export  Revenue’.  While  designing  the  PSAC  project, 
NAEB along with design mission team have identified possibilities of synergy with other 
projects viz. CDAT, KOICA, USAID, WFP etc. in the country e.g., upcoming CDAT project 
of the World Bank to support solar chili dryers and RAB to continue its applied research to 
release improved chili varieties. Rwanda based international agencies Cordaid and Heifer 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
international  have  partnered  with  PSAC  which  will  have  positive  impact  on  quality  of 
programme. Also, project’s partnership with BDR (for HEGF) and BDF (for PBGM). Such 
an  institutional  support  provides  enabling  environment  for  sustainability  of  initiatives 
during the project implementation period and even after the project period.  
PSAC’s  ownership  at  grass  root  remains  with  District  team  who  play  the  central  role  to 
ensure  smooth  implementation,  monitoring  and  coordination  of  PSAC  interventions.  It 
ensures  continuous  and  sustainable  extension  services  that  will  further  protect  the 
project’s investments. 
Simultaneously  PSAC  will  support  development  of  VC  platforms  and  working  groups  for 
multi-stakeholder  engagement  such  as  district  level  VC  platforms  for  Horticulture  VC, 
capacity  building  of  CEPAR  and  guideline  on  banana-coffee  intercropping  (to  feed  into 
Rwanda Agricultural law) for Coffee VC and support for development and use of national 
level information platforms (national tea register, national tea brand and e-commerce) in 
tea VC. These platforms / working groups and information systems will bind the multiple 
actors and may emerge as a new force to take forward the project initiatives in which VC 
stakeholders have a lead role.   
2.  Social  sustainability  (Empowerment):  In  order  to  sustain  the  VC  development 
efforts,  PSAC’s  approach  is  organizing  smallholders  in  groups,  engage  with  women  and 
youth and simultaneously build skills and capacities of the local cadre. PSAC is investing 
in capacity building of smallholder coffee, tea and horticulture co-operatives  specifically 
focusing on governance, farm/production management and representation of women and 
youth. The cadre of resource persons mainly women and youth in the form of lead farmers 
(who  will  facilitate  FFS),  common  services  champions,  seedlings  suppliers,  GALS+ 
champions,  internal  inspectors  for  certification  etc.  across  all  the  VCs  will  enable 
smallholders  to  engage  in  VC  actors  independently.  This  approach  will  also  enable 
smallholder to create their strong foot print in the VCs. The GALS+ will be implemented 
through  FFS  and  facilitating  GALS+  champions  to  participate  in  VC  platforms,  co-
operatives,  working  groups  etc.  to  create  awareness  about  gender  equality  and  ensure 
women’s representation.  
3.  Technical  sustainability:  In  order  to  ensure  competitiveness  of  the  VCs,  technical 
sustainability is crucial. PSAC will strive to achieve it through development and efficient 
delivery of services viz. extension, production, logistics, aggregation / processing, quality 
control and financial access. The extension  services  are mainly provided by district and 
sector technical teams through FFS and its associated Proximity coaches and lead farmers. 
Also, Private sector companies will engage with producers and producer groups to provide 
technical  advisory  services  e.g.  Rwanda  Nuts  providing  technical  advisory  services  to 
macadamia  farmers  using  their  own  resources.  Across  all  VCs,  the  aggregation 
responsibility remains with the community cooperatives and groups while working in close 
association with private sector companies.  
In case of quality control there are issues related to lack of accreditation and dependence 
on external human resources for international certification e.g. organic certification.  PSAC 
is supporting NAEB’s existing testing facilities to be accredited and also developing a cadre 
of 30 youth to work as internal inspectors for providing certification related services and a 
few will develop the capacity to work as certified auditors. This new cadre of trained youth 
along  with  accredited  facilities  will  ensure  the  sustainability  of  certification  processes 
beyond PSAC. 
The investment support will be provided to establish avocado grading line, hangers for tea 
and coffee, parabolic solar dryers for coffee, protective agriculture system for chili etc. to 
improve the product quality and operational efficiency. The digital systems will be used to 
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ensure transparency in green leaf collection and payments in tea VC and also to facilitate 
traceability in coffee VC. PSAC will develop capacity of local human resources to operate, 
maintain  and  manage  these  equipment  and  digital information  systems.  Specifically  for 
protective agriculture, it will develop linkages with HCoE, the in-country unit for training 
farmers and operators on technical aspects.  
Further  to  this,  integration  of  food  crops  in  the  coffee  and  horticulture  farming  system 
shall  enhance  the  sustainability  of  production  by  acting  as  cushion  against  food  and 
nutrition insecurity when prices are in their lowest and giving opportunity for investment 
from proceeds when prices are good and there are savings from food that is available in 
their farms.  
4.  Economic  and  financial  sustainability:  The  economic  and  financial  sustainability 
depends on three factors – productivity (improved yield and reducing post-harvest losses), 
scale of operation and access to finance.  The strategies for sustainable improvement of 
productivity  involves  use  of  high  yielding  seedlings,  application  of  better  agronomic 
practices,  improved  field  logistics,  infilling  /  gap  filling  of  seedlings,  application  of  good 
quality manure and adequate fertilizers etc. These interventions are supported by nursery 
raising, input support (including fertilizer revolving scheme for tea and inputs package for 
new  plantation  of  coffee  and  horticulture),  aggregation  through  producers’  groups  / 
cooperatives  (including  critical  infrastructure  support  for  tea  and  coffee)  to  ensure 
increased productivity. The project interventions are focused on selected districts (selected 
sectors  for  tea  and  coffee)  and  emphasis  has  been  given  on  consolidated  plantation 
(targeting mainly smallholders) to achieve the scale of production.  
PSAC has market-oriented approach towards financing. It has made provision for 100 per 
cent grant for infrastructure development (tea and coffee hangars, avocado grading line, 
soil and water testing kits etc. It has identified gaps and planned to support – a) HEGF for 
exporters b) PBGF for small and medium scale investment c) adaptation / development of 
financial  products  (for  leasing  and  climate  smart  agriculture)  and  tools  (digital  credit 
assessment tool, incorporating climate parameters in credit assessment etc.) focusing on 
needs of smallholder and MFIs/SACCOs. With basic infrastructure in-place and improved 
access to finance, PSAC interventions will become more market oriented.  
5.  Environmental  sustainability  and  climate  change:  The  component  of 
environmental  sustainability  and  climate  change  is  well  integrated  in  the  PSAC’s  VC 
interventions.  The  core  work  will  be  taken  up  through  FFS  in  which  proximity  coaches, 
field  production  assistants  and  lead  farmers  will  be  trained  climate  smart  agricultural 
practices and certification aspects. These community based local resource persons along 
with  sector  and  district  agronomist  will  facilitate  natural  resources  management  at  the 
grassroots  level  and  increase  awareness  among  community  members  about  GAP  and 
certification processes. Thus, sharing of knowledge with community and providing more 
responsibility to manage at grassroots level ensures the continuity of work.  
Various  climate  smart  technologies  viz.  parabolic  solar  dryer  for  coffee,  palintest  kit  for 
soil on coffee farms and waste water analysis from CWS to educate community about its 
use  and  effectiveness  whereas  technology  like  EIT  for  horticulture  will  be  promoted 
through  PBFG.  The  approach  will  make  community  aware  about  new  technologies  and 
motivates  them  to  invest.  In  case  of  tea  VC,  farmers  will  be  developing  agroforestry 
development for supplying wood to tea factories as well undertaking trials on zero tillage 
practices. The approach will bring environment sustainability in factories operations and 
farmers will also generate additional income.    
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Managing international price  fluctuations  related  to  climate  change  is  still  a  challenging 
task.  However,  PSAC  through  its  strategic  partner  Cordaid  has  planned  to  strengthen 
capacity  of  FIs  in  climate  resilience  finance,  integration  of  climate  indicators  in  credit 
assessment,  pilot  testing  of  climate  smart  financial  products  and  explore  possibility  of 
upscaling of successful products.  
C. Other aspects of the Exit Strategy:  
1. Scaling-up: The scaling-up of selected project interventions / approaches for greater 
impact on the sector includes: a) balanced review of each value chain in terms of export 
volumes and value on one hand and the footprint of target group (smallholders, women 
and youth) created in the value chain on the other hand. The footprint includes the scale 
of engagement of the target group, their leadership at various components of the value 
chain and feasibility of value created for them; b) potential for maintaining a private sector 
driven approach for scaling up with a central place for aggregators and buyers (exporters); 
c) possibility of ensuring government support in terms of associated policies and creation 
of infrastructure facilities/ support services. One of the important indicators of its selected 
VC  becoming  part  of  the  NAEB’s  strategic  plan  for  2025-2030;  d)  Access  to  affordable 
finance to all actors engaged in the chain so that scaling up can be smooth.  
2. Challenges/ risks to exit strategy: When the VC is being implemented in a project 
mode,  the  key  risk  is  seriousness  towards  actual  implementation  of  the  exit  plan  itself 
among  the  players.  In  order  to  make  the  exit  strategy  a  reality,  the  role  of  each  actor 
(including community groups, private sector players) in the strategy needs to be defined 
and  discussed  through  VC  platforms,  FFS  and  project  management.  In  order  to  boost 
production and productivity, PSAC is making major investments in the plantation of coffee, 
tea,  avocado,  macadamia.  Failure  to  limit  the  mortality  rate  within  prescribed  limits  in 
early stages of the project will affect the overall exit plan. The PSAC team should conduct 
annual mortality surveys from the beginning of the project and follow appropriate remedial 
plans. Also, development of financial services for PSAC VCs are critical for implementation 
of the exit plan.  
3. Monitoring the process of the Exit Strategy: Tracking of the progress – Successful 
establishment  of  plantation,  development  of  financial  services,  facilitation  of  contracts 
between FOs and buyers and ensuring sufficient export demand are the critical factors to 
be  tracked  from  the  beginning  of  the  project.  The  formal  exit  strategy  to  be  developed 
during  the  Mid-term  and  spearheaded  by  NAEB  will  include  timelines,  resource 
implications, responsibilities, scaling-up areas, constraints in successful exit, etc. It needs 
to be reviewed every six-months by the project team.  
4 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender Transformative
 Youth Sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition Sensitive
 Persons with Disabilities
 Indigenous Peoples
 Climate Finance
 Adaptive Capacity
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies,
 National youth policies,
strategies and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
strategies and actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and
opportunities by youth
group
 National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
 Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
 National policies,
strategies and actors
 Main groupings among
PwDs
 Context-based barriers
and opportunities for PwDs
 International standards,
national policies, strategies
and key IPs' organizations
 Main IPs communities,
demographic, social, cultural
and political characteristics
 Important livelihoods
constraints and opportunities
for IPs and their cultural
heritage
Theory of
change
Logframe
indicators
 Gender policy objectives
 Pathways to youth
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Gender transformative
 Youth employment
pathways
 Policy engagement on
included in project
objectives/activities
GEWE
 Outreach disaggregated
 Outreach
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Women are > 40% of
outreach beneficiaries
 IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
disaggregated by sex,
youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Persons with new
jobs/employment
opportunities (CI 2.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth
activities
 Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
activities
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
 Pathways to PwDs’
 Pathways to IPs'
socioeconomic empowerment
using a twin-track approach
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Targeted support to
improve nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Outcome level CIs
 CI 1.2.8 MDDW
 CI 1.2.9 KAP
 Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition
activities
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, disability and
IPs (if appropriate)
 Outreach indicator
disaggregated by sex, youth
and IPs
 IPs are > 30% of target
beneficiaries
 Staff with disability
inclusion-specific TORs
 Funds for disability
inclusion-related activities
(including accessibility)
 Staff with IPs-specific
TORs
 Funds for IPs related
activities, including FPIC
$7,220,000
$0
$7,220,000
IFAD
Adaptation
Finance
IFAD
Mitigation
Finance
Total IFAD
Climate-
focused
Finance
ECG
Remarks
Gender
The project intends to be gender transformative and has included measures to meet the criteria
2/2
Nutrition
Youth
The project intends to be youth sensitive and appropriate measures are included to meet the criteria
Persons with Disabilities
Indigenous Peoples
☐ No social inclusion themes
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 12 Brief Value Chain Analysis and Rationale for selection of Coffee, Tea and
Selected Horticulture Crop Value chains
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 12: Brief Value Chain Analysis and Rationale for selection of Coffee, Tea 
and Selected Horticulture Crop Value chains 
1.0 
Coffee:  
1.1 Summary Global Perspective of Coffee Demand: Coffee market size was valued 
at US$ 104.22 Billion in 2020 and projected to reach US$ 152.92 Billion by 2028 growing 
at a CAGR of 4.5 per cent from 2021 to 2028. Coffee demand is rising in emerging regions, 
with exports at the forefront of the supply chain. Coffee will continue to be a popular daily 
beverage in consumer diets around the world in the next years, but its consumption levels 
are  unlikely  to  reach  new  highs.  Coffee  output  is  also  likely  to  benefit  from  attractive 
government subsidies aimed at encouraging cash crop growth1. 
It is estimated that consumers drink 2.6 billion cups of coffee daily. Leading consumers 
are in Europe led by Finland (12 kg/capita/year) and Norway (9.9kg/capita/year). The top 
five  leading  importers  of  Rwanda  coffee  consumption  rates  are  Switzerland  at 
9Kg/capita/year;  UK  at  3.3kg/capita/kg;  Belgium  at  6.8kg/capita/year;  USA  at 
4.5kg/capita/year; and Singapore at 2.6Kg/capita/year. 
The demand for coffee continues to grow over the years as shown in the graph below. 
Figure 1: Global Demand for Coffee 2012 -20212 
1.2 Summary Coffee Sector Background: The highest ever produced coffee volume in 
Rwanda between 1990 and 2020 is 38.34 MT (639 60kg bags)3 in the 1992/1993 coffee 
season. Production has been dropping ever since after the genocide in 1994 and has now 
stagnated between 20 and 23 MT in the last decade.  
According to the 2015 national coffee census supported by PRICE, there are 355,771 coffee 
growers  with  89,726,809  trees  covering  35,891  Ha.  According  to  NAEB  and  a  few 
progressive farmers visited during the PSAC Design Mission, the country has the potential 
to produce 2500kgs per ha of coffee beans, hence the countries potential to produce over 
50 MT taking into considerations improved management of economic-environmental-social 
factors. The National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) has shown that the percentage 
of  fully washed coffee is targeted at 80 per cent of total production by 2024, while the 
productivity per tree should by that time have increased to 4 kg (MINAGRI, 2018). The 
1 https://www.verifiedmarketresearch.com/product/coffee-market/ 
2 https://www.statista.com/statistics/292595/global-coffee-consumption/ 
3 https://www.ico.org/new_historical.asp 
1 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
projected 4kg production per tree is achievable after the implementation of the proposed 
interventions  under  PSAC  to  get  the  country  back  to  the  1992/1993  coffee  season 
production.  
Rwanda exports over 95 per cent of national coffee production. The table below shows the 
top ten market destination countries for the coffee exports. 
Table 1: List of consistent Rwanda coffee importing countries by Volume4 
Importers 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Exported 
quantity, 
Tons 
Exported 
quantity, 
Tons 
Exported 
quantity, 
Tons 
Exported 
quantity, 
Tons 
Exported 
quantity, 
Tons 
World  
18,263 
17,466 
18,670 
21,921 
23,821 
Switzerland  
6,642 
7,437 
United Kingdom  
Belgium  
878 
4,168 
United States of America  
2,363 
Singapore  
South Sudan  
Uganda  
Japan  
Germany  
Kenya  
New Zealand  
United Arab Emirates  
Netherlands  
Italy  
Korea, Republic of  
China  
Poland  
1,375 
26 
205 
967 
494 
27 
97 
111 
33 
825 
2,083 
2,195 
1,398 
50 
149 
339 
263 
35 
2 
18 
552 
183 
16 
65 
6,835 
4,623 
1,142 
1,578 
1,145 
8,012 
4,932 
1,960 
1,931 
1,267 
1,889 
2,157 
176 
72 
542 
147 
1 
20 
290 
31 
32 
198 
92 
598 
159 
1 
24 
1 
347 
34 
36 
8,756 
5,742 
2,445 
1,802 
1,288 
1,090 
904 
327 
224 
222 
156 
135 
130 
92 
71 
63 
63 
The graph below shows the market trends for the five leading importers of Rwanda Coffee. 
4 https://www.trademap.org/Country_SelProductCountry_TS.aspx 
2 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Figure 2: A graph showing export trends to main market destinations5 
Rwanda ranks the fifth leading exporter of coffee from Africa as shown in the table below 
in US$ value. 
Table 2: Top 10 Coffee Exporters from Africa6 
Exporters 
Exported 
value 
2017 
in 
Exported 
value 
2018 
in 
Exported 
value 
2019 
in 
Exported 
value 
2020 
in 
Exported 
value 
2021 
in 
World  
20,379,440  18,522,507  17,547,606  17,916,518  21,715,288 
Africa Aggregation  
2,120,513 
1,942,155 
1,938,890 
1,939,606 
2,408,665 
Ethiopia  
Uganda  
Kenya  
936,893 
793,384 
793,627 
793,548 
1,185,526 
555,149 
435,956 
437,619 
514,191 
586,256 
226,728 
227,891 
198,932 
208,868 
238,360 
Tanzania, United Republic of  122,836 
145,065 
149,832 
143,133 
155,139 
Rwanda  
Burundi  
64,113 
71,072 
71,327 
69,341 
82,310 
36,438 
40,821 
37,779 
30,389 
45,788 
Cameroon  
40,821 
33,539 
36,296 
31,397 
30,653 
Côte d'Ivoire  
71,201 
137,894 
162,292 
90,021 
23,516 
Congo, Democratic Republic 
of the  
19,504 
17,867 
13,531 
16,389 
21,736 
Zambia  
6,192 
546 
3,331 
6,807 
14,074 
1.3 Rationale for PSAC interventions in the Coffee Value Chain 
i.  The coffee commodity is highly strategic as it represents in itself up to 25 per cent of 
Rwandan formal export earnings and it involves 350,000 growers7. Rwanda exports 
over 95 per cent of national coffee production. Despite a steady increase in the exports 
of specialty coffee, there is still a need to rehabilitate old plantations8, enhance climate 
smart  productivity,  strengthen  producers’  organizations,  and  ensure  that  all  coffee 
washing stations (CWS) are used at optimum capacity to deliver sustainable incomes 
to coffee growers.  
5 https://www.trademap.org/Country_SelProductCountry_TS_Graph 
6 https://www.trademap.org/Country_SelProduct_TS.aspx 
7 Ibid. 
8 The Government of Rwanda estimates that about 70 million coffee seedlings are aged above 55 years 
3 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
ii.  The  global  consumption  trend  of  coffee  indicates  an  upward  trajectory.  It  creates  a 
great opportunity for the specialty class of Rwanda’s coffee due to its consistent quality. 
However, it is yet to achieve its full potential as a competitive specialty grade product 
(that is differentiated and strategically placed in international markets) due to lower 
volume of production. This is evident from the fact that highest coffee production was 
38.34 MT in 1992/93 and to the level of 20 to 23 MT during the last decade.   
iii.  The National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) has targeted fully washed coffee at 
80 per cent of total production by 2024 with increase in productivity to 4kg per tree 
(MINAGRI,  2018)  to  reach  to  the  level  of  1992/93  coffee  season  production.  The 
synergetic effect will lead to sizable increase in income of smallholder coffee producers 
which is the core rationale for support through PSAC. Towards this, the obstacles to 
be solved and the available opportunities to be captured include: 
a.  Replacement of the old stock of coffee trees to bring youthfulness and vigour of 
3050 Ha of coffee area under production; 
b.  Rehabilitation of 1082 Ha of coffee above 8 years to create a younger coffee cycle 
that will stimulate more productivity; 
c.  Addressing issues around the capacity of Smallholder farmers agronomic 
practices, Cooperatives capacity as well as CWS capacities all geared towards 
increased volumes, better quality, organizational strengthening and performance 
and quality management, access to markets, climate smart agricultural and new 
technology adoption among others; 
d.  Increased proportions of specialty coffee from Rwanda targeting the changing 
consumption trends amongst the various segments of consumers; 
e.  Addressing gender and youth mainstreaming into the coffee sector as an effort to 
engage renewed energy at various levels of the VC. 
2.0 
Tea 
2.1 
Sector Overview  
Tea was introduced in Rwanda in 1952 and area under tea plantations has been continually 
increased to 24,401 Ha (2019) and is today a major contributor to foreign exchange for 
the country. The Rwandan tea production has recently performed well in an upward growth 
and in 2016/17 fiscal year, 605 Ha of new tea plantations were added to the existing area 
which  is  an  achievement  of  74  per  cent  compared  to  the  targets  that  had  been  set. 
According to the same source, the tea sales revenues for the year 2016 - 2017 increased 
to US$ 74.5 Million from US$ 70.7 Million generated in 2015-2016. 
2.2  Growth of the sector 
Rwanda is one of the top exporters of tea in Africa. The Rwanda tea value chain is well 
organized under the Rwanda Tea Association which brings together producers and 
manufacturers. There are 18 Tea factories and 21 Cooperatives in the country. Producers 
are grouped into cooperatives while manufacturers operate independently and only those 
with common ownership show signs of collaboration and uniformity of operations and 
performance. The cooperatives serve over 45,622 farmers while PSAC has proposed to 
serve 11,625 farmers. In 2021, green leaf production by cooperatives stood at 
92,817,149 Kgs while factories processed 35,390,825 Kgs of made tea which was an 
increase of 8 per cent over 2020 production. 
Income to farmers has also registered gradual growth over the years. For example, 
between 2018 and 2021, the take home income for farmers increased by 15 per cent on 
average according to ferwacothe reports. 
By law, cooperatives are further grouped into unions which further converge to form a 
national federation. The federation of Tea cooperatives in Rwanda assumes both a 
4 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
representation role of cooperatives but also that of a business advisor as confirmed by 
its membership in the Private Sector Foundation (PSF). 
2.3 
Challenges facing Rwanda Tea sector and areas of intervention for PSAC 
There are several challenges in the tea sector that may limit the level of growth and 
scale of impact on poverty levels. Among the challenges are; 
(i) availability of adequate fertilizers (ii) availability of land for expansion (iii) high cost 
of plucking labor (iv) low value addition in the country (iv) slow rate of 
commercialization of research outputs (v) high deductions on farmers’ incomes (vi) 
Gaps in policy framework 
2.3.1  Availability of adequate fertilizers  
An analysis of fertilizer availability in 5 cooperatives during the development of the 
Revolving Fertilizer Scheme (RFS) showed that there was a 61 per cent deficit in the 
fertilizer required by farmers based on hectares planted. However, interventions such as 
the RFS have seen fertilizer use increase in targeted areas. According to NAEB reports 
8,000 MT of fertilizers were targeted for application but the target was surpassed and 
11,895 MT were applied in plantations in 2020/21. PSAC will intervene by: 
a.  Upscaling of fertilizer availability  
PSAC will further invest US$ 2,000,000 to finance some of the cooperatives that 
are currently benefiting from the RFS and to set up the scheme for 3 cooperatives 
that have not benefited in the past. 
b.  Upskilling of fertilizer management teams 
A recent monitoring report by a committee on the progress of the RFS listed several 
challenges facing the implementation of the RFS that undermine the performance 
parameters that were set out in the concept paper developed by NAEB & IFAD.  
PSAC will support the formation and operationalization of a Fertilizer Management 
Committee (FMC) which will formulate, disseminate and enforce operating guidelines for 
fertilizer management in the tea sector. The FMC will include experienced 
Agronomists/Managers/Researchers in the country. 
2.3.2  Availability of land for expansion 
Tea production in Rwanda is a major economic activity in 11 high altitude districts in the 
Northern, Southern and Western regions. Production takes place both in the hill sides and 
valleys with hillside tea fetching higher prices in the auction market. However, challenges 
related to land availability for expansion of tea farms leads to a situation where farms are 
located far away from factories which leads to low farmer earnings due to the following 
reasons;  Increased  risk  of  quality  deterioration  during  transportation  of  green  leaf, 
depressed production and productivity as a result of long plucking cycles and high cost of 
production  due  to  lost  production,  inefficient  transportation  and  deteriorated  quality  of 
green leaf. PSAC will intervene by; 
a.  Advocating for regulations/guidelines to guide the distance of tea farms from 
factories. In formulating such regulations, the GoR will consider the state of 
feeder roads and terrain of the area. 
b.  Support farmers to undertake gap filling in their farms so as to increase 
production and productivity as well as to reduce the cost of production per 
farmer. 
2.3.3  High cost of plucking labor 
Tea plucking is labour intensive and provides many jobs for unskilled workers in rural areas 
where tea is grown. However, factors that would reduce the productivity of these workers 
5 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
directly contribute to an increase in plucking labour costs. For example, pluckers who are 
working for less hours will pluck less hours and therefore earn less. To mitigate this risk, 
the workers often increase their labour changes.   
PSAC will target interventions to counter increases in plucking labor costs that are 
associated with reduced working hours; 
a.  Increasing the number of leaf collection hangars to shorten distances that 
pluckers cover and increase their daily productivity 
b.  Increasing the number of leaf collection trucks to increase leaf collection 
frequency 
c.  Purchasing electronic green leaf weighing scales to increase transparency and 
accuracy of payable weight. 
2.3.4  Low value addition in the country 
 Most  of  the  tea  exported  by  the  country  is  not  in  value  added  form  although  the 
government objective is to increase value added exports. While individual factories have 
made  steps  towards  export  of  value-added  teas  to  regional  and  overseas  markets,  the 
levels are still not satisfactory according to NAEB. 
PSAC interventions in this area will seek to provide a roadmap to increasing the volumes 
of value-added teas exported by implementing the following activities; 
a.  Supporting NAEB to develop a tea marketing & value addition strategy and 
identifying opportunities that have commercial value to members of the Rwanda 
Tea Association and their partners. 
b.  Operationalizing the online trading platform 
c.  Promoting activities related to the National Tea Brand 
2.3.5  Slow rate of commercialization of research outputs 
The country has 2 tea production systems mainly; small scale farms and Industrial blocks. 
The  industrial  blocks  owned  by  factories  may  by  default  have  access  to  more  capital 
regularly  and  can  therefore  be  able  to  propagate  seedlings  based  on  the  latest 
recommendations from Rwanda Agricultural Board. 
On the other hand, small holder farmers constitute the larger production block but have 
less  access  to  capital  and  may  not  respond  quickly  to  recommendations  on  clones  and 
practices that require capital investment. Furthermore, market research has shown that it 
may be possible for farmers to earn more by producing their green leaf through organic 
practices.  However,  many  farmers  may  lack  the  resources  required  to  invest  in  the 
transition from conventional farming to organic production. PSAC will intervene by; 
a.  Supporting cooperatives to access cuttings from recommended clones per 
agroecological zones and thereby mitigate against high death rate of seedlings 
during transplanting as well as set them up for higher productivity (and income) 
in future. 
b.  Advocating that NAEB develops additional green leaf price sharing formula for 
diversified tea products be put in place to protect the interests of small holder tea 
farmers and de-risk their investment in tea production as well as incomes. 
c.  Supporting farmers to expand their organic tea plantations in response to market 
demand as advised by tea factories and the buyers of their tea. 
2.3.6  High deductions on farmers’ incomes 
Farmers gross income is determined by the price the partner factory is able to attract for 
their made tea in international tea markets as well the prevailing price sharing formula as 
administered  by  GoR.    However,  the  net  income  varies  from  cooperative  to  cooperative 
due to factors that are internal to the cooperative management. These factors determine 
the amount of deductions which are made by cooperatives management. 
6 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
PSAC will intervene by; 
a.  Building the capacity of Ferwacothe to develop and implement a Common 
Services framework/ Management Protocol for tea cooperatives in Rwanda by 
financing an expert to undertake the assignment by designing, training, 
implementing, monitoring and reviewing progress regularly. 
b.  Supporting Cooperatives to implement the Common Services Framework through 
Common Services Champions and Committee.  
2.3.7  Gaps in policy framework 
The Government has identified tea production as one of the pathways out of poverty for 
farmers  living  within  agro  ecological  zones  that  are  suitable  for  tea  production.  The 
capacity for tea to uplift large populations economically is reinforced by the fact that tea 
production  and  sales  takes  place  all  year  round  while  availability  and  participation  of 
regular markets make it possible for farmers to earn monthly incomes. 
In support of efficient production, PSAC will intervene by supporting/advocating to NAEB; 
a.  To complete and operationalize the national tea census and register in order to 
provide visibility of tea producers and encourage entry of new tea farmers. 
b.  To make guidelines to mange tea expansion with a view to limiting the distance of 
farms from factories, helping cooperatives/factories to achieve minimum hectares 
of planted tea farms, minimum tea bushes (hectares) per farmer and availability 
of suitable clones within tea growing catchments. 
c.  To scale up initiatives to improve productivity for example by scaling up the 5 per 
cent fund through financial and technical participation of factories and other 
partners. 
d.  Targeting standardization of approach and Coordination of core activities of tea 
cooperatives to create higher efficiencies, reducing costs and attracting new tea 
growers including self funded farmers. 
3.0  Horticulture: Purpose for selection of specific Horticulture crop VCs 
3.1  Process  of  selection  of  Horticulture  crop  VCs:    Rwanda’s  agricultural  exports 
doubled from 225 million US$ in 2013-2014 to 516 million US$ in 2017-2018 at a 22 per 
cent  compounded  annual  growth  rate  (CAGR),  and  NAEB  is  now  aiming  to  take  it  to  1 
billion USD by 20249. Horticulture has played critical role in this achievement by emerging 
as  one  of the faster growth  export crops  and  also helped in diversifying the agriculture 
export base.  In order to achieve its goal for 2024, NAEB has prioritized - French beans, 
snow peas, passion fruits, chilies mushrooms, macadamia, avocado and pineapple as high 
value horticulture value chains for international market exports based on assessments of 
their agronomic viability, profitability, competitiveness, and social impact (how much can 
farmers earn). It has also identified essential oils, stevia, sericulture as new growth value 
chains which hold the potential to grow in the upcoming years. With these efforts, Rwanda 
is  also  aiming  at  export  growth  of  17  per  cent  per  annum  to  achieve  its  targets  of  the 
National strategy for transformation10.  
PSAC has considered the above export potential crops as the basic list for selection and 
further assessed from the perspective of – a) geographical targeting and b) potential for 
engaging smallholders, women and youth c) market demand and d) availability of stable 
exporters. PSAC is targeting consolidated block of 14 districts (10 districts from western 
and southern region and 4 adjoining districts from northern and eastern province).  The 
major crops grown in these districts are avocado, macadamia, mango, passion fruit, citrus, 
9 NAEB strategic plan 2019-2024 
10 Concept note of MINAGRI submitted to IFAD dated 22nd June 2021.  
7 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
banana, essential oils (patchaouli, lemon grass, eucalyptus), chilli. French beans, onion, 
garlic, tomato and carrots.  
The common crops from the priority list and crops grown in the PSAC’s operational areas 
are  avocado,  macadamia,  passion  fruit,  french  beans,  chili  and  essential  oils.  However, 
export  of  passion  fruit  has  been  highly  volatile  and  driven  by  diseases  (passion  fruit 
woodiness),  subject  to  high  international  standards  (leading  to  high  rejection  rate  and 
local grades fetch half the price)11. The remaining five value chains show strong potential 
in developing smallholder-exporter led value chain development, opportunities to engage 
women  and  youth,  consistent  and  growing  export  demand,  markets  already  tested 
/experienced  by  Rwandan  exporters  and  provide  good  margin  for  smallholders  over 
domestic and regional markets.  
In order to reduce some of the market risks as well as support food security and nutrition, 
four more crops grown in the region – onion, garlic, carrot and tomato are also considered 
as complementary to the selected list of five export-oriented crops. These crops have good 
local and regional market demand, can be cultivated as intercrops in orchards as well as 
useful  for  crop  rotation  to  french  beans  and  chilies.  Additionally,  a  fruit  crop  mango  is 
selected as an import substitute.   
3.2 The analysis of core export-oriented Horticulture crops VCs:   
3.2.1  Macadamia:   It  is  one  of  the  few  products  in  Rwanda  in  which  value  addition 
(through  processing)  happens  within  the  country,  thus  creating  scope  for  more  jobs  to 
youth and women[1]. It is a low volume - high value crop; suitable for landlocked Rwanda. 
High demand in the international market and dedicated exporters (3 exporters) exist in 
the country but the production is low. Exporters are closely engaged with producers and 
also provide advisory support at the farmgate. It is a long gestation period crop but after 
5 years harvesting takes place in two seasons per year (June to October and December to 
February), thus creating frequent income generation opportunities. Once planted, the work 
in the macadamia orchard is not laborious which can reduce the workload of women. The 
profit potential is high (about 80%). The only risk is China, the current importer of nuts 
may become a major exporter by 2030 due to its own large-scale production. This risk can 
be overcome by organic production and exporters in Rwanda are ready to work towards 
it.  In  the  beginning  there  were  many  big  farmers  engaged  in  macadamia  production. 
Subsequently  smallholders  have  started  following  their  footsteps.  PSAC  focusing  on 
smallholders and women directly linking with exporters, there is more scope to work in 
the value chain. 
3.2.2 Avocado: Avocados are grown by small holder farmers and cooperatives mainly in 
Eastern and Southern provinces. The export volume of avocado from Rwanda increased 
from about 400MT in 2018-19 to 525MT in 2020-2112. The Rwanda airport data of peak 
season (August to December) 2020 and 2021 suggest that there is an increase in monthly 
fresh  avocado  export  to  UAE  and  UK  market  –  from  about  average  100MT/month  to 
average 200MT/month (from 4 containers per month to 8 containers per month)13, which 
is expected to be expected to be doubled in next 4-5 years. The UAE and Europe market 
show growing trend of average 26 per cent and 29 per cent import respectively when the 
share of Rwanda is just 1 per cent in volume. There are almost 7 exporters of avocado but 
a few of them are exporting to Europe and UAE. The profit margin is 31 per cent to 60 per 
cent  depending  on  sea  or  air  freight  cost.  Income  from  export  to  UAE  and  EU  is 
exponentially  higher  for  avocado  than  the  staple  crops:  maize  –  US$  297  per  ha,  irish 
potato US$ 2,094 per ha and avocado – US$ 3,955 per ha.14 
11 Commercial investment opportunities in agriculture value chains, USAID report (December 2018) 
12 NAEB export data shared with PSAC design team May 2022 
13 A note on Avocado sorting automation machine, NAEB (May 2022) 
14 Commercial investment opportunities in agriculture value chains, USAID report (December 2018) 
8 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
3.2.3  French  beans:  French  beans  are  cultivated  in  open  field  mainly  through  a  few 
commercial producers (who also export) and smallholders. It has year-round demand. Of 
the total production 80 per cent goes to regional markets (about 2/3rd to DRC and about 
1/3rd to Uganda) and 20 per cent to international market (France, Belgium, Netherland, 
UK  and  Dubai).  The  annual  export  volumes  in  2017,  2018,  2019  were  1081,  3503  and 
5437MT15 respectively which shows that the exports are rising in volumes.  There are 9 
exporters who buy from smallholders and 6 of them also have their own production. EU 
markets  expect  various  certifications  (Global  GAP,  HACCP,  BRC,  IFC,  SMETA  etc.)  and 
conduct stringent checks for fresh imports. French beans are an attractive crop because 
they mature early, harvested 45 days after sowing, and require minimal investment into 
production. Exporters have around a 20 percent rejection rate while sorting, but rejected 
French beans can be sold on the domestic market, keeping overall food losses low.  The 
average price of French beans in domestic market is Rwf180 to Rwf 360 per kg and in the 
international market, it is Rwf 500 to Rwf 650 per kg. The data from different sources of 
cooperative memberships indicates that 45 per cent to 54 per cent and 15 per cent – 18 
per cent of the total are women and youth16. It shows importance of the French beans VC 
for  women  but  low  participation  of  youth  in  production  (due  to  lack  of  capital  to  pay 
membership fees and lack of access to land as well as lack of access to finance).     
3.2.4  Chili:  It  is  produced  by  small  and  commercial  farmers  and  is  aggregated  by 
wholesalers, cooperatives, exporters and sometimes brokers. The annual export volumes 
of 2018, 2019 and 2020 were 721MT, 1097MT and 1496MT respectively17 which show a 
rising trend. Of the chilli exports to international markets, more than 60 percent chilli goes 
to  the  UK,  with  smaller  amounts  going  to  India,  Belgium,  the  Netherlands  and  France. 
International export markets absorb 24 percent of the production. While export is focused 
on fresh chili (red and green), recently export of dried chili to China has also started. Chili 
does not have significant regional markets but does have a good domestic demand. There 
are 7 exporters who buy from smallholders and 3 of them also have their own production. 
Like French beans, EU markets conduct stringent checks for fresh imports and also expect 
certification with basic one being GlobalGAP. Europe is the attractive market as it provides 
premium price. Income from export is exponentially higher than the staple crops: maize 
–  US$  297  per  ha,  irish  potato  US$  2,094  per  ha  and  chili  –  US$  4,336  per  ha18 and 
provides opportunity to diversify revenue streams. A sample data of cooperatives engaged 
in  chili  production  indicate  that  43  per  cent  women  have  co-operative  membership.  In 
terms of wage labour on commercial farms and exporters, 72 per cent women and 20 per 
cent youth are engaged seasonal work in chili production (cultivation, harvesting, sorting, 
packaging etc.) with daily wage ranging between RwF 1000 to RwF 2000.  
3.2.5 Essential Oil:  These are high value-added  oils obtained from  processing various 
essential oil crops such as patchouli, lemongrass, eucalyptus, geranium etc. and are used 
in high-end products in the flavours and fragrances industry. Geranium and patchouli are 
primarily used in the fragrances market where the whole oil is used. Eucalyptus, and lemon 
grass are lower value oils used as a source of specific compounds. Leading consumers of 
essential oils are the USA, followed by Western Europe and Japan. The EU leads in world 
trade  of  essential  oils  but  is  not  a  major  oil  producer  and  most  essential  oils  are  re-
exported. 
Due to low volume – high value, appropriate climatic conditions to grow in Rwanda and 
scope  to  engage  smallholders  in  cultivation  as  well  as  in  primary  processing,  it  is  an 
attractive value chain. Rwandan farmers can produce three or four harvests a year, a clear 
advantage compared to many other essential oil producing countries (e.g.   South Africa 
15 The data sources for 2017 and 2018 is from FAO (Horticulture Value Chain: Opportunities for youth in Rwanda 2022) and for 
2019 the data source is communication with NAEB, May 2022.  
16 Different data from two sources indicated in FAO report (Horticulture Value Chain: Opportunities for youth in Rwanda 2022) is 
combined to get the overall idea. 
17 Communication with with NAEB, May 2022 
18 Commercial investment opportunities in agriculture value chains, USAID report (December 2018) 
9 
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
has  only  two  harvests  a  year).  Rwanda  has  3  exporters  who  are  directly  engaged  with 
small producers besides cultivation on their own farms. The essential oil value chain was 
supported during the PRICE project and helped producers to move up in the value chain 
by carrying out primary extraction of oil at co-operative level and supplying it to exporters. 
The  participants  have  also  learnt  about  seedling  production  through  community-based 
nurseries. It also provided opportunity to intercrop essential oils producing crops in coffee. 
The value chain engages women, youth as well as aged family members. Thus, providing 
gainful  employment  opportunities.  The  next  stage  of  value  chain  development  can  be 
improving efficiency of operations and scaling-up in terms of volume of production through 
outgrower model.  
10 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 13: PSAC Target Districts
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 13: PSAC Target District 
REGION 
districts 
coffee 
tea 
X (women coops) 
 X 
X 
X 
Rusizi 
Nyamasheke  X 
X 
Karongi 
Rutsiro 
Ngororero 
Rubavu 
Nyabihu 
Nyaruguru 
Huye 
Gisagara 
Nyamagabe 
Nyanza 
Ruhango*** 
Muhanga 
Kamonyi 
Musanze 
Gakenke 
Burera 
Rulindo 
Gicumbi 
Nyagatare 
Gatsibo 
Kayonza** 
Rwamagana 
Bugesera 
Ngoma 
Kirehe 
14 + Kayonza 
WEST  
(5) 
SOUTH 
(5) 
NORTH 
(2) 
EAST   
(2+1) 
TOTAL 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Macadamia  avocado/mango 
X 
 X 
X 
X 
X 
chili 
 X 
Fr. beans  Other horti* 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
essential oils 
other projects**** 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
TNS 
KWA, ENABEL, TNS, Heifer 
KWA, ENABEL, TNS, JICA 
KWA, ENABEL, TNS 
KWA, ENABEL 
KWA 
KWA, ENABEL, Heifer 
Heifer 
TNS, Heifer 
TNS 
KWA, ENABEL, TNS 
TNS, Heifer 
Heifer 
KWA 
KWA 
KOICA, Heifer  
KWA, ENABEL 
KWA, ENABEL 
KWA, ENABEL, KOICA 
KWA, ENABEL 
6 
7 
12 + Kayonza 
* Additional horticultural crops for domestic/regional market and rotation purposes (for chili/beans) will be identified (e.g. tomato, garlic, onion, carrots, etc), and this will also 
supporting food security, improved nutrition, and strong opportunities to engage with smallholder farmers, esp. women and youth, in partnership with Heifer 
** Kayonza ONLY for essential oils trials by exporter ESS-OIL (geranium – bourbon; patchouli, citronella – java; vanilla bean; holly basil; French basil) 
*** Ruhango added as a replacement of Rutsiro district for the coffee value chain 
**** WB-funded CDAT project is to operate nation-wide 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 14. Funds Flows and Authorization Arrangements
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Rwanda 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 14: Funds Flows and Authorization Arrangements 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: PSAC Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM)
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Division
Country
Project
Date
INHERENT RISK RATING
Description of Risk Feature
COUNTRY RISK ASSESSMENT
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Country procurement law, regulations and manual exist
Existence of Standard Bidding Documents for Goods, Works and 
Services
Procurement Monitoring
Procurement Methods
Public access to procurement information
IFAD Procurement Risk Matrix
RWANDA
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC)
23-Jun-22
2.83
Rating
2.90
3.00
3
3
3
3
3
Assessment Basis
Remarks 
Recommendation /Mitigation
NET  RISK RATING
3 they all exist, 2 only two exist, 1 only one 
exist or none
The law governing public procurement management in Rwanda is Law 
n° 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 and Ministerial Order N° 002/20/10/TC of 
19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement. A manual 
exist in the form of Public Procurement User Guide which was 
released by the Rwanda Public Procurement Authority in November 
2010.
3 all exist, 2 only for NCB & ICB, none for 
Shopping, 1 none exists
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
SBD for goods, consultancy services, small consultancy services, works 
and small works are available in both English and French.  There is no 
SBD for shopping. These are compliant with IFAD SDB. The SPIU uses 
the complete set for all procurement services.  
This dimension has been rated 'A' by PEFA. Procurement data 
maintained by RPPA was seen to be comprehensive, and published 
annually.  Such monitoring data is accessible on the RPPA website 
(http://www.rppa.gov.rw), including audits of procuring entitites.
This dimension was rated 'A' by PEFA in the 2016 assessment. 
Procurement methods were observed to be followed according to the 
law. The RPPA maintains comprehensive data in the annual reports 
on all the methods used.
The PEFA identified the following criteria for assessing public access to
procurement
legal and regulatory framework for
procurement; government procurement plans; bidding opportunities;
contract award (purpose contractor and value); data on resolution of
procurement complaints and annual procurement statistics. The
introduction of Rwanda's online e-procurement system (UMUCYO,
accessible here: umucyo.gov.rw) has increased public access to every
infrormation on bids and contracats. RPPA through its website also
publishes a comprehensive set of information through its reports and
reports of the Independent Review panel which includes data on
and regulatory
resolution of procurement
frameowrk documnets are also available 
information;
complaints.
Legal
Accountability and Transparency
2.80
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
Procurement Complaints Management
#
A
1
a
b
c
d
e
2
a
3
2
The score is published on 
Transparency.org. 0 to 29 = 1, 30 to 60 = 2, 
61 to 100 = 3
The Independent Review Panel meets the following PEFA criteria: (1) 
is not involved in any capacity in procurement transactions or in the 
process leading to contract award decisions; (2) does not charge fees 
that prohibit access by concerned parties; (3) follows processes for 
submission and resolution of complaints that are clearly defined and 
publicly available; (4) exercises the authority to suspend the 
procurement process;(5) issues decisions within the timeframe 
specified in the rules/regulations (6) issues decisions that are binding 
on all parties (without precluding subsequent access to an external 
higher authority)
The 2021 Transpanrency International Corruption Perception Index 
ranks Rwanda at position no 52 with a score of 53/100.
As per paragraph 69 of the IFAD Procurement Guidelines, IFAD
requires that its own staff, the staff of Borrowers/Recipients
(including beneficiaries of
IFAD financing) and all bidders,
suppliers, contractors and consultants that are signatories to
IFAD financed contracts observe the highest standards of ethics
and integrity during the execution of procurement activities.
This position is clearly stated in IFAD’s Policy on Preventing
Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations. The
Government of Rwanda has also enacted the necessary laws
and has set up institutions to address corruption. The primary
anti-corruption agency is the Office of the Ombudsman which is
constitutionally independent and carries a wide mandate of
preventing and fighting against corruption and Injustice.  
b
Country Corruption Perception Index score 
2.96
Rating
3.00
3.00
3
3
3
3
3
3.00
3
3
c
2-tiered system to handle complaints
d
Existence of a debarment system
Existence of an independent and competent local authority 
responsible for investigating corruption allegations
PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT
Capability in Public Procurement
Existence of a Procurement Unit with at least 2 staff members 
(Design stage, reference is to govt agency)
Existence of a Procurement Officer (Implementation)
Staff member(s) have at least 7 years experience in donor-funded 
public procurement
What is the general quality of documents produced by the 
procurement office?
Do procurement staff have immediate access to the legal and 
regulatory framework documents?
Are the procurement and financial management functions 
separated?
3 as stated, 2 only a single level system, 1 
no system
3 full existence, 2 existence of complaints 
body that is the authority, 1 does not exist
3 existence of independent Anti-Corruption 
agency, 2 existence of an office within a 
government ministry/agency that carries out 
some/all of these functions, 1 does not exist
3 as stated, 2 one staff member, 1 does not 
exist (at Design stage)
3 as stated, 2 someone else doing 
Procurement, 1 procurement function not 
consistently handled by anyone
3 as stated, 2 for less than 7 years and/or  
experience in public procurement but not 
donor-funded, 1 for less than 3 years 
experience 
3 for very good bidding documents, 
evaluation reports and contracts, 2 for 
mediocre documents, 1 for documents with 
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for total separation, 2 for some separation, 
1 for procurement being done by FM staff
3
3
3
2.76
2.80
2
3
3
3
3
Public Procurement Processes
Procurement Methods
Procurement methods for Goods consistent with IFAD Guidelines
2.73
2.50
Procurement methods for Works consistent with IFAD Guidelines
Procurement methods for Services  consistent with IFAD Guidelines
Easy access to bidding documents by foreign firms
3 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 
for none
3 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 
for none
3 for large-value method for firms, small value 
method for firms and method for individual 
consultants; 2 for two of the above; 1 for only 
one or less
2
2
3
3
to the Procuring Entity and if not
A two tier system exists. The 1st one is the Procurement entity and
the second one the Independent Review Panel. Bidders. A prospective 
bidder or actual bidder may, at any stage of the procurement
proceedings and in accordance with the law, apply for a review of any
conduct in the procurement proceedings with respect to the Law or
any other procurement regulations. The normal order of appeal is
resolved then to the
first
Independent Review Panel.
Chapter IV of the Law n° 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 governing public
procurement provides the provisions for debarment. Rwanda Public
Procurement Authority is vested with the power to approve the
suspension or approve the debarment of bidders
in public
procurement. One of the provisions of Article 179: Procedures for
debarment from public procurement, provides that the Rwanda
Public Procurement Authority must establish a list of bidders
debarred from public procurement
through
newspapers, on its official website and on one single portal website
for public procurement. To suspend or approve the suspension and
debarment bidders in public procurement;
The primary anti-corruption agency is the Office of the Ombudsman
which is constitutionally independent and carries a wide mandate of
preventing and fighting against corruption and Injustice. The office of
the Ombudsman was establish by article 182 of
the Rwanda
Constitution of 4th July as amended to date, to reinforce good
governance in public institutions and emphasizing transparency. The
establishment of the organization and functioning of the office of the
ombudsman in Rwanda is established by Law N. 25/2003 of
15.08/2003
and publish it
The National Agriculture Export Development Board (NAEB) has a 
Procurement Unit which is under the Chief Finance Officer (CFO).  The 
Unit has one Procurement Officer who handles all procurement 
related work and is also secretary to the Tender Committee. 
A position of a Procurement Officer is recommended for the 
PSAC project.  The Procurement Officer will report to the Head 
Procurement SPIU and also work closely with the project team 
at NAEB
The Procurement Officer at NAEB has over ten (10) years experience 
in public procurement 
The general quality of documents produced by the procurement 
office was judged to be adequate.
The legal and regulatory framework documents are all available on 
the RPPA website. The procurement staff is well acquainted with the 
newest developments in the legal and regulatory procurement 
framework.
The financial and procurement management functions are separated. 
The Procurement Reports to CFO but there is no conflict in the 
functions.
The procurement methods for goods are generally consistent with
the level of
IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines except at
thesholds for shopping. According to the national thresholds, any
procurement activity whose value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal
to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be carried out via open
competitive bidding..
The procurement methods for works are generally consistent with
IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines except at
the level of
thesholds for shopping. According to the national thresholds, any
procurement activity whose value exceeds RWF 3,000,000.00 (equal
to, approximately, USD 3,000.00) is to be carried out via open
competitive bidding.
The procurement methods for consultancies are generally consistent
with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines.
Foreign firms can easily access bids through the e-procurement 
system provided they have gone through the required registration 
process.
The thresholds are established under law i.e. the Ministerial 
Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations 
on public procurement. 
The thresholds are established under law i.e. the Ministerial 
Order no. 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations 
on public procurement
Procurement Planning
Are procurement plans prepared ahead of time and consistent with 
annual work plans/budgets?
Do procurement people participate in the annual work planning 
processes?
2.67
3
3
3 prepared ahead and consistent, 2 one of 
either, 1 none
3 if required by regulation  and practised, 2 if 
required by regulation, 1 if none of above
Procurement plans are prepared ahead of time in consistency with 
the annual workplans/budgets
Yes the Procurement officer's inputs are required at the level of the 
preparation of the procurement plan (s)
e
B
1
a
b
c
d
e
2
i
a
b
c
d
ii
a
b
3
3
3
2.93
3.00
3
3
3
3
3
2.86
2.50
2
2
3
3
3.00
3
3
c
iii
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
iv
a
b
c
d
Are Procurement Plans done using an effective format with planned 
and actual rows across 3 different categories
Procurement Processes
Minimum number of quotations established by law
Minimum number of days for advertised procurement under 
competitive bidding processes
Is there enough time provided for bidders to ask questions and 
receive answers in the bidding process?
Are clarifications provided to all bidders?
Are bids received prior to the deadline securely stored?
Are procurement securities securely stored?
Are public bid openings conducted for advertised procurements, and 
within an hour of receipt of bids?
Are minutes of bid openings taken, and sent to bidders who 
submitted bids?
Are evaluations conducted by a suitably qualified ad-hoc evaluation 
committee?
In evaluation, is responsiveness based on criteria requirements in 
the bidding documents?
Are evaluations completed within the bid validity period?
Are conditions precedent to contract effectiveness clearly stipulated 
in the contract? (i.e., advance payment security, performance 
security, insurance, etc)
Does the agency maintain a complete record of the process? This 
would include copies of all public advertisements, pre-qualification 
documents (if used, the pre-qualification evaluation report 
documenting any decisions not to pre-qualify certain potential 
bidders), the bidding documents and any addenda, a record of any 
pre-bid meetings, the bid opening minutes, the final bid evaluation 
report (including a detailed record of the reasons used to accept or 
reject each bid), appeals against procedures or award 
recommendations, a signed copy of the final contract and any 
performance and advance payment securities issued, etc.
Are all contracts awarded advertised publicly?
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
Contract Administration and Management
2.82
Existence of authority levels in the contract management process
Existence of approval thresholds for contract amendments
Is there an effective contract monitoring system/framework in 
place?
Is there a process to monitor delivery of goods to verify quantity and 
quality?
3
2
3
3
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
The procurement plan is in the eprocurement platform. However its 
format is different and does not have provision for planned and actual 
rows
The PSAC project will use IFAD procurement use full 
procurement plan framework in developing the PP for the 
project
3 for three or more; 2 for two, 1 if it does not 
state or less than two
3 for minimum of 30 days; 2 for minimum of 
20 days; 1 for less than 20 days or not stated
3 if bidders have a minimum of 3 days for the 
RFQ method and 7 days for competitive 
methods to ask questions, 2 if less than 3 days 
for RFQ and less than 7 but more than 4 days 
for competitive methods, 1 if not mentioned 
in RFQ and less than 4 days for competitive 
procurements
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for both, 2 for bid openings being conducted 
more than an hour after receipt, 1 for bid 
openings not being conducted
3 for both, 2 for minutes being taken but not 
being sent, 1 for none
3 for both, 2 for qualified but not ad-hoc, 1 for 
ad-hoc or none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
A minimum of 3 quotations is established by law.
As provided in the Procurement Law time allotted to the preparation 
of tenders must not be less than thirty (30) calendar days.  For 
international open tender, the time allotted must be between forty 
five (45) and ninety (90) calendar days.  For request for quotation it is 
3 days.
After publication of tender notice, any prospective bidder may ask the
procuring entity to provide explanations as to the content of the
tender document within three sixths (3/6) of the deadline period for
the submission of tenders as of the date of tender notice publication.
The procuring entity provides the requested clarifications within one
sixth (1/6) of the deadline period for the submission of tenders as of
the receipt of the last request for clarifications. 
Yes this is done as provided in the law which states that Without 
disclosing the source of the request, the procuring entity must 
communicate to all prospective bidders clarifications requested and 
responses provided.
In the e-procurement system, bid submission closes automatically at 
the deadline. Bids are securely stored electronically.
Original procurement securities are kept under lock and key.
Yes as provided in the law which states that the interval between the 
deadline prescribed by the procuring entity for the submission of bids 
and the time for the opening of bids does not exceed one (1) hour. 
The e-procurement system displays the opening bid report to every 
bidder through the e-procurement portal immediately after bid 
opening.
The tender committee of NAEB has been established according to the
law governing public procurement management in Rwanda is Law n°
62/2018 of 25/08/2018 and Ministerial Order no. 002/20/10/TC of
19/05/2020 establishing Regulations on Public Procurement, which
establishes that the Chief Budget Manager of every procuring entity
must appoint a public tender committee for a term of 3 years, which
may be renewed only once.
Responsiveness criteria are specifically stated in the bidding 
documents.
The bid validity period is no more than 120 days. Evaluation should be 
within 21 days from the date of opening of bids except when there 
are sound reasons raised by the procuring entity, as prescribed by the 
procurement regulations. No issues of bid validity period being 
exceeded was recorded.
All conditions precedent to contract effectiveness are clearly 
stipulated for standard contracts for goods, works or services 
published on RPPA website.
All documents including correpondences are filed in soft copies. These 
are filed based on the Procurement Filing Checklist (Attached to all 
the files that were assessed) and it includes works, goods, non-
consultancy services and consultancy documents and 
correspondences from advertisement to contract closure.
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
All signed contracts are advertised publicly on the e-procurement
system.
3 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for 
none
3 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for 
none
Contract managers are guided by the provisions of the Law governing 
public procurement Chapter III, Contract Execution.  
NAEB uses the provisions of the Law governing Public Procurement 
which states that any amendment increasing or decreasing the 
contract value to more than 20% requires a new tender.  Only 
amendments of upto 20% are therefore allowed. 
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
A contract monitoring form is kept and updated by accounts 
department. Procurement files include relevant information 
concerning the execution of the contract.
There is an inspection and reception committee appointed by the 
Chief Budget Officer. 
For the PSAC project, there will be a specific Tender Committee 
which will be constituted to serve the project.  It is expected 
that the Committee will comprise technical staff that are key in 
the implementation of the project. Tender Committee will be 
appointed as per the law governing public procurement 
As provided in the IFAD Procurement Handbook, the procuring 
entity must obtain approval of the contract amendment from 
the appropriate approval authority. IFAD’s no objection is 
required for all prior-review contracts where the amendment 
(a) increases the original contract value by more than 10 per 
cent; (b) extends the original contract duration by 25 per cent or 
more. Therefore IFAD's threshold is broader.
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3.00
3
3
3
3
Is there a framework for approval of deliverables and payment 
process for consulting services contract?
3
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
3
2
1
Is there a process for resolution of final payment and contract 
closure?
Are contract disputes handled in accordance with a formal 
complaints/arbitration system?
Are works contracts supervised by independent engineers or a 
named project manager?
Are contracts completed on schedule and within the approved/ 
contracted contract price?
Does the organization have contract registers that register all 
contracts (with names, prices and dates), per procurement category?
Are adequate contract administration records maintained? (These 
would include contractual notices issued by the supplier, contractor, 
purchaser or employer; a detailed record of all changes or variation 
orders issued affecting the scope, qualities, timing or price of the 
contract; records of invoices and payments, progress reports, 
certificates of inspection, acceptance and completion; records of 
claim and dispute and their outcomes; etc.)
Risk Rating System
L : Low Risk
M : Medium Risk
H : High Risk
3
3
2
3
3
3
L
As per the Terms of Reference the deliverables which may include 
inception report, interim reports, draft report & final reports etc. will 
be validated by the user department through the process specified in 
the TORs  
The final payment follows the contract provision and depend on the 
contract type. For works and supply contract, the receiving 
committee and the respective contract manager confirms both 
the quantity and quality as per the specification, which then 
provides the basis for making the final payment.  For consultancy 
or studies contract, most of the contract have a provision of 
presenting the final report to the NAEB management for their 
validation, therefore their payment is always based on this 
validation  
Contract disputes are handled using a three tier system as provided in 
the Contract namely through amicable settlement with the procuring 
entity.  If this fails (2) through arbitration in accordance with Kigali 
International Arbitration Centre rules and if there is no resolution (3) 
through litigation in the national courts 
Works contracts are supervised by the relevant Departments of the 
Ministry of Infrastructure as the work involved may apply.  For 
example all building works apart from very small works that do not 
engineers specifications and BOQs are supervised by Rwanda Housing 
Authority. Therefore there is no  independently hired engineers. An 
important point to note is also that most works contracts are 
undertaken using force Account.  
IFAD will ensure that provision is made in the budget for 
supervision of all works contracts.  For the PSAC project IFAD 
will require that Force Account be used  only when the size, 
nature and location of the works make competitive bidding 
unsuitable; the Fund is satisfied that the construction facilities 
of the borrower are adequate and efficient; and the borrower 
has the capability to do the work expeditiously at a reasonable 
cost.
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
The Contracts that were reviewed showed that contracts are 
completed on schedule and within the approved/contracted contract 
price.
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
All contracts are registered on the e-procurement platform
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
All documents including correspondences are processed through the
e-procurement platform. The documents including correpondences
are filed in soft copies. These are filed based on the Procurement
Filing Checklist (Attached to all the files that were assessed) and it
includes works, goods, non consultancy services and consultancy
documents and correspondences from advertisement to contract
closure.
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 15. Grievance Redress Mechanism
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
(MINA 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT 
COMPETITIVENESS PROJECT  
(PSAC) 
________________________________________________ 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
(GRM) 
________________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
KG 569 Street,  
Kigali 
Rwanda 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF CONTENTS...........................................................................................................................2 
1.0      GENERAL .......................................................................................................................................3 
2.0      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR KIIWP ............................................................................3 
3.0      OPERATION OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM ..............................................................4 
3.1      PURPOSE OF THE GRM ..............................................................................................................4 
3.2      STRUCTURE OF THE GRM ..........................................................................................................5 
3.2.1    Process Overview .................................................................................................................6 
3.2.2    The Process of the GRM.......................................................................................................7 
1.0      GENERAL 
A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a process for receiving, evaluating and addressing 
project related concerns of, and complaints by, project affected communities or persons. 
IFAD’s  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  allows  affected  complainants  to  have  their  concerns 
resolved in a fair and timely manner through an independent process. IFAD’s GRM requires i) 
working  proactively  with  the  affected  parties  to  resolve  complaints;  ii)  ensuring  that  the 
complaints procedure is responsive and operates effectively; and  iii) maintaining records of 
all complaints and their resolutions.  
The principles of a good GRM are1:  
•  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities.  
•  Designed  to  take  into  account  culturally  appropriate  ways  of  handling  community 
concerns.  
•  A  clear  and  understandable  mechanism  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
affected communities at no cost.  
•  Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders. 
•  A  mechanism  that  prevents  retribution  and  does  not  impede  access  to  other 
remedies. 
The key steps for grievance management are2:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Publicising grievance management procedures so that the mechanism is accessible 
to everyone.  
Receiving (i.e., collecting, recording, and registering) and keeping track of grievances.  
Reviewing  and  investigating  grievances  to  assess  the  nature  of  the  grievance,  its 
severity and legitimacy.  
Developing  resolution  options  commensurate  with  the  nature  of  grievances  and 
preparing  and  communicating  a  clear  response  and  closing  out  cases  when 
agreement with the complainants is reached. 
v.  Monitoring  grievances  through  tracking  to  ascertain  effectiveness,  adapting  the 
mechanism to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and 
lessons learned. 
2.0      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR KIIWP   
Common  disputes  and  disagreements  may  be  related  to  land  property  boundaries, 
destruction of land resources following valuation processes including standing crops, amount 
of monies to be compensated and delay in disbursement of agreed compensation.  
Mostly PSAC interventions will be delivered to community beneficiaries through cooperatives, 
who  manage  grievances  and  conflicts  through  internal  committees.  The communities have 
confidence in these cooperative grievance redress mechanisms. Once an aggrieved person is 
not satisfied at any level, there is room for escalating the grievance to higher levels. 
1 IFC (2009); Good Practice Note – Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities, Guidance for 
Projects and Companies on Designing Grievance Mechanisms  
2 ibid  
Figure  1  depicts  the  pathways  the  grievance  redress  may  follow.  It  may  follow  either  the 
Abunzi  system  if  the  aggrieved  party  is  not  a  member  of  the  cooperative  concerned,  or  it 
would- follow the resolution mechanism typically used by the cooperatives as  stipulated in 
the provisions of Law N° 48/2013 of 28/06/2013 establishing the Rwanda Cooperative Agency 
(RCA). 
Figure 1      Grievance Redress Mechanism for KIIWP 
The  RCA  requires  that  cooperatives  request  arbitration  on  unresolved  grievances 
registered  by  their  members.  RCA  evokes  its  grievance  redress  mechanism,  failure  at 
which the grievance is escalated to the national court system. Aggrieved parties who are 
not members of a cooperative would register grievances in the Abunzi system or directly 
in the national courts, depending on the gravity of the grievance as defined by the law. 
This mechanism is also proposed at Project operation level as the GRM for resettlement 
requirements before Project commencement is provided for by law.  
3.0      OPERATION OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
The grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a system by which queries or clarifications about 
the  project  will  be  responded  to,  problems  with  implementation  will  be  resolved,  and 
complaints and grievances will be addressed efficiently and effectively.  
3.1      PURPOSE OF THE GRM 
The GRM will serve the following purpose: 
• 
• 
to  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  beneficiaries  and  to  address  and  resolve  their 
grievances. 
to  serve  as  a  conduit  for  soliciting  inquiries,  inviting  suggestions,  and  increasing 
community participation. 
to collect information that can be used to improve operational performance. 
to enhance the project’s legitimacy among stakeholders. 
to promote transparency and accountability. 
to deter fraud and corruption and mitigate project risks. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
3.2      STRUCTURE OF THE GRM 
The GRM consists of a small number of components:   
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The access point for impacted/concerned people 
Grievance log 
Acknowledgement stage 
Assessment stage 
Passing of resolution 
Response  
Room for appeal 
Case closure 
The components are summarized in the process flow diagram below. 
3.2.1    Process Overview 
The following key steps must be followed for all complaints received by PSAC staff: 
Receive, 
classify& log 
Acknowledge 
Assess and Investigate 
Resolve & Confirm 
Respond to Complainant 
Appeal &Follow up 
QA & Close 
The requirements for each of these steps is detailed below 
3.2.2    The Process of the GRM 
i)       Receive, classify & log 
All  potential  issues  must  be  captured  and  classified  for  escalation,  review  and  action  as 
required. 
a)       Receiving the Grievance: 
The  access  points  will  be  as  close  to  the  users  as  possible.  An  easily  accessible  and  well 
publicized focal point or user-facing ‘help desk’ is the first step. This will be established at 
each sub-project, and PSAC Offices so that it will be seen as credible and accessible. The main 
issues for the access point include the following: 
•  Uptake channels should include some or all of the following: 
o 
phone hotline,  
o 
email,  
o  mail,  
o 
SMS,  
o  webpage,  
o 
or face-to-face. 
•  The  uptake  channels  will  be  publicized  and  advertised  via  local  media  and  the 
implementing agency.  
•  Verbal complaints should be recorded by staff for them to be considered.  
•  Many complaints may be resolved ‘on the spot’ and informally by the PSAC staff but 
should also be logged in order to (i) encourage responsiveness; and (ii) ensure that 
repeated or low-level grievances are being noted in the system.  
•  The GRM should have the ability to handle anonymous complaints. 
Typically, the complainant will be provided with a receipt and ‘roadmap’ telling him/her how 
the complaint process works and when to expect further information. 
b)       Logging and classifying: 
Any complaint, issue or negative stakeholder interaction (whether this is formally logged by 
the complainant or not), must be logged and classified for action. 
All of these complaints must be formally logged using the standard forms and all complaints 
must be prioritized as follows: 
•  Priority  1  –  urgent,  potential  high  health  and  high  business  impact.  This  require  a 
response to the Complainant within three (3) working days.  
o  This should be used (sparingly) for major health issues where the complaint may have 
disastrous impacts on either human, the environment or PSAC itself. 
o  Also, this could be used in a situation where the complainant may be in a position to 
influence or make public statements that would impact upon the PSAC reputation. 
•  Priority 2, - non-urgent, lower health environmental and social impact. This requires a 
response to the complainant within 2 working weeks.  
o  This should be used for most complaints with individual stakeholders, as this allows a 
reasonable time to collect information and produce a balanced response. 
•  Discretion and flexibility should be exercised in prioritizing all complaints 
  The staff member logging the complaint should review the complaint and its priority 
with the Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager before proceeding to the next step.  
  The Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager will decide on the appropriate person(s) to 
carry out subsequent steps, including the investigation. 
  All  Priority  1  complaints  must  be  escalated  immediately  to  the  PSAC  Project 
Manager. 
ii)      Acknowledge 
Ensure  that  every  complaint  receives  a  formal  written  acknowledgement,  containing  an 
expectation of when they will receive a response, and the person dealing with it. 
•  All complaints, regardless of priority, should receive a pro forma acknowledgement sent 
out 1st class mail on the day of receipt. 
iii)     Assess &Investigate 
Follow up all aspects of the complaint, both internal and external, to ensure that the key facts 
are identified and clarified. 
•  The priority of the complaint will drive the timescale for completion (3 days for urgent or 
2 weeks for non-urgent). 
•  All  areas  of  interaction  and  communication  should  be  established  (who,  what,  where, 
when, why etc.) and documented where possible. 
iv)      Resolve & Confirm  
Ensure  that  the  final  resolution  is  clear  and  fair.  Also  confirm  the  proposed  action  and 
resolution with another senior person (PSAC Management). 
•  Ensure  that  the  proposed  resolution  meets  corporate  guidelines  and  does  not 
prejudice PSAC in any unnecessary legal or financial manner. 
•  Document the proposed action and discuss and agree with the PSAC Project Manager. 
•  Discuss and review the solution from both the corporate and complainant viewpoint 
to ensure fairness and clarity. 
•  The review should include recognition and documentation of any underlying issues 
that have contributed to the complaint and recommendations for actions to prevent 
further occurrence.  
•  This should then be reviewed as part of the bi-monthly quality assurance reviews. 
v)       Respond to Complainant  
Provide the Complainant with the resolution within the timescales promised. 
•  The  details  of  the  findings  and  proposed  resolution  should  be  clearly  explained  (in 
written  or  verbal  form  as  appropriate)  to  the  complainant-  within  the  agreed 
timescales. 
If this cannot be done on time the Complainant should be contacted by telephone to 
request further time. 
• 
vi)      Appeal & Follow 
Ensure that complaints are followed up to confirm that the complainants are satisfied with 
the response given. If not satisfied the Complainant is advised on the route for Appealing 
•  All Priority 1 complaints and 95% of priority 2 complaints must be followed up within 
a reasonable timescale. 
•  This will be carried out by PSAC Administration team / PSAC Project Manager’s office. 
•  The follow-up should identify the following  
Is the complainant satisfied with the response? 
o 
o  Did they feel that their complaint was properly and fairly handled? 
•  Any  negative  responses  to  these  questions  should  be  referred  to  PSAC  Project 
Managers for action and direct follow up with the complainant. 
•  The complainant is given room for appealing to the Ministry of Agriculture or Courts 
of Law, if he is not satisfied. 
vii)     QA & Close 
Ensure that the PSAC as a whole is aware of the complaints and any underlying issues. Plan 
actions to remove these and prevent future recurrence. 
•  All  complaints  should be  reviewed  monthly  as  part of  the  quality  assurance  review 
meetings. 
•  Any complaints where action can be taken to avoid recurrence must be acted upon 
and raised with the appropriate managers/teams across the PSAC. 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 16. Integrated Pest Managment Plan
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
(MINA 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT 
COMPETITIVENESS PROJECT  
(PSAC) 
________________________________________________ 
INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT PLAN 
(IPMP) 
________________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
KG 569 Street,  
Kigali 
Rwanda 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.0      INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................... 3 
2.0      EXISTING PEST MANAGEMENT APPROACHES AND THEIR LIMITATIONS. .............................. 3 
3.0      INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) ........................................................................................ 5 
4.0      INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLAN ................................................ 8 
1.0      INTRODUCTION 
The  Small-scale  farmers  will  be  involved  in  the  growing  of  coffee,  tea  and  horticulture 
crops.  These  agricultural  livelihoods  activities  will  entail  the  use  of  agro  chemicals 
(pesticides, fertilisers etc). This outline of the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
has been developed as a decision-making process for the selection, implementation, and 
evaluation of pest management practices to be employed in the project.  
2.0      EXISTING PEST MANAGEMENT APPROACHES AND THEIR LIMITATIONS. 
The farmers carry out routine management of pests in their fields, mainly through the use 
of pesticides. Farm and crop management techniques are also used to control pests but 
there are limitations and problems that the farmers face in using these methods. Below 
are the existing and potential pest management efforts and their limitations.  
• 
• 
Growing a Healthy Crop by Starting with Healthy Seed  
A crop that germinates from seed that is healthy is likely to be less vulnerable to 
pest  damage.  Also,  a  crop  grown from  seed that has been bred from  resistant 
strains is less likely to be damaged during plant growth and crop storage.  
Most of the farmers do not have ready access to good seed at the time of planting 
and  as  a  result  they  use  seed  from  the  previous  harvest.  Commercial  seed  is 
usually too expensive for the farmers who mostly rely on seed and farm input 
donations.  
Good Farming Practices to Ensure Vigorous Crops  
A  plant  growing  in  good  farm  conditions  is  generally  less  vulnerable  to  pest 
damage than a plant growing under stressed conditions. Good farming practices 
include  timely  and  recommended  soil  preparation  and  planting,  and 
recommended water and nutrient application.  
Limitations  and  constraints  for  the  farmers 
lack  of  appropriate 
skills/knowledge  on  water  and  nutrient  management,  lack  of  farm  inputs  and 
resources to adequately and timely prepare their farms.  
include 
•  Making the Crop Unattractive or Unavailable to Pests  
This strategy includes adjusting planting times to ensure that crop development 
does  not  coincide  with  pest  appearance.  The  success  of  using  this  strategy 
requires good knowledge of the seasons and the ability to forecast the right time 
for planting.  
The farmers need the appropriate training and information through the extension 
workers to ensure that they plant at the right times.  
• 
Crop Diversity or Rotation, Early Planting  
Crop rotations or multiple cropping removes the chance for the re-appearance of 
persistent pests. This strategy depends on the availability of seed to the farmers 
who, most of the times, are in short supply of adequate and good quality seed.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  the  Horticulture  sector  it  was  noted  during  the  field  trip  that  crop 
diversification and rotation was practiced to a limited extent. Some of the crops 
were  difficult  to  sell  due  to  lack  of  markets.  The  farmers  mentioned  lack  of 
markets as one of the reasons why they preferred to stick to the crops that had 
ready markets. Crop rotation is also difficult due to limitations on availability of 
land.  
General Hygiene  
Good sanitation of the farms and surroundings, including crop storage structures 
and buildings ensures clean and healthy crops as well as seed for planting. 
The  farmers  need  to  be  well  trained  in  crop  and  seed  management  to  avoid 
damage. They need to appreciate the importance of preparing their farms in time 
and the benefits of weeding at the appropriate times.  
Biological/ecological control  
This  is  achieved  by  conserving  and  enhancing  natural  biological/ecological 
controls already in the field and in selected situations, through natural enemies 
of  pests.  This  method  requires  research  and  thorough  evaluation  before  new 
species are introduced to avoid disrupting existing ecosystems.  
The farmers need to be trained in available and appropriate biological controls 
that can be used to prevent emergence of pests. Farmers are not fully aware of 
the potential for this control method which, by creating an enabling environment 
could tame natural biological systems to discourage pests.  
Physical Control  
Physical controls, such as flooding to eliminate snails are practiced where there 
is good supply of irrigation water. Other physical controls include hand picking of 
pests, uprooting infested crop, using fire to remove pests on crop residues and 
frequent weeding.  
These methods are commonly used by the farmers. However, there is need to 
enhance  their  application  to  ensure  that  they  are  used  in  a  systematic  and 
coordinated manner.  
Use of pesticides  
Pesticides may be used with care to ensure their toxicity to non-target organisms 
is  as  low  as  possible.  The  effectiveness  of  pesticides  should  be  as  selective  as 
possible. Certain pesticides of natural origin are compatible with integrated pest 
management  (IPM),  causing  minimum  disturbance  to  natural  biological  and 
ecological pest control mechanisms.  
It  was  noted  that  farmers  are  using  different  types  of  pesticides  for  the  same 
crops  and  that  the  type  of  pesticide  used  is  determined  by  affordability  and 
availability.  Use  of  pesticides  is  a  commonly  preferred  method  of  pest  control 
since it is perceived as a rapid method that does not require much effort. The 
farmers therefore need to be guided and trained to understand the limitations 
and  environmental  consequences  of  using  pesticides.  They  should  be 
knowledgeable  of  pesticides  that  are  compatible  with  IPM  and  that  do  not 
degrade the natural biological and ecological pest control systems. The farmers 
need  to  be  equipped  with  information  on  pesticide  application  quantities  and 
methods;  prevention  of  chemical  poisoning/accidents  and  effects  of  high 
pesticides residues in crops. Enforcement of the act that deals with Pesticides is 
of primary importance to control importation and use of pesticides.  
3.0      INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) refers to a mix of farmer-driven, ecologically based 
pest  control  practices  that  seeks  to  reduce  reliance  on  synthetic  chemical  pesticides.  It 
involves (a) managing pests (keeping them below economically damaging levels) rather 
than  seeking  to  eradicate  them;  (b)  relying,  to  the  extent  possible,  on  non-chemical 
measures to keep pest populations low; and (c) selecting and applying pesticides, when 
they have to be used, in a way that minimises adverse effects on beneficial organisms, 
humans, and the environment. 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is a comprehensive approach to solving pest problems. 
IPM  shifts  the  focus  from  controlling  a  pest  now;  to  making  the  best  management 
decisions for the long-term; and builds a comprehensive response to pest problems. The 
goal  is  to  identify  and  implement  coordinated  strategies  that  work  together  in  an 
integrated  manner  to  provide  optimum  results;  with  the  view  to  achieving  long-term 
positive environmental and social benefits. The concept of integration works on multiple 
levels  in  that  remedial  strategies  for  individual  pests  are  integrated  with  each  other  to 
ensure  compatibility  with  the  need  to  manage  other  pests.  The  pest  management 
strategies  must  be  consistent  with  the  objectives  to  protect  the  environment  and  to 
address social concerns.  
The IPM approach arises as a response to negate over-reliance on pesticides and short-
term solutions that do not account for all of the long-term costs and externalities. IPM 
acknowledges that pesticides are still valuable, but stresses that chemical control is but 
one of the many tactics considered in an IPM approach. Pesticide use in IPM is limited to 
situations where there is an identified need and lack of suitable alternatives. This contrasts 
with  a  preventive  chemical  approach  where  pesticides  are  used  on  a  prescribed  basis 
without determining the need or making full use of alternative measures.  
IPM  techniques  can  be  separated  into  two  major  groups:  i)  Relatively  straightforward 
replacements for chemicals, and ii) Supporting measures. 
Chemical replacement includes: 
•  Biological control: the introduction of insects, mites, micro-organisms that prey 
on or parasitize harmful species. 
•  Bio-pesticides: these have a pathogenic micro-organism as the active ingredient, 
for example a bacterium, fungus or a virus. 
•  Botanicals:  botanical  pesticides  contain  plant  extracts  that  have  biocidal 
properties e.g., Neem (Azadirachta indica). 
•  Semi-chemicals:  chemicals  (especially  pheromones)  are  used  to  stimulate 
particular behaviours or interactions between individual insects so as to control 
pests.  
Choosing  appropriate  measures 
is  not  straightforward  and  requires  significant 
understanding of the interactions between the environment, crop, pest, and predator. The 
scientific  basis  for  farmer  decision-making  in  biological  control  depends  on  detailed 
knowledge  of  the  life  histories  of  pests  and  their  natural  enemies,  crop  ecology,  and 
interactions within the agro-ecosystem. Supporting measures include traditional methods 
in  subsistence  farming  systems:  cultural  control  (e.g., 
of  pest  control  as  used 
intercropping),  habitat  manipulation  (e.g.,  creating  diversity),  mechanical  and  physical 
control,  natural  biological  systems  and  host  plant  resistance.  Farmer  participation  and 
learning are therefore essential in ensuring proper pest management practices.  
The basic requirements for implementing IPM in the  PSAC sites includes understanding 
the biology and economics of the pest and the system in which the pest exists, monitoring 
the  pests  and  natural  controls,  and  establishing  their  economic  or  aesthetic  injury 
thresholds.  IPM  can  be  achieved  by  selecting  an  appropriate  strategy  of  cultural, 
mechanical,  biological,  and/or  chemical  prevention  or  control  techniques,  as  briefly 
described below:  
• 
Cultural Practices:  
These include habitat modification and adapting operating procedures so that pest 
damage  is  reduced,  and  natural  control  is  enhanced.  It  involves  sanitation  or 
cleaning of sources of pest infestation, choosing plant varieties that are resistant 
to  pest  injury,  adjusting  planting  time,  fertilization,  tillage,  and  harvesting 
operations to have the most beneficial effect for the pest management situation.  
•  Biological Controls:  
These are predators, parasites, and diseases that attack pests. Measures should be 
taken to conserve naturally occurring populations of these biological controls. In 
some  situations  where  naturally  occurring  biological  controls  are  not  effective, 
they can be introduced from outside sources.  
•  Chemical Control: 
This  involves  selecting  a  pesticide  with  the  lowest  toxicity  to  humans  and  non-
target  organisms  (including  biological  controls)  and  using  it  in  such  a  way  to 
prevent  or  minimize  undesirable  environmental  effects.  The  lowest  effective 
amount  of  pesticide  is  applied,  using  appropriate  and  carefully  calibrated 
equipment.  In  many  cases,  use  of  pesticides  cannot  be  entirely  eliminated. 
However, use of pesticides must be controlled so as to reduce or eliminate social 
and environmental impacts.  
A comprehensive IPM should support a pesticide management plan that is designed to 
ensure  that  pesticides  are  procured,  handled,  stored,  applied  and  disposed  in  such  a 
manner that protects life and the environment. The plan shall consider the entire life cycle 
of the pesticides. Hence the various livelihood activities and operations must observe the 
following: 
a) 
All pesticides must be purchased from registered pesticides dealers. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Pesticides must be purchased strictly according to the requirements to avoid 
over-stocking. A follow up system for the procurement, transportation, receipt 
and custody of pesticides must be established. 
During movement or transportation of pesticides they must not be mixed up 
with  other  items,  particularly  food  items.  They  should  be  in  well  confined 
containers. 
Pesticides shall be stored in a dedicated and centralized warehouse or storage 
facility,  separately  from  agricultural  produce  and  other  items.  All  pesticides 
must always be under lock and key and under the custody of a very responsible 
person.  Storage  of  pesticides  in  farmers'  houses  must  be  prohibited. 
Warehouses must be protected from sources of fire. Access to the warehouses 
must be restricted to responsible and authorized persons. 
All pesticide mixing containers and spraying equipment must be washed and 
cleaned in a safeguarded central point. All containers must be disposed of in 
line  with  the  requirements  of  the  Pesticides  Act  and  the  Environmental 
Management Act.  
IPM strategies will comprise of soil pests, weeds, field and post- harvest pests, and pest 
diseases management. Use of certified seeds or seed dressing will protect crop from soil 
borne pests. Weed control could either be manual or use of appropriate herbicides, for 
example, pre- and post-germination herbicides. However, extreme care is needed in the 
use  of  herbicides,  as  wrong  or  uninformed  use  is  likely  to  cause  total  loss  of  crops  or 
pollution of water and soil.  
As a rule, beneficiaries should observe strict surveillance of their crop and observe high 
levels of crop hygiene as a first step to manage the pests and diseases in their plots, as 
appropriate. These include removal and destruction of affected plants and then preventive 
control of the identified problem. Post-harvest pests are managed even before harvesting 
by  cleaning  the  stores  and  destroying  the  residues  from  previous  harvest.  Use  of 
recommended pesticides on the harvested crop before storage contributes immensely to 
the preservation of the harvested crop against attacks by pests. 
IPM initiatives have the potential to improve the management of pests on the farms and 
in  food  handling facilities  to  improve  yields  and to prevent damage  to  crops.  Section 2 
above highlights some of the IPM practices that are being used to a limited extent, by the 
farmers.  These  practices  have  great potential  and  therefore  need to  be supported  and 
strengthened  through  extension  services  and  targeted  training  activities  to  ensure 
maximum benefits.  
4.0      INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLAN  
Table 1     Integrated pest management and monitoring plan 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Item  
No  
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practices  
Monitoring Institution   Monitoring  
Frequency  
1.  
PHYSICAL AND BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS  
1.1  
Coffee 
Tea, 
Horticultural 
damage by pests  
Low crop yields  
and 
Crop 
Use healthy seed and resistant varieties. Train 
farmers on importance of using healthy seed  
Farm management & farmers  IPM practices  
Min of Agriculture  
NAEB 
Quarterly  
(timely 
farming 
and 
practices 
Good 
recommended  soil  preparation,  water  and 
nutrient  management).  Train  farmers in good 
farming practices  
Provide information to farmers on appropriate 
planting times  
Crop rotation, diversity and inter-cropping  
Extension workers,  
farm management & farmers  
Recommended  agricultural  practices, 
IPM practices  
Min of Agriculture  
NAEB 
quarterly  
Extension workers.  
Extension workers  
Recommended  agricultural  practices, 
IPM practices  
Recommended agricultural  
practices  
Min. of Agriculture  
NAEB 
Min of Agriculture  
NAEB 
Train  farmers  in  enhancement  of  biological 
control of pests. Research in IPM methods  
Extension workers Agricultural 
Research, NGO's  
IPM practices  
Make  farm  inputs  and  information  on  pests, 
pesticides and pest resistant seeds available to 
farmers  
Micro-credit 
Extension  workers, 
suppliers and NGO's  
institutions, 
seed 
IPM  
Min of Agriculture  
NAEB 
Min of Agriculture  
NAEB 
2. 
CHEMICAL CONTROLS (PESTICIDES) 
2.1 
2.1.1  
Issues / Concerns During Pesticide Transportation  
Adulteration  
Lack of controls  
Inspection, sampling and testing  
Transporters  
-Packaging  and  storage  standards  -
Product  specifications  –Environment 
Act 
Pesticides Act  
NAEB 
2.1.2  
Accidents / spillages  
-Vehicle 
condition, -Poor driving skills  
condition, 
-Road 
Ensure  that  roadworthy  vehicles  are  used. 
Ensure drivers are properly instructed.  
NAEB 
traffic 
regulations. 
-Road 
maintenance requirements  
-Vehicle 
- Environment 
Department 
As need arises  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Item  
No  
2.1.3  
2.2 
2.2.1  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practices  
Monitoring Institution   Monitoring  
Frequency  
Accidental Contamination  Using same vehicle for different 
purposes  
Ensure  vehicles  are  inspected  and  cleaned 
when changing use  
Transporters  
- (pesticide transport regulations).  
As need arises  
- Environment 
Department  
Ministry of Agriculture -
DA  
Issues/Concerns During Pesticide Storage  
Pesticide loss, degradation 
and contamination.  
-Inappropriate  building 
storage of pesticides.  
for 
-Suitable warehouse  
Transporters 
 Agro dealers  
- regulations  
Environment 
- 
Department 
-NAEB 
approval 
faculties 
of 
for 
Before 
storage 
pesticides  
Wrong shelving or stacking  
-Routine inspection and inventory checks  
Agro-dealers  
-Inadequate  storage  space.  --
-Multi-
housekeeping 
Bad 
purpose use of warehouse  
Theft and vandalism 
Over-stocking  
-Provide adequate and separate  
storage space for pesticides  
Agro-dealers  
to  pesticide  areas.  Check 
Farm management  
Restrict  entry 
pesticides records regularly 
Buying the required quantities only  
-  
-  manufacturer's 
- NAEB  
- NAEB 
Half yearly  
Half yearly 
regulations, 
- 
guidelines  
- regulations,  
- manufacturer's  
guidelines  
Farm security policy 
Farm management  
quarterly 
Agro-dealers  
Pesticides Act  
Farm management  
As need arises  
2.2.2 
Farm members safety Lack of control on trespassers  Restrict entry to pesticide areas 
Farm management  
MBS, FAO Guidelines. Factories Act  Ministry Of Labour,  
Annually 
2.2.3  
Occupational Health  
Exposure to pesticides  
Provide appropriate warning signs 
-Provide protective clothing and  
ensure it is used.  
-Train farmers in proper  
pesticides handling.  
-Routine medical examination  
Agro-dealers  
Ministry of Agriculture  
NAEB 
labour regulations,  
regulations  
Issues/concerns during pesticide application  
2.3  
2.3.1  
2.3.2  
Pesticide  misuse,  over  / 
under use  
Intentional poisoning  
Frustration, Social pressures  
lack of appropriate knowledge  -Training and awareness campaigns  
Ministry of Agriculture  
NAEB  
Agro-dealers  
Pesticide manufacturers regulations  
Pesticides Act  
-Ensure  responsible,  mentally  sound  and 
mature persons are given charge and control 
of pesticides.  
-Restrict accessibility to pesticides.  
-Spot checking  
NAEB  
-Min. of labour.  
-  
- NAEB 
-, NAEB 
-DEO  
-  
-Min of labour  
- NAEB  
Annually  
Annually  
Annually  
2.3.3  
Accidental  
poisoning  
lack of knowledge of pesticide 
potency and negligence  
Training  
Ministry of Agriculture  
NAEB 
Pesticides Act  
-  
-DEO  
Annually  
Item  
No  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practices  
Monitoring Institution   Monitoring  
Frequency  
-Equipment malfunction  
-Wrong type of equipment.  
-  Time 
application (spraying)  
and  method  of 
-Regular maintenance of equipment.  
-Use recommended equipment.  
-Use approved methods of application.  
-Use recommended protective clothing.  
-Training 
Management  
seminars 
-Integrated  Pesticide 
-Ministry of Agriculture  
NAEB 
-Manufacturer's recommendations.  
-Equipment maintenance policy  
-  
- NAEB  
Annually  
-Improper 
equipment.  
cleaning 
of 
-Clean  equipment  and  dispose  equipment  as 
recommended by  
Ministry of Agriculture  
NAEB 
-Improper disposal of cleaning 
water and old equipment  
manufacturer.  
-Use  bio-beds  and  draining  dams  to  dispose 
cleaning and drainage waters  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
-Manufacturer's recommendations.  
- NAEB 
-PSAC  
Annually  
regulations.  Water 
- 
regulations  
resources 
- NAEB 
-PSAC 
Multi-purpose 
use 
equipment or pesticides  
of 
Control use of equipment and pesticides.  
-Thorough cleaning of equipment  
-Training  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
Ministry of Agriculture  
Pesticides Act  
- - NAEB 
-PSAC 
Annually  
Issues / Concerns during disposal of pesticides containers and equipment  
-Pesticides 
equipment 
and 
manufacturer's recommendations.  
-Water pollution standards.  
of 
- 
Department 
Environment.  
Annually  
,  
of 
2.4.  
2.4.1  
Water and Environmental 
pollution  
-Cleaning of equipment,  
-Disposal of remains of  
pesticides  
-Disposal  of  containers  and 
equipment  
-Use  of  bio-beds,  draining  channels  and 
draining dams.  
-Use chemical remains to re- spray.  
-Clean equipment in one place.  
-Use plants such as water lilies to absorb waste 
pesticides.  
-Take stock of pesticide containers  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
--- NAEB 
-PSAC 
-Department 
Environmental 
-Water resources Board  
Item  
No  
2.4.2  
Potential 
Concerns  
Post 
Monitoring  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practices  
Monitoring Institution   Monitoring  
Frequency  
Application 
Pesticides residues in the food 
chain  
-- NAEB 
-PSAC 
-Integrated Pest Management  
-Adherence  to  specifications  on  control  of 
residues  
-Sensitize  farmers  not  to  harvest  produce 
immediately after spraying  
-Information management  
-Develop manuals for use at grassroots level  
-Environmental standards  
-Wastewater standards  
Annually  
of 
-Department 
Environment 
-Water Resources Board  
- NAEB 
-PSAC 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 17. Labour Management Procedures
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
(MINA 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT 
COMPETITIVENESS PROJECT  
(PSAC) 
________________________________________________ 
LABOUR MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
(LMP) 
________________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
KG 569 Street,  
Kigali 
Rwanda 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
LABOUR MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES .............................................................................. 1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ........................................................................................................... 2 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ...................................................................................... 3 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 4 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ 5 
1.2      PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE (PDO)............................................................... 5 
1.3      PROJECT COMPONENTS ............................................................................................ 5 
1.3.1    Component 1: ....................................................................................................... 5 
1.3.2    Component 2: ....................................................................................................... 6 
1.3.3    Component 3: ....................................................................................................... 6 
2.  OVERVIEW OF LABOUR ON THE PSAC PROJECT ............................................................... 7 
2.1      LABOUR REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................... 7 
2.1.1    Direct Workers: ..................................................................................................... 7 
2.1.2    Contracted Workers:............................................................................................. 8 
2.1.3    Primary Supply Workers: ...................................................................................... 8 
3.  ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL LABOUR RISKS .................................................................... 8 
3.1      LABOUR INFLUX ......................................................................................................... 8 
3.2      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY: ..................................................................... 9 
3.3      GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE:........................................................................................ 9 
3.4      CHILD AND FORCED LABOUR: .................................................................................. 10 
4.  OVERVIEW OF LABOUR LEGISLATION: TERMS AND CONDITIONS ................................. 10 
4.1      THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ...................................................................................... 10 
5.  RESPONSIBLE STAFF AND PROCEDURES ........................................................................ 12 
5.1      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY..................................................................... 13 
5.2      LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. ................................................................... 13 
5.3      CONTRACTORS OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY. .......................................... 13 
5.4      CONTRACTOR LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. ............................................ 13 
5.5      WORKER GRIEVANCES. ............................................................................................ 13 
5.6      ADDITIONAL TRAINING. ........................................................................................... 13 
6.  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ........................................................................................... 14 
6.1      LABOUR INFLUX AND GENDER BASED VIOLENCE.................................................... 14 
6.2      OCCUPATIONAL, HEALTH AND SAFETY.................................................................... 15 
7.  AGE OF EMPLOYMENT ................................................................................................... 16 
8.  TERMS AND CONDITIONS ............................................................................................... 16 
8.1      WORKER’S ORGANIZATION ..................................................................................... 17 
9.  DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES AND GRIEVANCE MECHANISM ......................................... 17 
9.1      DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE ...................................................................................... 17 
9.2      INDIVIDUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ..................................................................... 18 
9.3      COLLECTIVE GRIEVANCES AND DISPUTES RESULTING FROM THE NEGOTIATIONS OF 
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENTS. ................................................................................................ 18 
9.4            GENDER-BASED  VIOLENCE,  SEXUAL  EXPLOITATION  AND  WORKPLACE  SEXUAL 
HARASSMENT ..................................................................................................................... 18 
10.  CONTRACTOR MANAGEMENT ........................................................................................ 19 
11.  COMMUNITY WORKERS ................................................................................................. 20 
12.  PRIMARY SUPPLY WORKERS ........................................................................................... 20 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ESMS                                 Environmental and Social Management System 
GDP                                   Gross Domestic Product 
GoR                                   Government of Rwanda 
GRM                                  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
IFAD                                   International Fund for Agricultural Development 
NCCLCD                                   National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development 
PAP                                     Project Affected Person 
PMU                                   Project Management Unit 
PO                                       Producer Organization 
PSAC                                   Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness project 
USAID                                 United States Agency for International Development 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The  Labour  Management  Procedures  (LMP)  is  developed  to  manage  risks  under  the 
Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC)  implemented  by  the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) and funded by IFAD. The LMP sets 
out the Program’s approach to meeting national requirements as well as the objectives of 
IFAD’s  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  of  IFAD  2021, 
specific objectives of Environmental and Socials Standard 5: Labour and Working Conditions 
The  document  identifies  the  types  of  workers  who  will  be  engaged  in  the  program  with 
tenures of respective groups to be recruited and involved. Of whom Direct, contracted (and 
sub-contracted,  as  appropriate),  and  Primary  Supply  Workers  are  the  major  types.  The 
document  advocates  for  awareness-raising  activities  added  with  periodic  monitoring  to 
ensure that the standards set in this procedure are understood by all employers and workers 
and  are then  followed.  However,  no  labour  influx  is  expected  as  the  sub-projects will  be 
small and dispersed all over the districts. 
The key highlight of this document is to categorically identify, assess, and prescribe how to 
address  the  issues  of  Child  and  Forced  Labour,  Gender-based  Violence,  and  Occupational 
Health and Safety. The program will discourage the recruitment of children and any practices 
of forced labour.  
The procedure specifically suggested the program’s position in case of gender-based violence. 
It pinpoints the high chance of women (and their children) being subjected to gender-based 
violence  due  to  the  program.  Hence,  necessary  mechanisms  are  in  place  with  regular 
monitoring and reporting.  
The  LMP  includes  the  issue  of  Occupation  Health  and  Safety  ensuring  appropriate 
implementation  of  IFAD  Standard  5:  Labour  and  Working  Conditions.  It  also  covers  a 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The mechanism includes Disciplinary Procedure, Individual 
Grievance Procedure, Collective Grievance Procedure, Gender-based Violence.  
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
This  Labour  Management  Procedures  (LMP)  was  developed  by  the  Rwanda  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) to manage risks under the Promoting Smallholder 
Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) funded by IFAD. The LMP sets out the Program’s 
approach  to  meeting  national  requirements  as  well  as  the  objectives  of  the  IFAD’s  Social, 
Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  of  IFAD  2020,  specifically  the 
objectives  of  Environmental  and  Socials,  Standard  5:  Labour  and  Working  Conditions  and 
Standard 6. Community health and safety. 
The aim of the PSAC project is to increase incomes of the rural poor, by supporting inclusive 
agro-exports value chains by increasing their climate resilient productive capacity and market 
access. The proposed project will focus on key activities that are priorities for the MINAGRI 
within  the  context  of  economic,  social,  and  governance  transformation  towards  the 
aspirations of Vision 2050.  
The components and sub-components of the project are summarized below. 
1.2      PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE (PDO) 
The  Project  Development  Objective  is  “To  support  the  inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted 
export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-resilient  productive  capacity  and 
market access”. 
1.3      PROJECT COMPONENTS 
To  address  the  Smallholder  Agro-export  Competitiveness  challenges  and  support  the 
achievement of the PDO, the proposed project consists of three main components: 
1.3.1    Component 1:  
Investments to enhance climate smart production and productivity of selected 
export-driven value chains  
This component will support the intensification and improve the competitiveness of 
the  production  levels  of  the  selected  export-driven  value  chains  through  targeted 
investments along two sets of interventions as detailed below: 
Sub-component 1.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity.  
This subcomponent (SC) will focus on expansion and rehabilitation of plantation areas, 
supported  by  the  development  and  adoption  of 
innovative  climate-resilient 
technologies  and  practices.  At  the  inception  level  the project  will  conduct  study  to 
determine the most cost-effective strategies in coffee processing and production. It 
will  support  the  coffee  drying  parabolic  structures  to  address  the  challenges  of 
increasing  wet  periods  affecting  the  quality  of  the  coffee  during  harvest.  Support 
conservation measures at tea plantations and promote a community-based approach 
for the production of avocado and mango seedlings  
Sub-component 1.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities.  
PSAC  will  address  the  key  infrastructure  gaps  that  are  hindering  smallholder 
cooperatives/POs in each export-driven VC. Acquisition of trucks to fast-track delivery 
of fresh tea leaves. The investment in an Avocado grading acquisition of Complete Soil 
and Water Testing Kit Investments in new hangar construction in 52 tea and 2 coffee 
cooperatives. Basic facilities, tools and equipment to all investments involving a grant 
will be supported under component 2 for business planning and linkage to financing, 
in  addition  to  the  overall  capacity  building  support  to  be  provided  for  improved 
cooperative governance and enhanced technical skills. 
1.3.2    Component 2: 
Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains) 
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted 
VCs  by  improving  smallholder  value  chain  actors’  access  to  advisory  services, 
sustainable markets and financial services. 
Sub-component 2.1 – Capacity building of Producer Organizations.  
The support will be provided to both established cooperatives, especially the ones that 
have  been  identified  as  weak  in  previous  assessments,  the  new  cooperatives,  out-
grower schemes, farmer groups that will be formed to accompany the expansion of 
certain crops as foreseen under component 1. Issues to be addressed will focus will 
include:    governance,  decision-making  process  and  management;  group  dynamics, 
gender  equality  climate  change  adaptation  approaches,  and  environmental  and 
natural resources management.  
Quality  control  and  market-driven  certification:    PSAC  support  will  support  in  the 
accreditation of certain testing services, creating a national pool of various voluntary 
standards certified lead trainers  
Backward and forward market linkages: The project will support efforts that promote 
brands that display the uniqueness of the Rwandan produce in Tea and coffee as well 
as  horticulture  through  digital  marketing  and  capacity  building  of  exporters  about 
international business environment   
Enhanced access to financial services: The project, through its business development 
services will support the quality and outreach of rural financial services by financial 
institutions, and build the capacity of the target groups to access financial services 
1.3.3    Component 3:  
Policy support and coordination  
Policy  dialogue:  in  PSAC  will  aim  at  efficiently  completing  the  work  undertaken  by 
other development projects and agencies.  
Enabling  rural  finance  environment.  To  ensure  enabling  agriculture  finance 
environment, especially for export agriculture, PSAC in collaboration with Cordaid and 
AFR will create a platform to coordinate the proposed activities of the final strategy.  
Other  issues  affecting  PSAC  export-driven  value  chains:  PSAC,  through  NAEB  will 
contribute  and  will  ensure  close  follow  up  on  policy  products  that  are  expected  to 
have a positive impact on the project’s target group.  
Specific support to value chain platforms: In this area PSAC intends to:  
(i) 
(ii) 
support round-tables for policy formulation in the coffee VC;  
build  Capacity  of  Business  Membership  Organizations  (BMOs)  like  Coffee 
Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR 
2.  OVERVIEW OF LABOUR ON THE PSAC PROJECT 
The LMP is applicable, to all the PSAC Project workers as per the following condition: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
People employed or engaged directly by PSAC to work specifically in relation to the 
Project, 
The  Government  public  servants,  who  may  provide  support  to  the  Project,  will 
remain  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  existing  public  sector 
employment agreement or arrangement, 
People  employed  or  engaged  by  consultants  to  perform  work  related  to  core 
function of the Project, regardless of location, 
People employed or engaged by PSAC’s primary suppliers, 
2.1      LABOUR REQUIREMENTS 
2.1.1    Direct Workers: 
Direct workers include, the NAEB staff, Program-based Staffs and Permanent MINAGRI Staffs. 
NAEB will employ consultants and support staff who are working on contractual bases as part 
of  the  PFU.  Terms  and  conditions  of  these  consultants  are  guided  by  the  Labour  law.  In 
addition, the civil servants (MINAGRI Staff) at the local level will be involved in the program 
implementation on a full time or on part-time basis. The consultants will be engaged by the 
Program to undertake short period assignments as necessary. These are consultants guided 
by specific contractual agreements between them and PSAC. 
Direct  workers  are  eligible  to  work  for  a  fixed  contract  period  of  not  more  than  1  year. 
Contracts will be renewed for another year based on satisfactory services. Consultants will be 
engaged under a short-term period of not more than six months and the labour requirement 
including the time schedule and deliverables will be stipulated in their respective contracts. 
NAEB will oversee the running of the Project. It will host the following key positions that will 
be recruited on a competitive basis:  
o  Project Operation Manager;  
o  3 Value Chain Specialists (coffee, tea, horticulture);  
o  Access to Finance (A2F) Specialist;  
o  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist;  
o  Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist;  
o  Environmental Specialist;  
o  Knowledge Management (KM) & Communication Specialist;  
o  Administrative Assistant;  
o  Accountants (reporting to Financial Manager of SPIU for IFAD-funded projects);  
o  Procurement Officer (reporting to Sr. Procurement Officer of SPIU for IFAD-funded 
projects);  
o  3 drivers (one for each value chain). In addition,  
o  NAEB Focal Person (young graduates, men and women) will be posted in each target 
district to ensure smooth coordination at field level. 
2.1.2    Contracted Workers:  
Based on the requirement in every component the  NAEB will employ contractors who will 
hire contracted workers based on their level of skills and program needs. If agreed with the 
NAEB  sub-contracts  of  the  work  could  be  given.  Sub-contractors  recruited  may  supply 
labourers as per the agreed terms and conditions.  
Contracted  workers  are  eligible  to  work  for  a  contract  period  fixed  by  the  NAEB.  Their 
contracts will be renewed, if required, based on satisfactory services. 
2.1.3    Primary Supply Workers:  
Based on the requirement in every component primary supply workers will be recruited by 
the suppliers as required. It will be ensured (and monitored periodically by the NAEB) that no 
children are recruited and supplied as workers. Furthermore, it will be monitored like above 
that  these  workers  are  not  subjected  to  ‘forced  labour’  in  any  manner.  NAEB  will  be 
responsible  to  make  sure  that  these  standards  are  followed  strictly.  If  any  deviation  is 
identified NAEB will take action as prescribed in the contract/ agreement following the LMP. 
Their tenure service will be based on supplies as procured. 
ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL LABOUR RISKS 
3. 
The  main  labour  risks  associated  with  the  Project  are  assessed  to  be  related  to  the  work 
environment and associated risks of accidents. Based on current conditions in the sector it is 
assessed that the risk of child or forced labour is negligible, and already managed through 
national legislation.  
The  MINAGRI  has  developed  this  LMP  as  part  of  the  environment  and  social  safeguards 
instruments for the project. It serves to illustrate the types of workers to be engaged and their 
management  in  line  with  IFAD  and  national  labour  laws.  Even  though  labour  influx  is  not 
anticipated, social impacts such as GBV, sexual exploitation and communicable diseases for 
local communities cannot be ruled out. Thus, management and mitigation of GBV/SEA risks 
were integrated in both the stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) and the LMP. 
3.1      LABOUR INFLUX 
It is not expected that there will be any labour influx in any project community. The PSAC will 
mandate and localize the economic benefits and only allow for outside, including expatriate 
labour,  where  there  is  a  requirement  for  special  skills.  There  will  be  no  dedicated  camps 
established for worker accommodation in the Project. 
Specific  requirements  to  manage  risks  associated  with  labour  influx,  related to  interaction 
between project workers and local communities, such as communicable diseases and gender-
based  violence,  are  managed  through  contractual  requirements,  Code  of  Conduct  and 
training set out in this document. These procedures are guided by the national legislation.  
3.2      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY:  
The  Occupational  health  and  Safety  measures  and  actions  will  be  developed  and 
implemented to assess and manage risks and impacts to the community arising from Project 
activities and workers. The consultants to be engaged will ensure that their employees/staff 
will be trained on occupational health and safety and records of which are to be inspected 
monthly and audited bi-annually in compliance with the Rwandan labour laws.  
Article 77 and 78 of the Rwandan Labour Law Law N° 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 and Article 132 to 
138 of the Rwandan Labour Code, Law N° 51/2001 of 30/12/2001 deal with occupational health 
and  safety  where  employers  are  required  to  ensure  the  health,  safety  and  welfare  in  the 
workplace for employees. The law include measures relating to OHS for protecting workers 
from injuries, illness or impacts associated with exposure to hazards encountered in the work 
place during work. The OHS measures include provision of PPE, awareness raising, trainings 
and guidance on how to prevent accidents at work place.  
PSAC  will  provide  workers  with PPE,  facilities  for  a  safe  and  clean  environment  to  eat  and 
change, sanitation facilities, and first aid kits.  
The law also requires the employer to inform the management of the social security and the 
Inspectorate of labor where the enterprise is located, occupational accident, disease or death 
in accordance with relevant Laws.  
The  law  also  Elaborates  offences  and  penalties  relating  to  occupational  health  and  safety 
where the employer was negligent about health and safety of employees.  
3.3      GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE:  
Based on IFAD Gender-based violence including sexual exploitation and abuse risk assessment 
rating, the social risks of Sexual Exploitation/Harassment and GBV are rated as moderate, and 
the project will not directly or indirectly cause or contribute to any of the pre-existing social 
issues  related  to  gender-based  violence  but  will  attempt  to  ultimately  contribute  to  their 
mitigation through improving the livelihoods of the poor stakeholders. 
Nonetheless, there is a possibility of contextual risks of GBV and there could be an increase 
in  the  risk  and  exposure  of  GBV/SEA  against  women  because  of  economic  improvement 
opportunity as a result of the project. There is thus a need to uphold safe environments at all 
sub-project areas and implement the GBV Action Plan contained in the project ESMF.  
3.4      CHILD AND FORCED LABOUR: 
The  risk  of  child  labour will  be  very  minimal  and  will be  mitigated through  Certification  of 
laborers’ age. This will be done by using the legally recognized documents such as the National 
Identification  Card,  and  Birth  Certificate.  Further,  awareness-raising  sessions  will  be 
conducted regularly to the communities to sensitize on prohibition and negative impacts of 
child  and  forced  Labour.  In  addition,  this  procedure  will  guide  the  authority  to  monitor 
periodically that no such practice is/ are being practiced in PSAC. 
4.  OVERVIEW OF LABOUR LEGISLATION: TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
This section sets out the key aspects of national labor legislation with regards to terms and 
conditions of work, and how national legislation applies to different categories of workers. 
The  overview  focuses  on  legislation  which  relates  to  the  working  relationship  between 
employers and workers in Rwanda as governed by the Law No. 66/2018 of 30 August 2018 
Regulating Labour in Rwanda, and the Rwandan Labour Code, Law N° 51/2001 of 30/12/2001, 
The scope of this Law applies to the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
6. 
Employment relations based on an employment contract between an employee and an 
employer in the private sector,  
Employment relations based on an employment contract between an employee and an 
employer in the public service, unless otherwise provided by the general statutes for 
public service,  
An apprentice,  
An intern; a self-employed person with regard to occupational health and safety,  
An informal sector employee with regard to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
occupational health and safety, 
the right to form trade unions and employers’ associations, 
the right to salary, 
the minimum wage in categories of occupations determined by an Order of the 
Minister in charge of labour, 
the right to leave, 
social security 
protection against workplace discrimination, 
protection from forced labour 
prohibited forms of work for the child, pregnant or breastfeeding woman.  
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
4.1      THE GENERAL PROVISIONS 
The General provisions are contained in: 
Chapter I General Provisions And Fundamental Rights: Article 10 to 40 of the labor law, deals 
with the rights of an employee which include: 
•  working in an environment where health and safety in the workplace are guaranteed, 
• 
to receive equal salary for works of equal value without discrimination of any kind, 
• 
to be provided leave as provided for by Law, 
• 
to join a trade union of his/her choice, 
• 
to be trained by his/her employer, and 
• 
to receive information relevant to his/her work.  
Article  7  prohibits  any  form  of  forced  labour,  article  8  prohibits  sexual  harassment  in 
workplace. Sexual harassment in any form against supervisee is prohibited. It is prohibited to 
dismiss  an  employee  for  having  reported  or  testified  on  sexual  harassment  committed  by 
his/her supervisor. If there is tangible evidence that an employee has resigned due to sexual 
harassment  committed  against  him/her  by  his/her  supervisor,  his/her  resignation  is 
considered as unfair dismissal. All project workers will sign a Code of Conduct. 
Article 9. The recruitment of project workers will be free from any kind of discrimination as 
provided for by the Law regulating Labour in Rwanda especially in its article 9 stipulating that 
“An employer must give employees equal opportunities at the workplace”. “An employer is 
prohibited from discriminating employees on basis of ethnic origin, family or ancestry, clan, 
skin color or race, sex, region, economic categories, religion or faith, opinion, fortune, cultural 
difference, language, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination. Every 
employer must pay employees equal salary for work of equal value without discrimination of 
any kind”. The same provision of the law will also be applicable in case of any labour influx 
occurrence.  
Chapter II:  dealing with Employment Contract, Apprenticeship and Internship Contracts. 
Article 11 of the law provides guidelines on the conclusion of an employment and provides 
options for written and unwritten contracts provided that whichever of both has proof. In 
light of this, an employment contract for PSAC workers shall be fixed and in written form with 
specification of employment terms and conditions and shall be signed off by the employer 
and employee so as to avoid any conflict or dispute that may arise in relation to this.  
Article 12 Apart from foreign consultant who might be contracted to perform specific duties 
that  might  require  special  expertise  that  cannot  be  sourced  locally,  in  this  project,  the 
likelihood of migrant workers is very low. Nevertheless, in the event of their employment, 
provisions of the law regulating labour in Rwanda and other relevant laws on these matters 
shall be applied especially article 12 of the Law N° 66/2018 of 30/08/2018. 
Chapter  III:  General  Working  Conditions  -  which  deals  with  rights,  obligation  and 
responsibilities  of  both  employers  and  employees.  Article  43  states  the  terms  of  working 
hours, which sets 45 as the maximum working hours per week however provides a window 
for extra hours for an employee upon the agreement with his or her employer on appropriate 
compensation for the overtime and leaves the responsibility to prepare daily timetable for 
work hours and break for an employee to the employer.  
Chapter IV: Salary -  Article 67 states that employers will pay the employee the whole salary 
to which he/she is entitled and deposits it in an account given by the employee in writing in 
a bank or in a financial institution recognised in accordance with the provisions on payment 
intervals of the written contract signed by the two which could be every day for an employee 
employed on hourly or daily basis, every week for an employee recruited for a week, every 
fifteen days for an employee recruited for a fortnight and every month for employee recruited 
on a one-month basis. 
Chapter V: Occupational Health And Safety -  Article 77 deals with General health and safety 
conditions  in  the  workplace,  Article  78  requires  employers/enterprises  to  establish 
Occupational Health and Safety Committee, while Article 79 emphasizes on the importance 
of Personal protective equipment while performing a certain type of activities under which 
most of the works to be performed under PSAC fall.  
Chapter VI: Association of Employees and Association of Employers 
Article 83 Employees’ right to freedom of association An employee has the right to: 1) join 
others in forming a trade union; 2)  join a trade union of his/her choice; 3) participate in lawful 
activities of a trade union. Article 84, Employers’ right to freedom  of association An employer 
has the right to: 1)  form employers’ association; 2) join employers’ association of choice; 3) 
participate in lawful activities of employers’ association. Article 85, Registration of employees’ 
organisations  and  employers’  organisations  Employees’  organisations  and  employers’ 
organisations are registered in accordance with the provisions of this Law. 
Chapter VIII: Labour Disputes Settlement -  which requires the employees’ representatives 
to  amicably  settle  individual  labour  disputes  between  employers  and  employees.  Where 
employees’ representatives fail to settle the disputes amicably, the concerned party refers 
the  matter  to  the  labour  inspector  of  the  area  where  enterprise  is  located.  If  the  Labour 
Inspector fails to settle the dispute due to the nature of the case or the conflict of interests, 
he/she refers the dispute to the Labour Inspector at the national level. If amicable settlement 
fails at this level the case is referred to the competent court. However, the court can decide 
not to receive the case after determining that steps for amicable settlement provided for in 
this Article have not been followed. 
Chapter IX: Right To Strike And Lockout -  Strike and lockout Employees have the right to 
strike and employers have the right to lock out in the respect of the provisions of this Law. 
The strike for employees or lockout for an employer is legal when the arbitration committee 
has  exceeded  fifteen  (15)  working  days  without  issuing  its  decision  or  the  conciliation 
resolution  on  collective  dispute  or  the  court  award  being  enforceable  have  not  been 
implemented. In any case, a strike or lockout must be preceded by a notice of four (4) working 
days. 
Chapter XI: Declaration Made by An Enterprise Article 116: Declaration of an enterprise and 
employees  An  employer  who  opens  an  enterprise  declares  it  in  writing  to  the  labour 
inspectorate  of  his/her  area.  He/she  also  provides  an  initial  declaration  of  information 
relating to the situation of his/her employees within one (1) month from commencement of 
enterprise. An employer wishing to close business or relocate an enterprise declares it to the 
Labour Inspector of his/her area within. 
RESPONSIBLE STAFF AND PROCEDURES 
5. 
The  Lead  Implementation  Agency  will  be  National  Agricultural  Export  Development  Board 
(NAEB),  under  the  responsibility  of  its  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  will  have  the  overall 
responsibility to oversee all aspects of the implementation of the PSAC in particular to ensure 
contractor  compliance.  The  project  will  be  implemented  by  the  NAEB, addressing  all  PSAC 
aspects  as  part  of  procurement  for  works  as  well  as  during  contractor  induction.  The 
contractors will subsequently be responsible for management of labour issues in accordance 
with contract specific labour Management Plans, implementation of which will be supervised 
by  the  NAEB  on  a  monthly  basis  or  at  shorter  intervals  as  defined  by  specific  Plans.  The 
detailed approach is described in the following sections. 
5.1      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY. 
The  PSAC  Environmental  Specialist  must  ensure  that  the  implementation  of  PSAC  will  be 
conducted  in  compliance  to  occupational  health  and  safety  requirements.  The  PSAC 
Environmental  Specialist  will  make  sure  that  each  participating  institution  receives  the 
template OHS programs, establish safety representatives for day-to-day monitoring of safety 
requirements, record and report all incidents accordingly to the PSAC. 
5.2      LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. 
Government civil servants, who may provide support to the Project, will remain subject to the 
terms  and  conditions  of  their  existing  public  sector  employment  agreement  or 
arrangement  as  per  provisions  of  the  Labour  Law.  In  addition  to  these  the  COVID  –  19 
regulations will also apply. 
5.3      CONTRACTORS OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY.  
Contractors  must  engage  a minimum  of  one  safety  representative.  Smaller  contracts  may 
permit  for  the  safety  representative  to  carry  out  other  assignments  as  well.  The  safety 
representative  will  ensure  the  day-to-day  compliance  with  specified  safety  measures  and 
records of any incidents are done. Minor incidents are reported to the  NAEB on a monthly 
basis;  serious  incidents  are  reported  immediately.  Minor  incidents  are  reflected  in  the 
quarterly reports to IFAD while major issues are flagged to IFAD immediately. 
5.4      CONTRACTOR LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. 
Contractors will keep records in accordance with specifications set out in this LMP. The NAEB 
may at any time require records  to ensure that labour conditions are met. NAEB will review 
records against actuals at a minimum on a monthly basis and can require immediate remedial 
actions if warranted. A summary of issues and remedial actions will be included in quarterly 
reports to IFAD. 
5.5      WORKER GRIEVANCES. 
The  NAEB  procedures  currently  in  place  will  remain  for  Project  staff.  Contractors  will  be 
required to present a worker grievance redress mechanism which responds to the minimum 
requirements in this LMP. The NAEB  Social  Officer  will  review  records  on  a  monthly  basis. 
Where worker concerns are not resolved, the national system will be used as set out in the 
section, but NAEB will keep  abreast  of  resolutions  and  reflect  them  in  quarterly  reports to 
IFAD. 
5.6      ADDITIONAL TRAINING. 
Contractors are required to, at all times, have a qualified safety officer on board. If training is 
required, this will be the contractor’s responsibility. The safety officer will provide instructions 
to contractor staff. NAEB will provide training to address risks associated with labour influx 
and will provide a schedule for trainings required. The contractor will be obligated to make 
staff  available  for  this  training,  as  well  as  any  additional  mandatory  trainings  required  by 
NAEB, as specified by the contract. 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
6. 
The engagement and treatment of program staff will be made on the basis of characteristics 
related to inherent job requirements. It will be based on the principle of equal opportunity 
and fair treatment,  and there  will  be no discrimination  with  respect  to  any  aspects  of the 
employment relationship, such as recruitment and hiring, compensation (including wages and 
benefits), working conditions and terms of employment, access to training, job assignment, 
promotion, termination of employment or retirement, or disciplinary practices.  
Contractors  will  be  responsible  for  mitigating  all  environmental  and  social  impacts  of 
subprojects  resulting from  activities  directly under  their  control.  The  NAEB  Environmental 
Specialist will incorporate standardized environmental and social clauses in the tender and 
contract documents in order for potential bidders to be aware of environmental and social 
performance requirements that will be expected from them and are able to reflect that in 
their bids and required to implement the clauses for the duration of the contract. NAEB will 
enforce compliance by contractors with these clauses. 
The contractor will be required to ensure that all documentation related to environmental and 
social management, including the LMP, is available for inspection at any time by the NAEB or 
its appointed agents. The contractual arrangements with each project worker must be clearly 
defined in accordance with Rwandan Legislation. All environmental and social requirements 
will be included in the bidding documents and contracts in addition to any additional clauses, 
which are contained, in the Projects environmental and social instruments. 
The NAEB, Contractors, suppliers or sub-contractors will never engage forced labour. Forced 
labour includes bonded labour (working against an impossible debt), excessive limitations of 
freedom  of  movement,  excessive  notice  periods,  retaining  the  worker’s  identity  or  other 
government-issued  documents  or  personal  belonging, 
imposition  of  recruitment  or 
employment fees payable at the commencement of employment, loss or delay of wages that 
impede  the  workers’  right  to  end  employment  within  their  legal  rights,  substantial  or 
inappropriate  fines,  physical  punishment,  use  of  security  or  other  personnel  to  force  or 
extract work from project workers, or other restrictions that compel a project worker to work 
on a non- voluntary basis. 
6.1      LABOUR INFLUX AND GENDER BASED VIOLENCE 
Contractors will need to maintain labour relations with local communities through a code of 
conduct  (CoC).  The  CoC  commits  all  persons  engaged  by  the  contractor,  including  sub-
contractors  and  suppliers,  to  acceptable  standards  of  behaviour.  The  CoC  must  include 
sanctions  for  non-compliance,  including  non-compliance  with  specific  policies  related  to 
gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and sexual harassment (e.g., termination). The CoC 
should be written in plain language and signed by each worker to indicate that they have: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Received a copy of the CoC as part of their contract, 
Had the CoC explained to them as part of induction process, 
Acknowledged that adherence to this CoC is a mandatory condition of employment, 
Understood that violations of the CoC can result in serious consequences, up to and 
including dismissal, or referral to legal authorities. 
A  copy  of  the  CoC  shall  be  displayed  in  a  location  easily  accessible  to  the  community  and 
project affected people. It shall be provided in English and translated into Kinyarwanda  
Contractors must address the risk of gender-based violence, through: Mandatory training and 
awareness raising for the workforce about refraining from unacceptable conduct toward local 
community members, specifically women. Training may be repeated, 
• 
• 
• 
Informing  workers  about  national  laws  that  make  sexual  harassment  and  gender-
based violence a punishable offence which is prosecuted, 
Adopting  a  policy  to  cooperate  with  law  enforcement  agencies  in  investigating 
complaints about gender-based violence, 
Developing  a  system  to  capture  gender-based  violence,  sexual  exploitation  and 
workplace sexual harassment related complaints/issues. 
This process will be under the portfolio of the Environmental Specialist to be recruited under 
the NAEB and shall identify and engage the relevant stakeholders on GBV and HIV and Aids 
related issues. 
6.2      OCCUPATIONAL, HEALTH AND SAFETY 
PSAC is committed to:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Complying  with  legislation  and  other  applicable  requirements  which  relate  to  the 
occupational health and safety hazards. 
Enabling  active  participation  in  OH&S  risks  elimination  through  promotion  of 
appropriate skills, knowledge and attitudes towards hazards. 
Continually improving the OH&S management system and performance. 
Communicating  this  policy  statement  to  all  persons  working  under  the  control  of 
PSAC with emphasis on individual OH&S responsibilities. 
Availing this policy statement to all interested parties at all participating educational 
facilities and institutions.  
The PSAC Environmental Specialist will be responsible for overseeing the workplace Safety, 
Health and Environmental issues. He/she must: 
• 
• 
• 
Identify potential hazards, 
In  collaboration  with  the  employer,  investigate  the  cause  of  accidents  at  the 
workplace, 
Attend meetings of the safety and health committee to which that safety and health 
representative is a member, 
•  Make  recommendations  to  the  employer  in  respect  of  safety  and  health  matters 
affecting employees. 
Further to avoid work related accidents and injuries, the contractor will:  
• 
• 
• 
Provide occupational health and safety training to all employees involved in  PSAC 
works.  
Ensure availability of first aid box. 
Provide employees with access to toilets and potable drinking water. 
• 
• 
Provide  safety  and  occupational  safety  measures  to  workers  with  Personal 
Protection  Equipment  (PPE)  when  installing  solar  systems  to  prevent  accidents 
during replacement and installation and follow safety measures in installing them. 
Properly dispose of solid waste at designated permitted sites landfill allocated by the 
local authorities. 
Further  to  enforcing  the  compliance  of  environmental  management,  contractors  are 
responsible and liable of safety of site equipment, labours and daily workers attending to the 
site installations and safety of citizens for each sub-project site, as mandatory measures. 
AGE OF EMPLOYMENT 
7. 
Rwanda is a member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) hence it adheres to its 
standards.  The  national  Law  No  66/2018  of  30/08/2018  regulating  Labour  in  Rwanda  was 
elaborated in reference to the International Labour Law. Therefore, this LMP was prepared 
and will be implemented in respect of the international labour standards.   
More specifically the following principles as set forth in the ILO Declaration on Fundamental 
Principles and Rights at Work of 1998 amended in 2022 will be respected:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
The right of workers to associate freely and bargain collectively 
The end of forced and compulsory labour 
The end of child labour 
The end of unfair discrimination among workers 
In addition to article 6 of the labour law which points out with a general outlook on various 
prohibited forms of work for the child, the ministerial instructions no 01/2017 of 17/11/2017 
relating to prevention and fight against child  labour in its article 9 states that a child aged 
between l6-17 may perform work like an adult of above 18 years as long as the work is not 
forced and is in compliance with national legislation.  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
8. 
The  terms  and  conditions  of  employment  in  terms  of  this  project  are  governed  by  the 
provisions of the national Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 regulating Labour in Rwanda which 
makes it mandatory for employers to give its employees a copy of the written particulars of 
employment with definite agreements spelt out. This requirement however is not applicable 
to casual employees. For this project, contractors will be required to provide all its employees 
with written particulars of employment, including casual employees. 
Contractors will also be required to comply with the most current Regulation of Wages Order 
for their particular sector, e.g., the Building and Construction Industry which is issued by the 
Order of the Minister in charge of labour and reviewed on a regular basis. The Wages Order 
specifies the minimum wages, hours of work, overtime pay, leave entitlements, travelling and 
subsistence allowances, and the issue of protective clothing. 
8.1      WORKER’S ORGANIZATION 
The national Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 regulating Labour in Rwanda was elaborated in 
reference to the International Labour Law. The following articles demonstrate this fact  
Article 83: Employees’ right to freedom of association An employee has the right to: 1) join 
others in forming a trade union; 2) join a trade union of his/her choice; 3) participate in lawful 
activities of a trade union. 
Article 84: Employers’ right to freedom of association An employer has the right to: 1)  form 
employers’  association;  2)  join  employers’  association  of  choice;  3)  participate  in  lawful 
activities of employers’ association. 
Article 85: Registration of employees’ organisations and employers’ organisations Employees’ 
organisations and employers’ organisations are registered in accordance with the provisions 
of this Law.  
Rwanda is a member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) hence it adheres to its 
standards.  Therefore,  this  LMP  was  prepared  and  will  be  implemented  in  respect  of  the 
international labour standards. Therefore NAEB provides employees with the right to join and 
form an organization for purpose of labour representation.  
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES AND GRIEVANCE MECHANISM 
9. 
In  any  working  environment  it  is  essential  for  both  employers  and  employees  to  be  fully 
conversant with all aspects of disciplinary processes, the grievance handling procedures and 
the legal requirements and rights involved. In implementing an effective dispute management 
system consideration must be given to the disputes resulting from the following: 
• 
• 
Disciplinary Action 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
9.1      DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 
The starting point for all disciplinary action is rules. These rules may be implied or explicit and 
of course will vary from workplace to workplace. Some rules are implied in the contract of 
employment  (e.g.,  ruling  against  use  of  alcohol  and  drugs  at  workplace),  however  it  is 
advisable that even implied rules be included in the disciplinary code or schedule of offences. 
Therefore, the workplace rules must be: 
Valid and reasonable 
Clear and unambiguous 
The employee must understand the procedure to be applied if he/she contravenes 
nay of the rules. 
• 
• 
• 
A  comprehensive  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  has  been  developed  for  the  project, 
however the following dispute resolution procedures at workplace will be as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
Conducting  of  a  comprehensive  investigation  to  determine  whether  there  are 
grounds for a hearing to be held. 
If a hearing is to be held, the employer is to notify the employee of the allegations 
using a language that the employee can understand. 
The employee is to be given reasonable time to prepare for the hearing and to be 
represented by a fellow employee or lawyer. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The employee must be given an opportunity to respond to the allegations, question 
the witnesses of the employer and to lead witnesses. 
If  an  employee  fails  to  attend  the  hearing  the  employer  may  proceed  with  the 
hearing in the absence of the employee. 
The  hearing  must  be  held  and  concluded  within  a  reasonable  time  and  is  to  be 
chaired by an impartial representative. 
If an employee is dismissed, it must be given the reasons for dismissal and the right 
to refer the dispute concerning the fairness of the dismissal to the labour Court. 
Therefore,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  Consultants/Contractor  to  ensure  that  they  have  a 
disciplinary  procedure  and  Code  and  Standards  which  the  employees  are  aware  of.  Each 
Consultant/Contractor will be required to produce this procedure to ensure that employees 
are not treated unfairly. 
9.2      INDIVIDUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
Termination of Employment requires every employer, including contractors, to have a Formal 
Grievance Procedure which should be known and explained to the employee. Such procedure 
should at least: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Specify to whom the employee should lodge the grievance, 
Refer to time frames to allow the grievance to be dealt with expeditiously, 
Allow the person to refer the grievance to a more senior level within the organization, 
if it is not resolved at the lowest level, 
If a grievance is not resolved the employee has the right to lodge a dispute with the 
employer. 
All  the  contractors  who  will  be  engaged  for  the  project  will  be  required  to  produce  their 
grievance  procedure  as  a  requirement  for  tender  which  at  a  minimum  comply  with  these 
requirements. In addition, good international practice recommends that the procedures be 
transparent,  is  confidential,  adheres  to non-retribution  practices  and  includes  the  right  to 
representation.  After  they  are  engaged,  they  will  be  required  to  produce  proof  that  each 
employee has been inducted and signed that they have been inducted on the procedure. 
9.3      COLLECTIVE GRIEVANCES AND DISPUTES RESULTING FROM THE NEGOTIATIONS OF 
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENTS. 
Where  a  trade  union  is  recognized,  it  is  entitled  to  negotiate  on  a  regular  basis  with  the 
employer over terms and conditions existing at the workplace and the employer is obliged to 
negotiate  with  it.  The  procedures  followed  in  such  instances  is  usually  contained  in  the 
Recognition  Agreement,  which  states  how  the  issues  are  raised,  the  procedure  for 
negotiations, the composition of the parties involved in the negotiation and the procedure to 
deal with issues that are not resolved through consensus. Chapter VIII of the national labour 
Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 deals with issues of Labour Disputes Settlement while articles 
92 and 93 provide guidelines for collective bargaining. Disagreements on salaries and other 
entitlements or working conditions will be solved through workers representation.  
9.4            GENDER-BASED  VIOLENCE,  SEXUAL  EXPLOITATION  AND  WORKPLACE  SEXUAL 
HARASSMENT 
Violence and harassment in the work world deprives people of their dignity, is incompatible 
with decent work, and a threat to equal opportunities and to safe, healthy, and productive 
working environments. It remains a widespread phenomenon, present in all countries and 
disregarding sectors, occupations, and workplace arrangements. In line with IFAD’s policy to 
preventing  and  responding  to  sexual  harassment,  sexual  exploitation,  and  abuse,  in  cases 
these  occur,  there  should  be  established  reporting  and  response  protocols  in  place,  with 
specific procedures for gender-based violence, including confidential reporting with safe and 
ethical  documenting of such  cases, that  indicate  when  and  where  to  report  incidents, and 
what follow-up actions will be undertaken. In addition, there should be modalities to provide 
services and redress to survivors. 
10.  CONTRACTOR MANAGEMENT 
The  NAEB  will  require  that  contractors  monitor,  keep  records  and  report  on  terms  and 
conditions  related  to  labour  management.  The  contractor  must  provide  workers  with 
evidence of all payments made,  including social security benefits, pension contributions or 
other entitlements regardless of the worker being engaged on a fixed term contract, full-time, 
part- time or temporarily. The application of this requirement will be proportionate to the 
activities and to the size of the contract, in a manner acceptable to NAEB and IFAD: 
• 
• 
Labour  conditions:  records  of  workers  engaged  under  the  Project,  including 
contracts, registry of induction of workers including  Code of Conduct (CoC), hours 
worked,  remuneration  and  deductions  (including  overtime),  collective  bargaining 
agreements. 
Safety:  recordable  incidents  and  corresponding  Root  Cause  Analysis  (lost  time 
incidents, medical treatment cases), first aid cases, high potential near misses, and 
remedial and preventive activities required (for example, revised job safety analysis, 
new or different equipment, skills training, and so forth). 
•  Workers:  number  of  workers,  indication  of  origin  (expatriate,  local,  nonlocal 
nationals), gender, age with evidence that no child labour is involved, and skill level 
(unskilled, skilled, supervisory, professional, management). 
Training/induction: dates, number of trainees, and topics. 
Details of any security risks: details of risks the contractor may be exposed to while 
performing  its  work—the  threats  may  come  from  third  parties  external  to  the 
project. 
• 
• 
•  Worker grievances: details including occurrence date, grievance, and date submitted; 
actions  taken and dates; resolution (if any) and date; and follow-up yet to be taken 
grievances listed should include those received since the preceding report and those 
that were unresolved at the time of that report. 
Every Safety File is ‘site-specific’. It will be compiled following the client’s and the site’s safety 
specifications. The overall information requirements remain the same, and the site- specific 
documents will be added. When Health and Safety File is set up, it will consist of the following 
Documents: 
•  Contractor appointment letter.  
•  Notification of Construction Work 
•  Copy of the OHS regulations 
•  Occupational Health and Safety Management Plan 
•  Company Occupational Health and Safety Policy 
Letter of Good Standing 
• 
•  Material Safety Data Sheets for hazardous materials used (if required) 
•  Tax Clearance Certificate 
•  Risk Assessments 
•  Safe work procedures (Site Specific) 
•  Fall Protection Plan (if required) 
• 
Legal  appointment  with  proof  of  training  (Ex.  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Risk 
Assessor, First Aider, etc.) 
Incident Reporting Procedures 
• 
Incident Reports  
• 
Incident Registers 
• 
•  Reports of Accidents 
•  Emergency Preparedness Documents 
•  First Aid Documents 
Induction Records 
• 
•  Medical Surveillance Records 
•  Safety Communication (e.g., Toolbox talks) 
•  Minutes of Safety Meetings 
• 
Inspection Registers 
11.  COMMUNITY WORKERS  
(There will be no provision for Community Workers.) 
12.  PRIMARY SUPPLY WORKERS 
This section addresses labour management risk associated with people employed or engaged 
by  NAEB’s  primary  suppliers.  Primary  suppliers  are  suppliers  who,  on  an  ongoing  basis, 
provide goods or materials directly to the Project. 
The project will require procurement of a substantial number of materials, including protection 
and control equipment, power-poles, steel products, Solar products, computer products etc.  
All  primary  suppliers  are  formal  businesses  who  are  required  to  procure  and  produce 
materials subject to high standards. 
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 18. Staekholder Engagement Plan
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL RESOURCES 
(MINAGRI) 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT COMPETITIVENESS 
PROJECT (PSAC) 
________________________________________________ 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN  
(SEP) 
________________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
KG 569 Street,  
Kigali 
Rwanda 
_______________________________ 
The  Rwanda  -  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC) 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is intended to provide complete documentation for the 
requirements of a holistic Stakeholder Engagement system for the project. This SEP contains 
the findings of a study conducted for the agriculture sector of Rwanda and the instrument 
has been developed based on the local conditions and findings. 
Report no. 
Issue no.   
Date of issue 
001 
001 
……….…………………………………………                      ………………. 
        CHECKED  
DATE 
……….…………………………………………                      ………………. 
        APPROVED 
DATE 
Page | ii  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................ 3 
TABLE OF TABLES .................................................................................................................. 4 
TABLE OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................ 4 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ....................................................................................... 5 
1 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN ..................................................................... 6 
1.1      INTRODUCTION/PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................... 6 
1.2      OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN ........................................................................................... 6 
1.3      ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT ................................................................................. 6 
2 
3 
4 
5 
INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS .................................................................................... 8 
REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................... 10 
3.1      RELEVANT NATIONAL LEGISLATION .......................................................................... 10 
PREVIOUS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES .......................................... 16 
STAKEHOLDERS IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS ................................................ 17 
5.1      IDENTIFYING STAKEHOLDERS ................................................................................... 17 
5.2      PRELIMINARY STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION ........................................................ 17 
6 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS ............................................... 20 
6.1      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT .................................................................................. 20 
6.2      PURPOSE AND TIMING OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ...................... 20 
6.3     PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE ........................................... 21 
6.4     PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR CONSULTATION .............................................................. 21 
6.5      PROPOSED STRATEGY TO INCORPORATE THE VIEW OF VULNERABLE GROUPS ....... 23 
6.6      STAKEHOLDERS ANALYSIS......................................................................................... 23 
6.7      PLANNING FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ......................................................... 25 
6.7.1    Stakeholder Consultation Techniques/Methods ................................................ 25 
6.8      ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE .................................. 27 
6.8.1    Stakeholders Engagement Activities .................................................................. 27 
6.8.2    Communication Plan .......................................................................................... 27 
6.8.3    Information Disclosure ....................................................................................... 28 
7 
AN OVERVIEW OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ............................................... 30 
7.1      WHAT IS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT? .................................................................. 30 
7.2      PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ...................................... 30 
7.3      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS .................................................... 31 
7.3.1    Time and resources: ........................................................................................... 31 
7.3.2    It raises expectations: ......................................................................................... 31 
7.3.3    Securing stakeholder participation: ................................................................... 31 
7.3.4    Consultation fatigue: .......................................................................................... 31 
8 
RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTION ................................... 32 
8.1      RESOURCES ............................................................................................................... 32 
8.1.1    Budget ................................................................................................................ 32 
Page | 3  
8.1.2    Training .............................................................................................................. 32 
8.2      RESPONSIBILITIES ..................................................................................................... 32 
9 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM .................................................................... 33 
9.1      INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 33 
9.2      DEFINITION OF GRM ................................................................................................. 33 
9.3      GRM SCOPE AND USE................................................................................................ 33 
9.4      GRM FOR PSAC .......................................................................................................... 34 
9.5      STRUCTURE OF THE GRM .......................................................................................... 34 
9.5.1    Process Overview ................................................................................................ 35 
9.6      SEP RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ................................................................... 40 
9.6.1    Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 40 
9.6.2    The Project Management Unit ........................................................................... 40 
9.6.3    Environment and Social Specialist (ESS). ............................................................ 40 
9.6.4    Resources ............................................................................................................ 41 
9.6.5    Budget ................................................................................................................ 41 
9.6.6    Training .............................................................................................................. 41 
9.7      MONITORING AND REPORTING ................................................................................ 41 
9.7.1    Review of Engagement Activities in the Field .................................................... 42 
9.7.2    Reporting Stakeholders Engagement Activities ................................................. 42 
TABLE OF TABLES 
Table 2-1      Institutional Analysis. .......................................................................................... 8 
Table 3-1      Relevant Policies ............................................................................................... 10 
Table 3-1      PSAC design process .......................................................................................... 16 
Table 5-1      Identified Stakeholders for PSAC ...................................................................... 17 
Table 5-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques ............................................................... 22 
Table 5-2      Stakeholder Engagement Techniques ............................................................... 26 
Table 5-3      Stakeholder Engagement Activities .................................................................. 27 
Table 5-4      Stakeholders Engagement Communication Plan .............................................. 27 
Table 5-5      Summary Overview of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) ...................... 28 
Table 8-1      Key Performance Indicators by Project Phase .................................................. 42 
Figure 5-1      Basic Stakeholder Influence/Interest Chart. .................................................... 24 
TABLE OF FIGURES 
Page | 4  
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ESMS                                 Environmental and Social Management System 
GDP                                   Gross Domestic Product 
GoR                                   Government of Rwanda 
GRM                                  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
IFAD                                   International Fund for Agricultural Development 
NCCLCD                                   National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development 
PAP                                     Project Affected Person 
PMU                                   Project Management Unit 
PO                                       Producer Organization 
PSAC                                   Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness project 
USAID                                 United States Agency for International Development 
Page | 5  
1 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN  
1.1      INTRODUCTION/PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
This  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  (SEP)  forms  part  of  the  set  of  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Instruments for the Rwanda Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness 
Project (PSAC). The Implementing Agency of the Project, the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal 
Resources (MINAGRI) through the National Agricultural Export Development Board (NAEB), has 
the responsibility to effectively engage stakeholders in achieving the project objectives, hence 
the formulation of this SEP, which will be applied for all public consultation processes. 
The  SEP  aims  to  improve  and  facilitate  decision  making  and  create  an  atmosphere  of 
understanding that actively involves project-affected people and other stakeholders in a timely 
manner.  It  will  further  provide  the  stakeholders  with  sufficient  opportunity  to  voice  their 
opinions and concerns that may influence project decisions. 
1.2      OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN 
The Key objectives of the SEP are to:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Identify key stakeholders that are affected, and/or able to influence the Project and its 
activities,  
Identify  the  most  effective  methods,  timing,  and  structures  through  which  to  share 
project  information,  and  to  ensure  regular,  accessible,  transparent,  and  appropriate 
consultation,  
Provide  guidance  for  stakeholder  engagement  such  that  it  meets  the  standards  of 
International Best Practice,  
Develop a stakeholders’ engagement process that provides stakeholders with sufficient 
opportunity to voice their opinions and concerns and be able to influence the project,  
Establish formal grievance redress mechanisms,  
Define roles and responsibilities for the project implementers in conducting stakeholder 
consultations,  
Define reporting and monitoring measures to ensure the effectiveness of the SEP and 
periodical reviews of the SEP based on findings. 
The  SEP  provides  a  framework  for  achieving  effective  stakeholder  involvement  and  promotes 
greater  awareness  and  understanding  of  issues  so  that  the  project  is  carried  out  effectively. 
Effective stakeholder engagement develops a “social licence” to operate and depends on mutual 
trust, respect and transparent communication between the NAEB and its stakeholders. The key 
elements of the SEP are: 
Stakeholder identification and analysis 
Stakeholder Engagement Program  
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
• 
• 
• 
•  Monitoring and Reporting 
1.3      ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT 
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network is 
compost  of  nine  catchments.  The  topography  is  characterized  by  hills  and  mountains  and 
therefore widely varying altitudes (900 m in south-west, 1500-2000 m in the south and the centre 
Page | 6  
of the country, 1800-3000 m in the highlands of the north and the west and 3000-4507 m in the 
regions of Congo-Nile Crest and the chain of volcanoes). Again, the country is divided into 12 
agro-ecological zones that can be clustered into three natural regions which are the highlands, 
midlands,  and  lowlands.  The  topography,  results  in  60%  of  the  total  land  area  being  under 
cultivation. 
1.4      CLIMATE TRENDS AND IMPACTS 
The Rwanda’s climate is dominated by the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) which passes 
over  the  country  twice  a  year  and  is  further  modified  by  a  widely  varying  altitude  across  the 
country and by the presence of large adjacent water bodies of the great lakes. Some parts of the 
country benefit from two agriculture rainy seasons (February-May; September-December). The 
duration of the two rainy season is increasingly variable, ranging from seven to nine months, with 
an annual rainfall amount of up to 1,500 mm. From 1985 to 2015, the average temperature has 
increased  by  0.29oC  per  decade  with  the  increased  interannual  variability  over  the  last  few 
decades (USAID, 2019). Previous analysis  illustrates regional changes,  such as in the Northern 
and Western Provinces, where the rainy season is becoming shorter and more intense (Warner 
et  al,  2015).  Overall,  the  total  annual  precipitation  will  be  reduced  in  all  provinces  until  mid-
century. 
Page | 7  
2 
INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS 
The following is an outline of the institutions that will be involved in the implementation of PSAC, 
Table 2-1      Institutional Analysis. 
INSTITUTION 
DESCRIPTION 
Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
This Ministry is composed of two sectors: Water Resources and Environment. 
Environment  is  a  crosscutting.  MoE  is  responsible  for  the  development  of 
policies,  laws,  and  regulations  as  well  as  coordination  of all  activities  in  the 
management of water resources activities and environment, as well as their 
follow up and evaluation. The Ministry of Environment has the following main 
responsibilities: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
To  develop  and  disseminate  the  environment  and  climate  change 
policies, strategies, and programs 
To monitor and evaluate the implementation and mainstreaming of 
environment  and  climate  change  policies,  strategies  and  programs 
across all sectors, especially productive sector. 
To  oversee  and  evaluate  institutions  under  its  supervision  by 
providing guidance on the implementation of specific programs to be 
realised  by  the 
local 
government. 
To mobilise the necessary resources for the development, protection, 
and  conservation  of  the  environment  for  the  climate  change 
adaptation and mitigation. 
its  supervision  and 
institutions  under 
Rwanda 
Management Authority (REMA) 
Environment 
FONERWA 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) was established in 2004 
to act as the implementing organ of environment-related policies and laws in 
is  also  tasked  to  coordinate  different  environmental 
Rwanda.  REMA 
protection  activities  undertaken  by  environmental  promotion  agencies;  to 
promote  the  integration  of  environmental  issues  in  development  policies, 
projects,  plans  and  programmes;  to  coordinate 
implementation  of 
Government policies and decisions taken by the Board of Directors and ensure 
the integration of environmental issues in national planning among concerned 
departments  and 
institutions  within  the  Government;  to  advise  the 
Government  with  regard  to  the  legislation  and  other  measures  relating  to 
environmental management or implementation of conventions, treaties and 
international  agreements  relevant  to  the  field  of  environment  as  and  when 
necessary; to make proposals to the Government in the field of environmental 
policies and strategies; etc. 
The  National  Fund  for  Environment  –  FONERWA  is  a  ground-breaking 
Environment  and  climate  change  Fund,  established  by  the  Rwandan 
Government in 2012. The Fund’s purpose is to be the engine of green growth 
in Rwanda, while serving as a touchstone for Africa and the rest of the world. 
Our strategy is to provide unheralded technical and financial support to the 
best  public  and  private  projects  that  align  with  Rwanda’s  commitment  to  a 
green economy. 
The Fund’s core responsibilities are to: 
•  Mobilise and manage resources used in financing activities aiming at 
protecting and preserving environment and natural resources. 
•  Mobilise and manage funds to be used in the fight against climate 
• 
change and its impact. 
Collect and manage funds from the public and private sector, 
through bilateral and multi-lateral partnerships, to achieve the 
country’s objectives to advance national priorities in the field of 
environment and climate change. 
Page | 8  
Ministry  of  Gender  and  Family 
Promotion 
Youth 
Communities 
• 
• 
• 
Support public organs, associations and individuals for environment 
protection and conservation, research as well as the fight against 
the climate change. 
Coordinate and ensure that various finance partnership agreements 
related to prevention as well as fighting against climate change are 
prepared and effectively managed across various national 
stakeholders. 
Collaborate with other national regional and international 
institutions with the same mission. 
Ministry  of  Gender  and  Family  Promotion  plays  a  leading  role  in  the 
implementation of the gender agenda in the country. The project, through its 
Gender  Specialist,  will  coordinate  with  MIGEPROF  on  initiatives  for  gender 
equality and women empowerment at the district level (coordinating with the 
Gender and Family Promotion Officers) in particular. 
The Gender Monitoring Office is mandated by the constitution, along with the 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, and the national women’s council 
for executing several programs and policies to address these gender gaps and 
constraints. 
Women’s  Council  at  the  district  level  will  be  key  reference  to  align  KIIWP’s 
gender  strategy  with  the  priorities  set  by  Kayonza  district  on  gender 
mainstreaming and to articulate with women’s associations and cooperatives.  
In the Ministry of Agriculture, a gender advisor supports capacity building of 
staff  through  development  of  performance  contracts  that  address  gender 
integration, including identification of key gender-responsive indicators. 
National  Youth  Policy  (2015),  this  policy  focuses  on  youth  economic 
issues  related  to  unemployment  and 
empowerment  by  addressing 
underemployment, limited skills, low rate of access to finance and markets. 
Rwanda  Youth  Agribusiness  Forum  (RYAF)  is  established  to  bring  different 
youth organisations together, individual youth farmers and entrepreneurs.  
It  is  a  platform  established  to  bring  together  different  youth  organizations, 
individual youth farmers and entrepreneurs. RYAF already engaged in  IFAD-
supported projects PASP and RDDP in the delivery of training and extension 
services, and it  could be further involved to  engage youth in agriculture, as 
service  providers  as  well  as  beneficiaries  of  capacity  building,  business  and 
financial services. 
HoReCo  is  a  business  company  of  professionals  in  agriculture  who  were 
trained in matters of horticulture development and value chain, irrigation and 
agriculture mechanization as well as building capacity of youth in agriculture. 
The  communities  in  targets  Districts  who  will  receive  project  funding  to 
establish  village  sub-projects  will  be  obliged  to  act  in  accordance  with  all 
national  laws  and  regulations  related  to  the  type  of  project  they  are 
implementing.  In  addition,  village-level  leadership  committees  and  elected 
village  officials  will  be  responsible  for  supporting  implementation  of  the 
environmental and social management framework. 
Page | 9  
3  REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 
3.1      RELEVANT NATIONAL LEGISLATION 
The PSAC SEP takes into account the existing institutional and regulatory framework within the 
context of Rwanda and international laws. These applicable laws and international good practices 
are discussed below. Table 3-1 outlines the Relevant national legislation for the implementation 
of PSAC project. 
Table 3-1      Relevant Policies 
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
1.0 
1.1 
RELEVANT POLICIES 
Environment and 
Climate 
Rwanda Environment Policy The overall objective of the Environmental Policy 
is  the  improvement  of  man’s  wellbeing,  the  judicious  utilization  of  natural 
resources  and  the  protection  and  rational  management  of  ecosystems  for  a 
sustainable  and  fair  development.  The  policy  seeks  to  achieve  this  through 
improved  health  and  quality  of  life  for  every  citizen  and  promotion  of 
sustainable socio economic development through a rational management and 
utilization  of  resources  and  Environment,  integrating  Environmental  aspects 
into all the development policies, planning and in all activities carried out at the 
national, provincial and local level, with the full participation of the population, 
conservation,  preserve  and  restoration  of  ecosystems  and  maintenance  of 
ecological and systems functions.  
in 
its 
The  PSAC  investments  apply  this  policy  and  will  integrate  the  Rwanda 
Environment  Policy 
implementation  by  protecting,  restoring  or 
maintaining both the quality of ecological and systems functions, involving all 
stakeholders in project activities and improving/ maintaining public health and 
safety.  
The  National  Strategy  on  Climate  Change  and  Low-Carbon  Development 
(NCCLCD)  for  Green  Growth  and  Climate  Resilience  underlines  the  need  to 
manage the implications of climate variability for the social, environmental and 
economic  development  of  the  country.  The  Green  Growth  Plan  fosters  the 
development of irrigation infrastructure that give farmers more control of the 
water resource, facilitate diversification of crops, contribute to efficient land and 
water usage and ensure water availability in dry areas.  
In 2020, Rwanda updated its  Nationally determined Contributions. PSAC will 
contribute  to  the  following  prioritised  adaptation  interventions:  i)  develop 
climate resilient post-harvest and value addition facilities and technologies; iii) 
develop sustainable land use management practices; v) expand irrigation and 
improve  water  management  and  vi)  development  of  Agroforestry  and 
sustainable agriculture 
From 2008 to 2018, the government of Rwanda began Economic Development 
and  Poverty  Reduction  Strategies  one  and  two  that  were  split  giving  each 
campaign a five (5) year period of runtime, these campaigns focused on growing 
the  country’s  GDP,  reducing  the  country’s  poverty  rates,  and  reducing  the 
income inequality between households. One cow per family (Girinka Program) 
was mainly started to help the poor families in Rwanda by giving them a cow 
and after it gives birth to calves the calves are then given to other families facing 
financial challenges however the family in position of a cow could sell milk to 
local dairies help earn extra money. 
Page | 10  
1.2 
Economic Development 
and Poverty Reduction 
Strategies (EDPRS) 
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
1.3 
ICT Policy 
1.4 
The  National  Agriculture 
Policy – June 2017 
Umuganda  was  also  made  to help the  communities  in Rwanda  whereby  
on the last Saturday of a month people gather and do work , e.g., building 
homes  for  the  homeless  and  building  roads  and  bridges.  Savings  and 
Credits Cooperatives (SACCOs) were started to help the people in the rural areas 
to have access to banks where they could save money and get boosted or apply 
for loans without having to get to a major city to get access to a major bank. 
This policy recognizes information and communications technology (ICTs) to be 
a cross-cutting area aimed at equality and equity to all Rwandan citizens. The 
focus is on: - Using information and communications technology services (ICTs) 
to provide educational opportunities to all Rwandan citizens regardless of either 
male  or  female,  age,  geographical  location,  or  special  education  that  may  be 
needed for different and unique situations. 
The  National  Agriculture  Policy  of  June  2017  seeks  to  make  agriculture  and 
livestock  more  productive  at  the  same  time  ensuring  proper  utilization  of 
natural resources and sustainability for future generations. The policy puts more 
emphasis on value addition to agricultural and livestock produce through setting 
up  agro-processing  units  and  enabling  proper  post-harvest  handling  to  avoid 
losses.  The  policy  has  the  mission  of  ensuring  food  and  nutrition  security  of 
Rwandans by using modern agribusiness technologies, professionalizing farmers 
in  terms  of  production,  commercialization  of  the  outputs  and  then  creating 
competitive agriculture sector. 
The  objective  of  the  Rwanda  Agriculture  Policy  is  to  intensify  and  transform 
subsistence agriculture into a market-oriented agriculture, and this requires the 
modern inputs, notably improved seeds/ varieties, and fertilizers. This would be 
achieved through: 
• 
Promotion of new strategies that will stimulate productivity growth for 
a  broadened  nutritional  food  production,  while  embarking  on  new 
opportunities  for  farm  income  diversification,  to  secure  further 
reductions in rural poverty, and transform the dominant  subsistence 
farming sector into a competitive and market-led agriculture sector. 
•  Development  and  promotion  of  a 
sustainable  agricultural 
intensification  and  a 
to  counter 
environmental degradation and climate change in ways that maintain 
sustainable agricultural growth. 
resilient  agriculture  sector 
1.5 
National  Strategy 
Transformation (NST1) 
for 
•  Addressing the knowledge and skills deficits in the agriculture sector to 
unlock significant additional agricultural as well as labour productivity 
gains for high quality produce and services. 
Enhancing  policy  and  institutional  coordination  and  collaboration 
amongst  different  relevant  stakeholders  operating  in  the  sector 
through the creation of an effective  enabling  environment to render 
institutions more responsive. 
• 
The National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) entails interventions to enable 
the transformation journey towards achieving Vision 2050 aspirations. It merges 
the 7 Year Government Program (2017- 2024) and the national medium-term 
development  strategy,  which  were  previously  standalone  documents.  It 
long-range  global  and  regional  commitments  by 
integrates  far-sighted, 
embracing: (i) the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), (ii) the African Union 
Agenda 2063 and its First 10-Year Implementation Plan 2014-2023, (iii) the East 
African Community (EAC) Vision 2050 and (iv) the COP 21 Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change and other agreements. 
The  NST1  focuses  on  three  pillars,  mainly  Economic  Transformation,  Social 
Transformation and Transformational Governance and considers the seven (7) 
Page | 11  
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
cross-cutting  areas  to  attain  inclusive  and  sustainable  development:  Capacity 
Development, HIV/AIDS and Non-Communicable Diseases, Disability and Social 
Inclusion, Gender and Family Promotion, Regional Integration and International 
Positioning, Disaster Management, Environment and Climate Change. 
to 
(iii)  Promote 
facilitate  economic  growth, 
The objectives of the economic transformation pillars include (i) Create decent 
jobs  for  economic  development  and  poverty  reduction,  (ii)  Accelerate 
Urbanization 
industrial 
development, export promotion and expansion of trade related infrastructure, 
(iv)  Develop  and  promote  a  service-led  and  knowledge-based  economy,  (v) 
Increase agriculture and livestock quality, productivity and production and (vi) 
Sustainably exploit natural resources and protect the environment. The social 
transformation targets to (i) Move towards a Poverty Free Rwanda, (ii) Ensure a 
Quality Healthy Population, (iii) Develop a Competitive and Capable  Rwandan 
Population,  (iv)  Ensure  Quality  of  education  for  all  aiming  at  building  a 
knowledge-based economy and (v) Transition to a Modern Rwandan Household 
in urban and rural areas. 
1.6 
Green 
Climate 
Strategy 
Growth 
and 
Resilience 
1.7 
Social 
Policy 
Development 
1.8 
Gender 
The present project is in line with economic and social transformation pillars of 
the  NST1  as  it  will  raise  agriculture  quality,  productivity,  and  production, 
promote resilience and enhance graduation from poverty and extreme poverty 
and eradicate malnutrition and ensure quality healthy population. 
Rwanda  adopted  the  national  Green  Growth  and  Climate  Resilience  Strategy 
(GGCRS) in 2011 with the vision for Rwanda to be a developed climate-resilient 
and low-carbon economy by 2050. The mainstreaming and implementation of 
the GGCRS is mandated to the ministry responsible for environment and climate 
change, which is currently the Ministry of Environment. The GGCRS stipulates 4 
strategic objectives: 
• 
• 
Energy  security  and  a  low-carbon  energy  supply  that  supports  the 
development of Green Industry and Services.  
Sustainable land use and water resource management that results in 
food security. 
•  Appropriate urban development and preservation of biodiversity and 
• 
ecosystem Services; and 
Social  protection,  improved  health  and  disaster  risk  reduction  that 
reduce vulnerability to climate change. 
This revised Community Development Policy aims to mobilise and empower the 
Rwandan community to exercise its powers in decision making to promote its 
development, commensurate with the progress of decentralization. Its mission 
is to "ensure effective and sustainable participation of the community in its own 
development,  to  achieve  poverty  reduction  and  self-reliance  based  on  the 
sustainable exploitation of available resources 
Revised National Gender Policy 2021, puts emphasis on ensuring that gender 
equality  concepts  and  principles  are  well  understood  and  applied  by  all.  The 
policy will further strengthen pre-established foundation not only by addressing 
the remaining policy gaps in mainstreaming gender across sectors and ensuring 
that sector-specific planning and implementation of programs that are gender 
responsive but also proposes mechanisms for addressing the persistent cultural 
norms  and  stereotypes  hindering  the  effectiveness  of  gender  equality  and 
equity.  Unlike  the  2010  National  Gender  Policy,  the  2021  gender  policy 
emphasizes on effective engagement of men and boys and accelerating gender 
mainstreaming in the private sector.  
Gender and youth mainstreaming strategy in agriculture 2019-2025, builds on 
the work of the previous gender-specific sector strategy developed in 2010. It 
Page | 12  
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
aims to support the implementation of the Fourth Strategic Plan for Agricultural 
Transformation (PSTA4, 2018) and the National Agriculture Policy (NAP, 2018) 
The 4th Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation (PSTA4), Empowerment 
of women in PSTA 4 focuses on training and capacity development in leadership 
and management skills for women to actively participate in decision-making at 
the  household,  cooperative,  community,  and  institutional  level.  In  parallel, 
women economic empowerment will be fostered through provision of technical 
skills  and  promoting  access  to  inputs.  This  includes  for  example,  providing 
targeted  support  to  women  to  access  suitable  financial  products  for  income 
generating activities, productive and off farm.  
National Strategy for Transformation (NST1), Gender and Family Promotion is 
one of the cross-cutting areas under the National Strategy for transformation 
(NST1 2017-2024) and emphasizes on interventions geared to: promote access 
to finance for women, mainstreaming gender in employment and job creation 
strategies, capacity development of the gender machinery and scaling-up Early 
Childhood Development (ECD) services at village levels as well as strengthening 
and promoting gender equality and ensure equal opportunities for all Rwandans  
District Development Strategy (DDS), in 2018, all districts in Rwanda developed 
their DDS translating their intended development aspirations over the course of 
NST-1.  The  DDSs  emphasize  on  strengthening  and  promoting  gender  equality 
and  ensure  equal  opportunities  for  all  Rwandans.  Women  and  youth 
employment are another area of focus for DDSs. 
National  Gender  Coordination  and  Partnership  Strategy  (2016-2020),  guides 
the  coordination  of  gender  promotion,  establishing  a  framework  for 
stakeholders’  coordination  and  engagement  and  set  strategic  priorities  for 
action. 
National Policy against Gender-Based Violence (2011) supports gender-based 
violence  prevention  and  response  and  provides  an  opportunity  for  further 
advancements.  Significant  steps  have  been  taken  in  the  country  to  have 
dedicated staff and resources to provide services to victims and reduce impunity 
for GBV. The existing One-Stop Centers provide critical support to victims of GBV 
and can be used as a model for integrated care and support.  
National  Gender  Policy  (2010):  is  the  guiding  framework  to  mainstreaming 
gender  into  the  national  development  process  and  outcomes.  To  integrate 
gender into critical areas such as poverty, health, agriculture and food security 
and education, among others is the main objective of this policy. 
1.9 
2.0 
2.1 
National  Youth  Policy 
(2015) 
National  Youth  Policy  (2015)  focuses  on  youth  economic  empowerment  by 
addressing  issues  related  to  unemployment  and  underemployment,  limited 
skills, low rate of access to finance and markets, among others. 
LEGISLATION 
Rwandan Constitution 
The  constitution  is  the  supreme  law  of  the  country.  Any  law,  decision  or  act 
contrary  to  this  Constitution  is  without  effect.  The  Articles  22  and  53  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Rwanda,  promulgated  in  2003  and  revised  in 
December 2015, articulate the rights and responsibilities of all citizens and the 
role of the state regarding the environment by providing that every citizen is 
entitled to a healthy and satisfying environment and that every person has the 
duty  to  protect,  safeguard  and  promote  the  environment  respectively.  The 
guidance of the Constitution on environmental preservation and management 
as a crosscutting issue is reflected in the National Vision 2050 and the National 
Policy on Environment of 2017. 
Page | 13  
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
2.2 
Law on Environment 
law  No  48/2018  of 
13/08/2018 
2.3 
2.4 
to 
Ministerial 
order  N° 
003/2008  of  15/08/2008 
relating 
the 
and 
requirements 
procedure 
for 
environmental 
impact 
Assessment 
Local  Government  Act 
– 2005. 
2.5 
Labour Act 
The  PSAC  activities  will  likely  have  adverse  environmental  impacts  on  land, 
water,  biodiversity  and  air  resources.  The  mitigation  measures 
for 
environmental protection will be guided by the law No 48/2018 of 13/08/2018 
on Environment. 
The  most  relevant  legislation  for  this  study  is  the  Law  on  Environment.  The 
legislation sets out the general legal framework for Environment protection and 
management  in  Rwanda.  It  centres  on  avoiding  and  reducing  disastrous 
consequences on Environment. The Ministry of Environment puts in place the 
instructions  and  procedures  for  the  environment  conservation.  Until  very 
recently,  REMA  was  responsible  for  the  approval  of  ESIA  reports;  this 
responsibility has now been transferred to Rwanda Development Board (RDB) 
where there is a department for ESIA, responsible for review and approval of all 
ESIA reports. 
Impact  Assessment 
This project will observe the law No 48/2018 of 13/08/2018 on environment by 
preparing  Environmental  and  Social 
(ESIAs)  or 
Environmental and Social Management  Plans (ESMPs) to ensure reduction of 
disastrous consequences on the Environment in its activities. The project will 
also monitor the compliance with environmental safeguards in all sites.  
The Article 1 stipulates that Environmental Impact study is a systematic way of 
identifying environmental, social, and economic impacts of a project before a 
decision of its acceptance is made. In Article 3, the developer submits an official 
application  which  includes  a  project  brief  of  the  proposed  project  to  the 
authority  (RDB).  Article  4  specifies  that  within  thirty  (30)  calendar  days  after 
receipt of the project brief and after its analysis, RDB shall submit the Terms of 
reference to the developer for the Environmental impact study. 
Local government is provided for by the Organic Law 2005, and it is enshrined in 
Chapter 1 of the constitution. The Ministry of Local Government is responsible 
for local government, which is in four tiers, comprising 30 districts (akarere); 416 
sectors (imerenge); 2,148 cells (utugari); and 14,837 villages (imudungu). Local 
elections are held every five years. 
The  local  authorities  have  revenue-raising  powers,  and  derive  income  from 
property taxes and licence fees, as well as receiving regular and one-off transfers 
from  national  government.  They  provide  public  services  in  partnership  with 
other agencies, which include primary health care; environmental management; 
water  supply;  waste  disposal;  rural  electrification;  promoting  local  economic 
development; town planning; and local transport. 
According to the Labour Code, employment contract is any contract, either oral 
or written in Kinyarwanda and in other official language’s, by virtue of which a 
person agrees to work for an employer in return for pay. It can be concluded for 
a  fixed  term,  open  ended  or for  a  well-defined  task,  basing  on  employer  and 
worker's  mutual  consent,  the  contract  must  be  written  if  the  work  can  be 
completed in a period of 6 month’s or not and the contract signed in Rwanda is 
implemented in a foreign country. 
A  written  contract  must  contain  the  information  on:  its  legal  basis;  complete 
identity of both parties and workplace; nature and duration of contract; nature 
of job; probation period; notice period; salary, allowance and deductions, date 
and place of payment; rate of overtime remuneration; relevant collective labour 
convention; and internal rules and regulations; employment category and level 
of  occupation;  weekly  working  hours;  and  other  clauses  favourable  to  the 
worker, obligations and commitments of both employer and employee are also 
to be mentioned in the contract for them to be respected in good faith  
Page | 14  
No. 
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
INTERPRETATION 
Rwandan  labour  Law  allows  hiring  fixed  term  contract  workers  for  tasks  of 
permanent nature. A worker hired for a fixed-term or an unspecified period that 
lasts  more  than  six  (6)  consecutive  months  with  the  same  employer  is 
considered a permanent worker, a fixed term contract can be renewed as many 
times as agreed upon between the parties. 
Page | 15  
4 
PREVIOUS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 
IFAD  -  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC):  Design  Mission 
April 9-27 May 2022 
The  purpose  of  the  present  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  is,  among  others,  to  provide 
information  on  how  Stakeholder  Engagement  will  be  practiced  throughout  the  course  of  the 
project  and  which  methods  will  be  used  as  part  of  the  process;  as  well  as  to  outline  the 
responsibilities of NAEB. While the project is not expected to cause any serious or substantial 
environmental and/or social risks, the Project will apply the IFAD SECAP requirements.  
As  part  of  stakeholder  engagement  in  preparing  the  PSAC  Project  several  missions  and 
consultations have taken place, commencing with the initial scooping mission, and drafting of 
the Concept Note in May 2022 (Table 3-1) and culminating with the current full design mission in 
May 2021. The process is summarised in table 3-1 below:  
Table 4-1      PSAC design process 
March 2022 
April 2022 
May 2022 
July 2022 
August 2022 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
DATES 
CONSULTATION PROCESS 
IFAD Scooping Mission 
IFAD Approval of PSAC 
IFAD approval of Concept note 
Full Design mission, Draft PDR + Budget 
Review of Design Package 
Approval PISC and IFAD  
Negotiations 
IFAD Approval 
Legal Agreement Signed 
Recruitment initiates 
Project Starts 
As  part  of  the  current  consultations  during  the  preparation  of  the  PSAC  project,  the 
MINAGRI/NAEB  is  engaged  in  ongoing  dialogue  with  all  possible  stakeholders.  They  have 
informed the main stakeholders on the Project design, indicated its openness for feedback on 
the Project design, and informed them on the applicability of the SECAP to PSAC. NAEB has also 
stressed the importance of stakeholder engagement with the primary beneficiaries of the project 
– The possible beneficiary farmers, cooperatives, the disadvantaged, women, and youths in the 
target constituencies.  
The  May  2021  design  mission  consultations  were  to  introduce  the  project  and  gather 
stakeholders’  views  and  perceptions  on  the  proposed  project.  The  Project  will  continue  to 
conduct in-depth stakeholder engagement throughout Project implementation. Currently due to 
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the public health situation does not allow for, comprehensive in-
person consultations and hance  a lot of the engagement so far has been conducted remotely 
through phone and video calls.  
Page | 16  
5 
STAKEHOLDERS IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 
5.1      IDENTIFYING STAKEHOLDERS 
To  develop  an  effective  SEP,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  who  the  stakeholders  are  and 
understand their needs and expectations for engagement, and their priorities and objectives in 
relation  to  the  Project.  This  information  is  then  used  to  tailor  engagement  to  each  type  of 
stakeholder. As part of this process, it is particularly important to identify individuals and groups 
who  may  find  it  more  difficult  to  participate  and  those  who  may  be  differentially  or 
disproportionately affected by the project because of their marginalised or vulnerable status. 
Stakeholders for the purpose of this project have been and will continue to be identified on a 
continuous  basis  by  identifying  those  people  and  institutions  that  have  an  interest  in  the 
successful planning and execution of the project including special interest groups. These include 
those:  
• 
• 
• 
Project Implementing Agencies (funding agencies, executing agencies, partners) 
Directly and/or indirectly project-affected people (PAPs) and  
Interested parties (Environmental protection authorities, Social and labour regulatory 
authorities, Contractors, Media, Civil Society etc) 
The affected group comprises of the beneficiary farmers, Cooperatives, Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) and farmer groups/associations among others who will benefit from the 
hardware  and  software  services  offered  by  the  project.  A  subset  of  this  category  are  the 
vulnerable groups. A significant factor in achieving inclusiveness of the engagement process is 
safeguarding  the  participation  of  vulnerable  individuals  in  public  consultations  and  other 
engagement  forums  established  by  the  project.  Vulnerable  groups  are  persons  who  may  be 
disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the project as compared with any other 
groups due to their vulnerable status, and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure 
their  equal  representation  in  the  consultation  and  participation  in  the  program.  In  this  case, 
women and youths fall into that category but there are differences within the same categories 
and/or gender lines that needs to be carefully considered. 
Engagement is directly proportional to impact and influence, and as the extent of impact of a 
project on a stakeholder group increases, or the extent of influence of a particular stakeholder 
on a project increase, engagement with that stakeholder group should intensify and deepen in 
terms of the frequency and the intensity of the engagement method used. 
5.2      PRELIMINARY STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION  
The key stakeholders identified in the SEP and to be continuously engaged could include: 
Table 5-1      Identified Stakeholders for PSAC 
LEVEL 
STAKEHOLDER 
Global 
Central 
Government 
IFAD 
Government of Spain 
Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic 
Planning 
(MINECOFIN) 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT 
SPECIFIC 
INFORMATION TARGET 
Country/Regional Office   Funding Agency 
Country/Regional Office  Co-funding Agency  
Permanent  Secretary’s 
office  
Fund Manager  
Page | 17  
LEVEL 
STAKEHOLDER 
MINAGRI 
Ministry  of  Agriculture 
and  Animal  Resources 
(MINAGRI) 
SPECIFIC 
INFORMATION TARGET 
MINAGRI 
Project  Management 
Unit staff 
Department 
Agricultural Extension 
of 
Ministry of  Infrastructure 
(MININFRA) 
Designated officer 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT 
Implementing Agency  
Committee  member 
Steering 
/ 
oversight  and  technical  expertise  on 
agricultural production  
Responsible for all raw water  
Ministry  of  Environment. 
(MoE) 
National 
Export 
Board (NAEB) 
Agricultural 
Development 
Designated officer  
Steering Committee member  
Designated officer  
Steering Committee member  
Private  Sector, 
Coalitions  and 
Associations 
Civil Society 
District 
of 
buyers, 
targeted 
Cooperative 
of 
Sports 
Gender, 
& 
Ministry 
Youth, 
Recreation (MGYSR) 
Input  manufacturing  / 
supplier companies  
Aggregators, 
transporters, 
processing businesses 
Coalitions 
Communities 
neighbouring 
Landscapes 
Rwanda National Farmers 
Union (LENAFU) 
Other  agricultural  and 
Forestry NGOs 
Rwanda 
Agency 
SACCOs,  e.g.,  Gatare  Tea 
Farmers SACCO 
Tea 
Gatare, Cyato, 
Tea Plantations 
Farmers 
e.g.,  Gasonga 
Cooperative 
Coffee Washing Stations 
FONERWA 
REMA 
Human  rights,  Women, 
child, 
youth 
and 
promoters 
District 
Management Unit  
Rural District Council. 
Department of water 
Cooperatives 
Coffee 
Factories, 
Project 
PSAC 
e.g., 
Designated officer  
Designated officer  
Steering Committee member  
Steering Committee member  
Designated officers  
Input suppliers 
Designated officers 
produce market linkages, 
Coalition Leadership 
Coalition Activities 
Designated officers 
Agricultural Production. 
Designated officers 
Agricultural and Forestry Activities. 
NGO focal persons  
Interested parties, Technical expertise 
Staff members  
District level Implementing Agency 
District administrator. 
Local field Officers  
All District development  
Equitable sharing of water 
Page | 18  
LEVEL 
STAKEHOLDER 
SPECIFIC 
INFORMATION TARGET 
All District Officers  
ROLE IN THE PROJECT 
Technical  expertise  on  agricultural 
production 
of 
District Officers  
Environmental protection 
of 
Extension 
Department 
Agricultural 
Services  
Department 
Environment. 
Traditional Leadership 
Chiefs 
Traditional 
Leadership 
Village  
Village Leadership  
Village Head  
Community 
organisations  
based 
Household  
Wider Community  
Farmers/ Water Users 
User 
Development 
Village 
Committees (VIDCOs) 
Water 
Organisations (WUOs) 
Agriculture  Production 
Groups (APGs) 
Community leadership 
Women and Youth  
traditional 
Overall 
leadership, 
upholding  of  cultural  values,  Land 
distribution, community level GRM 
Traditional 
leadership,  upholding  of 
cultural  values,  Land  distribution, 
community level GRM 
Coordinating  Village 
plans 
Steering Committee member / Affected 
parties / water management  
Steering Committee member / Affected 
parties / production management  
Indirectly affected parties  
Directly  Affected  parties  /  primary 
project beneficiaries 
development 
The above list is not exhaustive. As the project gets underway, NAEB will develop a detailed SEP 
identifying  emerging  and  all  possible  stakeholders,  their  specific  information  needs  and  the 
appropriate modes of consultation as well as feedback mechanisms.  The consultation process 
shall ensure that all those identified as stakeholders are conferred with. Active engagement of 
all  stakeholders  will  facilitate  a  common  understanding  of  the  specific  opportunities  and 
constraints  which  can  be  the  foundation  for  deeper  harmonization  and  coordination  of  the 
various support services. 
Page | 19  
6 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
6.1      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
The following considerations should be made when planning for stakeholder engagement: 
Resourcing  Stakeholder  Engagement:  Stakeholder  engagement  requires  resources  as  it  takes 
time  to  develop  and  build  trust-based  relationships  with  stakeholders.  Relationships  with 
stakeholders  should  develop,  grow,  and  be  sustained.  This  becomes  a  continuous  process  as 
additional stakeholders might be identified that will also need to be engaged.  
Some stakeholders will need to be educated about the concept of engagement itself, as well as 
on  the  complex  issues  requiring  specialised  and  technical  knowledge.  These  demands  can 
increase the cost of consultation required to meet external expectations. 
Managing expectations: Stakeholders can have unrealistically high expectations of benefits that 
may accrue to them from a project and as such NAEB must be clear on what they can and cannot 
do,  establishing  a  clear  understanding  of  their  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  engagement 
processes should provide NAEB with an opportunity to develop relationships with stakeholders 
and potential project partners.  
Securing stakeholder participation: Cultural norms and values can prevent stakeholders from 
freely participating in meetings. Often there are conflicting demands within a community, and it 
can  be  challenging  for  a  project  to  identify  stakeholders  who  are  representative  of  common 
interests.  There  may  be  a  need  to  employ  local  officers  who  are  sensitive  to  local  power 
dynamics. 
Consultation  fatigue:  Stakeholders  can  easily  tire  of  consultation  processes  especially  when 
promises  are  not  fulfilled,  and  their  opinions  and  concerns  are  not  taken  into  consideration. 
Often stakeholders feel their lives are not improving because of the project and this can lead to 
consultation meetings being used as an area to voice complaints and grievances about the lack 
of  development.  Implementing  Partners  must  not  make  wild  promises  to  stakeholders;  but 
expectations should be managed through dissemination of accurate information. Opinions for 
stakeholders  should  be  treated  as  feedback  to  the  project  and  other  project  partners  and 
specialists.  
6.2      PURPOSE AND TIMING OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM 
The  main  goal  of  the  Stakeholder  engagement  plan  is  primarily  to  garner  all  support  of  the 
Agriculture and Social Development sectors. This support will allow for ease of implementation 
as it is assumed that mobilization of these stakeholders will provide an enabling environment for 
implementation of the various livelihood activities. The ongoing sharing of information will be 
aligned with ongoing information dissemination meetings that already exist within the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI). In addition to these scheduled meetings, it is 
worth mentioning that there will be progress updates on implementation of project activities at 
different  levels.  These  updates  will  be  provided  by  the  different  implementers  of  project 
activities. Documentation of these meetings will form part of project documentation.  
Page | 20  
The Key Objectives of the SEP can be summarised as follows:  
•  Provide  guidance  for  stakeholder  engagement  such  that  it  meets  the  standards  of 
• 
• 
International Best Practice,  
Identify key stakeholders that are affected, and/or able to influence the Project and its 
activities,  
Identify  the  most  effective  methods,  timing,  and  structures  through  which  to  share 
project  information,  and  to  ensure  regular,  accessible,  transparent,  and  appropriate 
consultation,  
•  Development of a stakeholders engagement process that provides stakeholders with an 
opportunity to influence project,  
•  Establish formal grievance redress mechanisms disclosure,  
•  Define roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the SEP,  
•  Define  reporting  and  monitoring  measures  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  SEP  and 
periodical reviews of the SEP based on findings. 
6.3     PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE 
Information and data that will be shared will be information about the project description that 
will  include  among  many  other  issues,  the  project  background,  the  theory  of  change  and  the 
summarized presentation of each of the project components and subcomponents. The projects 
beneficiaries selection will also be outlined. This information will largely be shared at the early 
stages of the project.  
This will be presented in document format to the district offices who will in-turn present it to 
lower levels, i.e., the beneficiaries. These documents will also be published in the Government 
of Rwanda website as well as the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources/NAEB website. 
There will also be presentations and discussions over scheduled radio and television platforms 
where  Ministry  Officials  responsible  for  implementation,  management  and  coordination  of 
project activities will make presentations about the project as well as the progress update while 
engaging with the public and answering any arising questions. 
The Ministry will also use the platforms below to reach more stakeholders who do not have easy 
access to information: 
Newspapers, posters, radio, television, 
Information centres and exhibitions or other visual displays, 
Brochures, leaflets, posters, nontechnical summary documents and reports, 
Official correspondence, meetings, 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Website, social media. 
The strategy will also include means to consult with project-affected stakeholders if there are 
significant  changes  to  the  project  resulting  in  additional  risks  and  impacts.  The  most  critical 
aspect of the strategy is the leveraging of village level leadership engagement and coordination 
with the District Administrator’s Offices.  
6.4     PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR CONSULTATION 
The  Agriculture  Sector  has  a  range  of  stakeholder  groups  as  earlier  identified.  These  include 
members  of  the  community  level  governance  structures,  District  Administration  Structures, 
Page | 21  
Ministry  Officials  and  the  general  public.  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources 
Information  Office  will  be  responsible  for  coordination  of  all  these  events  and  will  keep  a 
schedule of implementation of all outreach activities and will report on progress. 
These groups will be engaged by use of different platforms including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Interviews  
Surveys, polls, and questionnaires for beneficiary feedback  
Public meetings, workshops, and/or focus groups on specific topic. 
Participatory methods 
Other traditional mechanisms for consultation and decision making. 
Table 6-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques 
ENGAGEMENT TECHNIQUE 
APPROPRIATE APPLICATION OF THE TECHNIQUE 
Correspondences (Phone, 
Emails) 
One-on-one meetings 
Formal meetings 
Public  meetings 
COVID-19 guidelines)  
(following 
Focus group meetings 
Project website 
Project leaflet 
Surveys 
Workshops 
•  Distribute 
information  to  Government  officials,  NGOs,  Local  Government,  and 
organisations/agencies 
Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up 
• 
•  Seeking views and opinions 
•  Enable stakeholder to speak freely about sensitive issues 
•  Build personal relationships 
•  Record meetings 
•  Present the Project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow group to comment – opinions and views 
•  Build impersonal relation with high level stakeholders 
•  Disseminate technical information 
•  Record discussions 
•  Present Project information to a large group of stakeholders, especially communities 
•  Allow the group to provide their views and opinions 
•  Build relationship with the communities, especially those impacted 
•  Distribute non-technical information 
•  Facilitate meetings with presentations, PowerPoint, posters etc. 
•  Record discussions, comments, questions. 
•  Present Project information to a group of stakeholders (8- 15 people groups) 
•  Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline information 
•  Build relationships with communities 
•  Record responses 
•  Present project information and progress updates 
•  Disclose SEP, GRM and other relevant project documentation 
•  Brief project information to provide regular update 
•  Site specific project information. 
•  Gathering opinions and views from individual stakeholders 
•  Gather baseline data 
•  Record data 
•  Develop a baseline database for monitoring impacts 
•  Present project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow a group of stakeholders to provide their views and opinions 
•  Use  participatory  exercises  to  facilitate  group  discussions,  brainstorm  issues,  analyse 
information, and develop recommendations and strategies 
•  Record responses 
Page | 22  
6.5      PROPOSED STRATEGY TO INCORPORATE THE VIEW OF VULNERABLE GROUPS 
During the consultation process, the views of vulnerable or disadvantaged groups will be sought 
through a process of free, prior, and informed consultation. This will be done during project 
preparation to inform them about the project, to fully identify their views, to obtain their broad 
community support to the project, and to develop project design and safeguard instruments. 
This process is best done as part of the social assessment although consultations are likely to 
continue after its completion. 
For  projects  with  no  impacts  or  direct  interventions  with  the  vulnerable  or  disadvantaged 
communities, the local communities are informed about the project, asked for their views on 
the project, and assured that they will not be affected during project implementation.  
For  projects  affecting  vulnerable  or  disadvantaged  communities,  whether  positively  or 
adversely, a more elaborate consultation process is required. This may include, as appropriate:  
• 
Informing the affected vulnerable or disadvantaged communities about project objectives 
and activities, 
•  Discussing and assessing possible adverse impacts and ways to avoid or mitigate them, 
•  Discussing and assessing potential project benefits and how these can be enhanced, 
•  Discussing  and  assessing  land  and  natural  resource  use  and  how  management  of 
• 
• 
these resources may be enhanced, 
Identifying customary rights to land and natural resource use and possible ways of 
enhancing these, 
Identifying and discussing (potential) conflicts with other communities and how these 
might be avoided, 
•  Discussing and assessing food security and how it might be enhanced through project 
interventions, 
•  Discussing and eliciting customary norms of the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups 
and incorporating them into the project design. 
• 
Eliciting and incorporating indigenous knowledge into project design, 
• 
Facilitating and ascertaining the affected communities’ broad support to the project, 
•  Developing  a  strategy  for  vulnerable  or  disadvantaged  groups’  participation  and 
consultation during project implementation, including monitoring and evaluation. 
All project information provided to  vulnerable or disadvantaged groups should be in a form 
appropriate to local needs. Local languages should usually be used and efforts should be made 
to include all community members, including women and members of different generations 
and social groups (e.g. clans and socioeconomic background).  
If the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups are organized in community associations or umbrella 
organizations, these should usually be consulted. In some cases, it may be appropriate or even 
necessary  to  include  or  use  in  the  process  independent  entities  that  have  the  affected 
communities’  trust.  The  experience  of  (other)  locally  active  NGOs  and  experts  may  also  be 
useful.  
6.6      STAKEHOLDERS ANALYSIS 
Once stakeholders are identified by directly and/or indirectly project-affected parties, interested 
parties, and those who have the potential to influence project outcomes, the next step will be to 
Page | 23  
assess  the  level  of  stakeholder  interest  and  support  for  the  project.  The  assessment  shall  be 
geared toward identifying:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
stakeholders' interests,  
areas of potential risks and misunderstandings,  
mechanisms to positively influence other stakeholders,  
key people to be informed about the project during the preparation and implementation 
phases and,  
negatively impacted stakeholders as well as their adverse effects on the project. 
NAEB through its implementation partners shall continuously classify stakeholders based on: 
• 
• 
• 
their power to influence and their interest on the project,  
the legitimacy of each stakeholder’s relationship with the project, and  
the  urgency  of  the  stakeholder’s  claim  on  the  project  activities,  potential  risks,  and 
impacts. 
Based  on  this  analysis,  the  communication  strategy,  and  the  coordination  mechanism  to  be 
developed by NAEB shall incorporate strategies to engage the ‘High Interest and High Influence 
stakeholders ‘and the ‘high Interest and Low Influence’ stakeholders.  
High interest and high influence stakeholders: The plan should be to fully engage this group and 
apply all effort to ensure that they are satisfied and fully always informed of the project. This can 
be done by focusing efforts on these groups of stakeholders throughout the project cycle, giving 
them the importance, they deserve, involving them in project governance decision making bodies 
and engaging them and consulting them regularly  as well as providing timeous feedback. The 
engagement plan targeting these stakeholders shall be incorporated into the project annual work 
plan. 
Figure 6-1      Basic Stakeholder Influence/Interest Chart. 
(Adapted from: https://www.boreal-is.com/data/uploads/2020/07/A-step-by-step-guide-to-building-a-
stakehoder-engagement-plan) 
Page | 24  
High  interest  and  medium/low  influence  stakeholders:  The  high  interest  and  low  influence 
stakeholders should be kept informed, ensuring that no major issues arise because of the project. 
The  project  will  maintain  this  group’s  interest  in  the  project,  involving  them  in  the 
implementation arrangements, tapping into their interest and keep them in the loop.  
The objective of the engagement and consultation plan under the PSAC project is to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Begin early in the project planning process to gather initial views on the project proposal 
and inform project design, 
Encourage stakeholder feedback, particularly as a way of informing project design and 
engagement by stakeholders in the identification and mitigation of environmental and 
social risks and impacts, 
Ensure that stakeholders understand how the project is likely to affect them  
Ensure consistency in messaging, 
Continue  engagement  on  an  ongoing  basis  as  risks  and  impacts  arise  and  manage 
stakeholders’ expectations, 
Ensure  prior  disclosure  and  dissemination  of  relevant,  transparent,  objective, 
meaningful and easily  accessible information in a timeframe that enables meaningful 
consultations with stakeholders in a culturally appropriate format, in the local language 
and is understandable to stakeholders, 
Consider and respond to feedback, 
Support active and inclusive engagement with project-affected parties, 
Ensure that consultation(s) is/ are free of external manipulation, interference, coercion, 
discrimination, and intimidation; and 
Ensure consultation (s) is/are documented and disclosed by the project.  
6.7      PLANNING FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  
NAEB  will  establish  an  operational  plan  in  line  with  proposed  project  activities  to  ensure  the 
participation  and  engagement  of  the  stakeholders,  ensuring  that  each  group  gets  involved  as 
defined and receive the agreed information. The plan must ensure a balance in the involvement 
and  benefits  between  different  gender  segments  and  the  participation  of  vulnerable  groups, 
ensuring  that  the  project's  objectives  are  met  in  terms  of  regeneration  of  landscapes  and 
livelihoods  through  Inclusive  Financing.  Regular  meetings  will  be  scheduled  with  the 
representatives of the groups of actors involved in the project, for the revision of the plan, activity 
progress and necessary adjustments according to probable changes in the initial context during 
the execution of the project.  
6.7.1    Stakeholder Consultation Techniques/Methods  
There  are  a  variety  of  engagement  techniques  used  to  build  relationships  with  stakeholders, 
gather  information  from  stakeholders,  consult  with  stakeholders,  and  disseminate  project 
information to stakeholders. A range of techniques will be applied that are specifically tailored 
to  the  identified  stakeholder  groups.  The  format  of  every  engagement  activity  should  meet 
general requirements on accessibility, i.e., should be held at venues that are easily reachable and 
do  not  require  long  commute,  entrance  fee  or  preliminary  access  authorization,  cultural 
appropriateness  (i.e.,  with  due  respect  to  the  local  customs  and  norms),  and  inclusivity,  i.e., 
engaging  all  segments  of  the  project  affected  parties  including  the  vulnerable  individuals.  If 
necessary, logistical assistance should be provided to enable participants from the remote areas, 
persons  with  limited  physical  abilities  and  those  with  insufficient  financial  or  transportation 
Page | 25  
means to attend public meetings scheduled by the project. Particular attention will be given to 
the vulnerable groups to ensure that they are not denied project benefits. 
request 
radio  programs, 
In general, public consultations will take place through virtual and physical workshops, seminars, 
meetings, 
for  written  proposals/comments,  questionnaire 
administration, public reading and explanation of project ideas and requirements. In the wake of 
Covid-19  however,  there  needs  to  be  a  paradigm  shift  as  to  how  engagement  processes  are 
carried out to minimize risk of infection and spread of the disease. There is need to do a cost-
benefit analysis and strike a balance between virtually based communication channels and those 
that need physical interaction. The techniques mostly used in SEP are outlined in the table below: 
Table 6-2      Stakeholder Engagement Techniques 
ENGAGEMENT TECHNIQUE 
APPROPRIATE APPLICATION OF THE TECHNIQUES 
NAEB - Internal  
Official 
(Phone, Emails) 
correspondences 
Social  Media 
(WhatsApp, 
SMS,  Face  book,  Twitter, 
Zoom,  Microsoft  Meetings 
Google classes etc  
Project website 
One-on-one 
meetings 
physical 
Formal physical meetings 
Public consultation meetings 
Focus group meetings 
Project leaflet 
Surveys 
Multi-stakeholder  meetings 
and/or Workshops 
•  Emails  
•  Progress Meetings  
•  Bulletin board Grievance procedure Code of conduct 
•  Distribute  information  to  Co-Implementing  partners  (at  central,  regional  and  local 
level), other Government departments, NGOs, Local Government, private sector, and 
organisations/agencies 
Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up 
• 
•  Share information with beneficiaries  
•  Distribute information to Co-Implementing partners 
• 
Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up 
•  Online Meetings with stakeholders  
•  Online Workshops with stakeholders 
•  Present project information and progress updates  
•  Disclose SEP, GRM and other relevant project documentation 
•  Seeking views and opinions 
•  Enable stakeholder to speak freely about sensitive issues 
•  Build personal relationships 
•  Record meetings 
•  Present the Project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow group to comment – opinions and views 
•  Build impersonal relation with high level stakeholders 
•  Disseminate technical information 
•  Record discussions 
•  Present Project information to a large group of stakeholders, especially communities 
•  Allow the group to provide their views and opinions 
•  Build relationship with the communities, especially those impacted 
•  Distribute non-technical information 
•  Facilitate meetings with presentations, PowerPoint, posters etc. 
•  Record discussions, comments, questions. 
•  Present Project information to a group of stakeholders (8-15 people groups) 
•  Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline information 
•  Build relationships with communities 
•  Record responses 
•  Brief project information to provide regular update 
•  Site specific project information. 
•  Gathering opinions and views from individual stakeholders 
•  Gather baseline data 
•  Record data 
•  Develop a baseline database for monitoring impacts 
•  Present project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow a group of stakeholders to provide their views and opinions 
•  Use participatory exercises to facilitate group discussions, brainstorm issues, analyse 
information, and develop recommendations and strategies 
•  Record responses 
Page | 26  
6.8      ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE 
6.8.1    Stakeholders Engagement Activities  
Prior to the commencement of stakeholder’s engagement activities, meetings shall be scheduled 
with relevant Traditional Authorities, Community Representatives, political leaders in the project 
area, Government Ministries and Departments, Media, and other Interested & Affected Parties 
(I&APs). The purpose of these meetings shall be to refine stakeholder’s engagement strategy to 
meet the requirements of I&APs and ensure that future communication is effective and cognisant 
of all social sensitivities. 
Table 6-3      Stakeholder Engagement Activities  
STAGE 
OBJECTIVES 
KEY ACTIVITIES 
TARGET STAKEHOLDERS 
Preliminary 
Engagements 
• 
To  gain  a  preliminary 
understanding of the scope 
of  the  PSAC  Project  and 
relevant stakeholders; 
•  Field Visits 
•  Stakeholder 
process 
identification 
other 
To  meet  key  stakeholders 
and introduce them to the 
project 
and  Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
Process, 
To disclose the GRM as well 
as 
project 
documents  in  the  public 
domain  to  all  interested 
and affected stakeholders, 
To gather issues of concern 
and through this identify a 
list  of  potential  negative 
and positive impacts, 
To expose the stakeholders 
to the developed GRM and 
specific 
project 
other 
Reports. 
Engagements 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Disclosure of the 
Grievance 
Redress 
Mechanism 
(GRM) and other 
project  specific 
Reports.  
•  Meetings with key stakeholders 
broader 
engagement 
to 
facilitate 
stakeholder’s 
process, 
the 
•  Dissemination  of  engagement 
(background 
documents, 
materials 
information 
posters, media notices etc.), 
•  Consultations  through  training 
focal 
other 
workshops  with  GRM 
points, 
and 
stakeholders 
all 
•  Feedback from stakeholders. 
•  Disseminate the GRM and other 
project  specific  Reports  to  all 
stakeholders, 
•  Expound  the  contents  of  the 
GRM and other project specific 
Reports to all stakeholders, 
•  Government Ministries and 
Departments 
•  Communities 
•  Coalitions 
• 
• 
• 
Local Authorities 
Local Leadership 
Government  Ministries 
and Departments, 
Communities, 
Coalitions 
Local authorities, 
Local Leadership 
PSAC Consultants, 
Agric Extension Officers 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  NGOs  
• 
Vulnerable Persons 
• 
Government  Ministries 
and Departments 
Communities  
Coalitions 
Local Authorities 
Local Leadership 
General Public 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Media 
6.8.2    Communication Plan 
Table 6-4      Stakeholders Engagement Communication Plan 
DATE 
STAKEHOLDERS 
COMMUNICATION 
MINAGRI 
• 
• 
District 
Officers 
RDC 
Officers 
Chief 
Agricultural 
Executive 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
PSAC Stakeholders Engagement Plan 
Preliminary Meeting 
Present  information  on  GRM  and  other 
project specific reports 
Induction and training on use of GRM tools 
Distribute non-technical information 
METHOD OF 
ENGAGEMENT 
Formal Meeting 
• 
Formal Meetings 
• 
•  Workshops 
Page | 27  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Development 
Village 
Committees 
Community Leadership 
Project Field Officers (PFO) 
Forestry Field Officers. 
Agric Extension Officers 
Communities 
Coalitions 
Project Beneficiaries 
Vulnerable Persons 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Facilitate  meetings  with  presentations, 
PowerPoint, posters etc. 
Present information on GRM 
Induction and training on use of GRM tools 
Distribute non-technical information 
Facilitate  meetings  with  presentations, 
PowerPoint, posters etc. 
Allow to provide their views and opinion 
Request  guidance  on  how  to  handle  PSAC 
issues related to their views and opinions 
Present  GRM  and  other  project  specific 
reports to project communities 
Allow  the  communities  to  provide  their 
views and opinions 
Build relationships with the communities 
Facilitate  meeting  with  presentation  and 
posters 
Formal Meeting 
• 
•  Workshop 
• 
Email  
Community Meetings 
Media 
• 
Distribute non-technical information 
• 
Press Statements 
6.8.3    Information Disclosure 
The type of information to be disclosed to the various stakeholders depends on their interests 
and how they will be affected by the Programme – or how PSAC activities may be affected by 
them. Thereafter various communication tools can be utilized for the engagement process, such 
as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Project notices published in local newspapers, 
Radio advertisements, 
Direct mailings to communities, 
Presentations with or without focus group sessions), 
Targeted e-mails, 
Virtual meetings, presentations, seminars, workshops, with stakeholders, 
One-on-one  meetings,  presentations,  seminars,  workshops,  e-mails,  and  phone 
conversations with stakeholders, 
Site tours, and  
The use of social media. 
Table  1.5  below  gives  a  general  overview  of  the  types  of  information  needs  for  various 
stakeholder groups. 
Table 6-5      Summary Overview of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) 
Stakeholders 
Information to be disclosed 
Consultation means 
ROLL community, neighbouring 
communities, general public 
Current and new activities and how these 
relate  to  them  in  terms  of  opportunities 
and threats 
Forum  to  express  community  /  health 
fears  and  get  feedback  e.g.,  accidental 
release/escape; contamination; 
emergencies (fire) 
Local leaders i.e., Chief’s or district offices, 
Churches,  national  media,  social  media, 
Forestry website etc. 
Public 
discussions, social media. 
Training 
specific  members  of 
communities, awareness, education 
consultations, 
group 
focal 
the 
Page | 28  
Staff  /  workers  at 
Districts  
target 
Farmers Groups, 
Agricultural NGOs 
Farmer Union 
Agrochemical companies 
landscapes  and 
How  regeneration  of 
other  project  work  will  affect  their  work 
environments 
including  Occupational 
Health & Safety rules 
Consultation on agricultural needs / food 
security issues. 
Staff  newsletters,  bulletin  boards,  email, 
website,  meetings  with  management, 
staff  sensitization  & 
inhouse  training 
programs. 
District  Extension 
services,  Baseline 
surveys/subsequent  surveys  to  monitor 
impacts, emails, bulletins 
Intergovernmental Institutions; 
IFAD, FAO, etc 
Setting 
participating Districts  
regeneration 
agenda 
for 
Intergovernmental 
consultations  
meetings 
and 
University Graduates 
Youths 
Capacity 
Districts.  
building 
for 
participating 
Build  partnerships  through  meetings, 
seminars, workshops 
Internship opportunities 
Opportunities  for  employment  during 
project implementation, sponsorships for 
education 
Website, public media, bulletin boards 
District  Agricultural  Offices,  public 
consultations 
Page | 29  
7 
AN OVERVIEW OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
7.1      WHAT IS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT?  
Stakeholder Engagement will be free of manipulation, interference, coercion, and intimidation, 
and  conducted  based  on  timely,  relevant,  understandable,  and  accessible  information,  in  a 
culturally appropriate format. It involves interactions between identified groups of people and 
provides stakeholders with an opportunity to raise their concerns and opinions (e.g., by way of 
meetings, surveys, interviews and/or focus groups), and ensures that this information is taken 
into consideration when making project decisions.  
Effective stakeholder engagement develops a “social licence” to operate and depends on mutual 
trust, respect and transparent communication between MINAGRI and its stakeholders. It thereby 
improves its decision-making and performance by:  
•  Managing costs: Effective engagement can help PSACavoid costs, in terms of money and 
reputation.  
•  Managing  risk:  Engagement  helps  PSACand  communities  to  identify,  prevent,  and 
• 
• 
• 
• 
mitigate environmental and social impacts that can threaten project viability.  
Enhancing  reputation:  By  publicly  recognising  human  rights  and  committing  to 
environmental protection, MINAGRI and financial institutions IFAD involved in financing 
the project can boost their credibility and minimise risks.  
Avoiding conflict: Understanding current and potential issues such as rights to service 
provision and proposed project activities.  
Improving corporate policy: Obtaining perceptions about a project, which can act as a 
catalyst for changes and improvements in MINAGRI corporate practices and policies;  
Identifying, monitoring and reporting on impacts: Understanding a project’s impact on 
stakeholders, evaluating and reporting back on mechanisms to address these impacts; 
and  
•  Managing  stakeholder  expectations:  Consultation  also  provides  the  opportunity  for 
MINAGRI to become aware of and manage stakeholder attitudes and expectations.  
7.2      PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  
This  (SEP)  shall  be  informed  by  a  set  of  principles  defining  its  core  values  underpinning 
interactions  with  identified  stakeholders.  Common  principles  based  on  “International  Best 
Practice” include the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Commitment is demonstrated when the need to understand, engage and identify the 
community is recognized and acted upon early in the process, 
Integrity occurs when engagement is conducted in a manner that fosters mutual respect 
and trust, 
Respect is created when the rights, cultural beliefs, values and interests of stakeholders 
and affected communities are recognized, 
Transparency is demonstrated when community concerns are responded to in a timely, 
open, and effective manner, 
Inclusiveness  is  achieved  when  broad  participation  is  encouraged  and  supported  by 
appropriate participation opportunities; and 
Trust  is achieved through open and meaningful dialogue that respects and upholds a 
Page | 30  
community’s beliefs, values, and opinions. 
7.3      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS  
The following considerations should be made when planning for stakeholder engagement:  
7.3.1    Time and resources: 
It takes time to develop and build trust-based relationships with stakeholders. The consensus 
from practitioners is that from the outset relationships with stakeholders should develop and 
grow, and that these relationships should be nurtured and fostered not to disappear. 
Additional stakeholders might be identified that also want to be engaged. No willing stakeholder 
should  be  excluded  from  the  process  of  engagement.  Some  stakeholders  will  need  to  be 
educated  about  the  concept  of  engagement  itself,  as  well  as  on the  complex  issues  requiring 
specialised  and  technical  knowledge.  These  demands  can  increase  the  cost  of  consultation 
required to meet external expectations, and often this occurs at a time when a project lacks the 
internal capacity and resources to implement a broad engagement strategy. 
7.3.2    It raises expectations: 
Stakeholders can have unrealistically high expectations of benefits that may accrue to them from 
a  project.  As  such  MINAGRI  from  the  outset  must  be  clear  on  what  they  can  and  cannot  do, 
establishing a clear understanding of their roles and responsibilities. 
In  PSAC  areas,  the  engagement  processes  should  provide  MINAGRI  with  an  opportunity  to 
develop relationships with stakeholders and potential project partners.  
7.3.3    Securing stakeholder participation: 
Cultural norms and values can prevent stakeholders from freely participating in meetings. Often 
there  are  conflicting  demands  within  a  community,  and  it  can  be  challenging  for  a  project  to 
identify  stakeholders  who  are  representative  of  common  interests.  This  might  be  avoided  by 
employing local consultants who are sensitive to local power dynamics, which requires project 
proponents  developing  an  awareness  of  the  local  context  and  implementing  structures  to 
support and foster effective stakeholder engagement.  
7.3.4    Consultation fatigue: 
Moreover, there is evidence to suggest that stakeholders can easily tire of consultation processes 
especially  when  promises  are  unfulfilled,  and  their  opinions  and  concerns  are  not  taken  into 
consideration. Often stakeholders feel their lives are not improving because of a project and this 
can lead to consultation meetings being used as an area to voice complaints and grievances about 
the lack of development. This might be avoided by coordinating stakeholder engagement and by 
ensuring  PSAC  Consultants  do  not  make  promises  to  stakeholders,  but  rather  use  the  public 
consultation  process  as  an  opportunity  to  manage  expectations,  challenge  misconceptions, 
disseminate accurate project information, and gather stakeholder opinions which are feedback 
to the client and other project specialists.  
Page | 31  
8 
RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTION 
8.1      RESOURCES 
The  stakeholder  engagement  activities  have  been  estimated  to  cost  about  US  $  25,000.00 
throughout the project life and will be allocated from the overall project allotment. However, the 
design and implementation of a detailed and accurate SEP will be the overall responsibility of 
NAEB. Other resources to be committed will be organized as such: 
• 
• 
• 
The NAEB/SPIU Information Office will be in charge of the SEP in liaison with the project 
development team led by MINAGRI. 
The  NAEB/SPIU  are  committed  to  the  implementation  of  the  project  as  well  as  the 
implementation of the SEP in keeping with requirements and good governance pillars 
therefore  make  a  commitment  to  commit  some  of  the  project  funds  towards  the 
implementation of the SEP activities. 
Additional information on SEP related activities will be available from the Information 
office with support from the MINAGRI.  
8.1.1    Budget 
The  Project  Coordinator  will  ensure  that  NAEB  has  an  adequate  standing  budget  allocated 
towards the Stakeholder Management Programme.  
8.1.2    Training 
All the PSAC partners and NAEB team will attend a workshop that will bring awareness on the 
project, SEP, GRM as well as other project specific documents. 
8.2      RESPONSIBILITIES 
The management, coordination and implementation of the SEP and its integral tasks will be the 
responsibility of dedicated team members within NAEB, partner ministries and its Contractors, 
Sub-contractors,  and  Consultants.  The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  organizations  are 
presented below. 
NAEB will be responsible for the preparation and physical implementation of the PSAC Project.  
The Project Coordinator will work closely with the Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) to 
ensure that the SEP is implemented in a successful manner. 
Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) is responsible for the management of project related 
social  and  environmental  issues.  The  ESS  will  oversee  all  stakeholders’  engagement  activities 
regarding  the  implementation  of  the  GRM  as  well  as  other  project  specific  documents. 
Responsibilities of the ESS include the following: 
•  Develop,  implement  and  monitor  stakeholders  engagement  plan  for  the  project,  GRM 
and other project specific documents; 
•  Liaise  with  the  Project  Coordinator  to  ensure  that  stakeholders  engagement 
requirements are understood, 
•  Maintain the stakeholder database; and 
•  Proactively  identify  stakeholders,  project  risks  and  opportunities  and  inform  Project 
Coordinator to ensure that the necessary planning can be done to either mitigate risk or 
exploit opportunities. 
Page | 32  
9  GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM  
9.1      INTRODUCTION 
Implementation of the project may generate several challenges and complaints especially those 
which  relate  to  infringement  of  rights  of  sections  of  the  society.  As  part  of  addressing  such 
complaints  and  in  the  spirit  of  the  continuous  consultation  process,  a  Grievance  Redress 
Mechanism (GRM) has been developed for PSAC. This GRM is in line with the GRMs that are being 
applied by the rest of the projects currently in the country. 
Transparency and accountability are core elements of the Project. For this purpose, the project 
will  include  a  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  (GRM).  The  goal  of  the  GRM  is  to  strengthen 
accountability  to  beneficiaries  and  to  provide  channels  for  project  stakeholders  to  provide 
feedback  and/or  express  grievances  related  to  project  supported  activities.  The  GRM  is  a 
mechanism that allows for the identification and resolution of issues affecting the project. By 
increasing  transparency  and  accountability,  the  GRM  aims  to  reduce  the  risk  of  the  project 
inadvertently affecting citizens/beneficiaries and serves as an important feedback and learning 
mechanism that can help improve project impact. 
The  mechanism focuses not only  on  receiving  and  recording  complaints but  also  on  resolving 
them.  While  feedback  should  be handled  at the  level  closest  to  the  complaint,  all  complaints 
should be registered and follow the basic procedures set out in this chapter. 
9.2      DEFINITION OF GRM 
For the purposes of these Operational Guidelines, a Grievance Redress Mechanism is a process 
for  receiving,  assessing,  and  addressing  project-related  complaints  from  citizens  and  affected 
communities  at  the  level  of  the  project.  The  terms  ‘grievance  ‘and  ‘complaint’  are  used 
interchangeably. 
9.3      GRM SCOPE AND USE 
SCOPE:  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  will  be  available  for  project  stakeholders  and  other 
interested  parties  to  submit  questions,  comments,  suggestions  and/or  complaints,  or  provide 
any form of feedback on all project-funded activities.  
GRM’s users: Project beneficiaries, project affected people (i.e., those who will be and/or are 
likely to be directly or indirectly affected, positively or negatively, by the project), as well as the 
broader citizenry can use the GRM for the above purposes (see Scope). 
GRM’s management: The GRM is managed by NAEB, under the direct responsibility of MINAGRI. 
Submission  of  complaints:  Complaints  can  be  expressed  at  any  time  throughout  project 
implementation. 
Page | 33  
• 
9.4      GRM FOR PSAC 
The PSAC GRM will be a system by which queries or clarifications about the programme will be 
responded to, problems with implementation will be resolved, and complaints and grievances 
will be addressed efficiently and effectively. The purpose of the grievance redress mechanism is: 
To  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  beneficiaries  and  to  address  and  resolve  their 
grievances, 
To  serve  as  a  conduit  for  soliciting  inquiries,  inviting  suggestions,  and  increasing 
community participation, 
To collect information that can be used to improve operational performance, 
To enhance the programme’s legitimacy among stakeholders, 
To promote transparency and accountability, 
To deter fraud and corruption and mitigate programme risks. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
9.5      STRUCTURE OF THE GRM 
The GRM consists of a small number of components:   
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The access point for impacted/concerned people 
Grievance log 
Acknowledgement stage 
Assessment stage 
Passing of resolution 
Response  
Room for appeal 
Case closure 
The components are summarized in the process flow diagram below. 
Page | 34  
9.5.1    Process Overview 
The following key steps must be followed for all complaints received by NAEB staff: 
Receive, 
classify& log 
Acknowledge 
Assess and Investigate 
Resolve & 
Confirm 
Respond to Complainant 
Appeal &Follow up 
QA & Close 
The requirements for each of these steps is detailed below 
Page | 35  
1.0    Receive, classify & 
log 
Summary 
Ensure that all potential issues are captured and classified for escalation, review and action 
as required. 
Receiving the Grievance: 
The  access  points  will  be  as  close  to  the  users  as  possible.  An  easily  accessible  and  well 
publicized focal point or user-facing ‘help desk’ is the first step. This will be established at 
each sub-project, and NAEB Offices so that it will be seen as credible and accessible. The main 
issues for the access point include the following: 
•  Uptake channels should include some or all of the following: 
o  phone hotline,  
o  email,  
o  mail,  
o  SMS,  
o  webpage,  
o  or face-to-face. 
The  uptake  channels  will  be  publicized  and  advertised  via  local  media  and  the 
implementing agency.  
• 
•  Verbal complaints should be recorded by staff for them to be considered.  
•  Many complaints may be resolved ‘on the spot’ and informally by the PSAC staff but 
should also be logged to (i) encourage responsiveness; and (ii) ensure that repeated 
or low-level grievances are being noted in the system.  
The GRM should have the ability to handle anonymous complaints. 
• 
Typically, the complainant will be provided with a receipt and ‘roadmap’ telling him/her how 
the complaint process works and when to expect further information. 
Logging and classifying: 
Any complaint, issue or negative stakeholder interaction (whether this is formally logged by 
the complainant or not), must be logged and classified for action. 
All of these complaints must be formally logged using the standard forms. 
All complaints must be prioritized as follows: 
•  Priority 1 – urgent, potential high health and high business impact. This require a 
response to the Complainant within three (3) working days.  
o  This should be used (sparingly) for major health issues where the complaint 
may have disastrous impacts on either human, the environment or PSAC itself. 
Page | 36  
o  Also, this could be used in a situation where the complainant may be able to 
influence  or  make  public  statements  that  would  impact  upon  the  IADP 
reputation. 
✓  Priority  2,  -  non-urgent,  lower  health  environmental  and  social  impact.  This 
requires a response to the complainant within 2 working weeks.  
o 
This should be used for most complaints with individual stakeholders, as this 
allows  a  reasonable  time  to  collect  information  and  produce  a  balanced 
response. 
  Discretion and flexibility should be exercised in prioritizing all complaints 
  The staff member logging the complaint should review the complaint and its priority 
with the Sub-project/PSAC Project Manager before proceeding to the next step.  
o  The  Sub-project/PSAC  Project  Manager  will  decide  on  the  appropriate  person(s)  to 
carry out subsequent steps, including the investigation. 
  All  Priority  1  complaints  must  be  escalated  immediately  to  the  PSAC  Project 
Manager. 
 2.0 Acknowledge 
Summary 
Ensure  that  every  complaint  receives  a  formal  written  acknowledgement,  containing  an 
expectation of when they will receive a response, and the person dealing with it. 
  All complaints, regardless of priority, should receive a pro forma acknowledgement sent 
out 1st class mail on the day of receipt. 
Page | 37  
3.0       Assess &Investigate 
Summary 
Follow up all aspects of the complaint, both internal and external, to ensure that the key facts 
are identified and clarified. 
  The priority of the complaint will drive the timescale for completion (3 days for urgent or 
2 weeks for non-urgent). 
  All  areas  of  interaction  and  communication  should  be  established  (who,  what,  where, 
when why etc.) and documented where possible. 
4.0     Resolve & Confirm  
Summary 
Ensure  that  the  final  resolution  is  clear  and  fair.  Also  confirm  the  proposed  action  and 
resolution with another senior person (PSAC Management). 
  Ensure that the proposed resolution meets corporate guidelines and does not prejudice 
IADP in any unnecessary legal or financial manner. 
  Document the proposed action and discuss and agree with the PSAC Project Manager. 
  Discuss and review the solution from both the corporate and complainant viewpoint to 
ensure fairness and clarity. 
  The review should include recognition and documentation of any underlying issues that 
have contributed to the complaint and recommendations for actions to prevent further 
occurrence.  
  This should then be reviewed as part of the bi-monthly quality assurance reviews. 
Page | 38  
5.0     Respond to Complainant  
Summary 
Provide the Complainant with the resolution within the timescales promised. 
  The details of the findings and proposed resolution should be clearly explained (in written 
or verbal form as appropriate) to the complainant- within the agreed timescales. 
 
If  this  cannot  be  done  on  time  the  Complainant  should  be  contacted  by  telephone  to 
request further time. 
6.0     Appeal & Follow up 
Summary 
Ensure that complaints are followed up to confirm that the complainants are satisfied with 
the response given. If not satisfied the Complainant is advised on the route for Appealing. 
  All Priority 1 complaints and 95% of priority 2 complaints must be followed up within 
a reasonable timescale. 
 
This will be carried out by PSAC Administration team / Project Manager’s office. 
 
The follow-up should identify the following  
- 
Is the complainant satisfied with the response? 
-  Did they feel that their complaint was properly and fairly handled? 
  Any negative responses to these questions should be referred to  ROLL-GEF Project 
 
Managers for action and direct follow up with the complainant. 
The complainant is given room for appealing to the Ministry of Forestry or Courts of 
Law, if he is not satisfied. 
Page | 39  
7.0    QA & Close 
Summary 
Ensure that the PSAC as a whole is aware of the complaints and any underlying issues. Plan 
actions to remove these and prevent future recurrence. 
  All  complaints  should  be  reviewed  monthly  as  part  of  the  quality  assurance  review 
meetings. 
  Any complaints where action can be taken to avoid recurrence must be acted upon and 
raised with the appropriate managers/teams across the PSAC. 
9.6      SEP RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
9.6.1    Responsibilities  
The management, coordination and implementation of the SEP and its integral tasks will be 
the responsibility of the project Environmental and Social specialist (ESS) together with other 
dedicated team members within NAEB. Their roles and responsibilities are presented below. 
9.6.2    The Project Management Unit 
NAEB  will  be  accountable  for  ensuring  PSAC  achieves  its  development  objectives  and  for 
oversight  of  all  day-to-day  operations  of  the  project.  NAEB  will  also  be  responsible  for  all 
reporting requirement of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) and IFAD related to the project. 
NAEB  under  the  oversight  of  the  Permanent  Secretary  will  work  closely  with  relevant 
stakeholders to ensure that the SEP is implemented in a successful manner. 
9.6.3    Environment and Social Specialist (ESS). 
The  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  the  management  of  project  related 
Environment and social safeguards issues. He/she will oversee all stakeholder engagement 
activities  regarding  the  implementation  of  the  GRM  as  well  as  other  project  specific 
documents. Responsibilities will include the following: 
•  Continuous  Development,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  stakeholder’s 
• 
engagement plan and other project specific documents, 
To bring together the different stakeholders engaged in the project and develop joint 
strategies and plans, ensuring that key stakeholders are engaged while creating and 
maintaining momentum. Liaise with the Project Director to ensure that stakeholders 
engagement requirements are understood, 
•  Guiding  and  overseeing  community  sensitization  processes,  ensuring  that  key 
information  reaches  all  intended  target  groups,  that  beneficiary  selection  is 
transparent and in line with pre-defined criteria and that all target groups participate 
in relevant programme decision-making processes, 
Page | 40  
• 
Liaising with local stakeholders regularly to disseminate information about social risk 
mitigation activities considered by PSACPSAC, 
To develop and maintain the stakeholder database/map, 
• 
•  Proactively identify stakeholders, project risks and opportunities and inform Project 
Director to ensure that the necessary planning can be done to either mitigate risk or 
exploit opportunities. 
To  organize  regular  meetings  and/or  prepare  regular  communications,  in  close 
collaboration with NAEB 
Liaise with the Project Director to ensure that stakeholder engagement requirements 
are understood. 
• 
• 
9.6.4    Resources  
The  design  and  implementation  of  a  detailed  and  accurate  SEP  will  be  the  overall 
responsibility of NAEB. The Project Director will oversee the SEP implementation to ensure 
the success of the PSAC project. 
9.6.5    Budget 
The  Project  Director  will  ensure  that  NAEB  has  an  adequate  standing  budget  allocated 
towards the Stakeholder Management Programme.  
9.6.6    Training 
All  the  PSAC  partners  and  NAEB  team  members  will  attend  a  workshop  that  will  bring 
awareness on the project, SEP, GRM as well as other project specific documents. 
9.7      MONITORING AND REPORTING 
Monitoring and evaluation of the SEP process is vital as it ensures that the NAEB can respond 
to identified issues and alter the schedule and nature of engagement activities to make them 
more effective. As part of the SEP, a mechanism for providing feedback to the stakeholders 
on  their  information  needs  will  be  set  up.  In  addition,  the  SEP  will  include  means  for 
monitoring  the  effectiveness  of  the  public  consultation  processes  and  outcomes  from 
consultations,  and  for  determining  where  further  action  may  be  necessary  regarding 
engagement.  
The environmental and social safeguards specialists in NAEB will be responsible to ensure that 
the SEP is implemented throughout the life of the project. They will also be responsible for 
communicating and reporting on all stakeholder matters to the Project Director.  
Monitoring of the stakeholder engagement process allows the efficacy of the process to be 
evaluated. Amongst others the following monitoring activities will be implemented: 
• 
• 
During 
the  engagement  activities:  short-term  monitoring 
adjustments/improvements to be made during engagement; and 
Following completion of all engagement activities: review of outputs at the end of 
engagement to evaluate the effectiveness of the SEP as implemented. 
to  allow 
for 
To help in the monitoring system, a series of key performance indicators for each stakeholder 
engagement stage will be developed. Table below shows an example of the indicators and 
performance against the indicators to show successful completion of engagement tasks 
Page | 41  
Table 9-1      Key Performance Indicators by Project Phase 
PHASE  
ACTIVITIES 
INDICATORS 
Planning for Project 
GRM,  SEP  and  other 
project 
specific 
documents 
Implementation 
Share  updates  on  Project 
activities 
Share  updates  on  SEP,  GRM 
and  other  project 
specific 
documents activities 
Posters  displayed 
specified 
• 
in  allocated  service  centres  by  time 
• 
Posters  displayed  in  allocated  service  centres  by  time 
specified, 
Affected community stakeholders will have received and 
understand the information disclosed and attended the 
public meetings, 
Communities provided feedback, 
• 
•  No  complaints  about  non-receipt  of  project  specific 
documents received. 
The  identification  of  PSAC  related  impacts  and  concerns  is  a  key  element  of  stakeholder 
engagement that will occur over the complete Project life cycle. As such, the identification of 
new  concerns,  impacts,  and  grievances  as  the  GRM  and  project  progress  will  serve  as  an 
overall indicator for the implementation of the stakeholder engagement process. There are 
two  keyways  in  which  the  stakeholder  engagement  process, as  will  be  provided  for  in  the 
M&E action plan, will be monitored: 
9.7.1    Review of Engagement Activities in the Field 
During the engagements with stakeholders the engagement team will assess meetings using 
the following engagement tools: 
Stakeholders database, 
Issue and Response table, and  
• 
• 
•  Meeting records of all consultations held. 
9.7.2    Reporting Stakeholders Engagement Activities 
Performance will be reviewed following the stakeholder’s engagement sessions conducted in 
the field. The following will be considered in assessing performance: 
•  Materials disseminated: Types, frequency, and location, 
• 
Place  and  time  of  formal  engagement  events  and  level  of  participation  including 
specific stakeholders’ groups. 
Number of people attending public or formal meetings, 
Number of comments received, type of stakeholder and detail of feedback provided,  
• 
• 
•  Meeting minutes, attendance register and photographic evidence, 
• 
Numbers  and  type  of  stakeholders  who  contact  the  PSAC  project  team  by  mail, 
telephone, and any other means of communication, 
Comments  received  by  government  authorities,  community  leaders  and  other 
project partners and passed to the PSAC project, and 
Number and types of feedback and/or grievances and the nature and timing of their 
resolution; and the extent to which feedback and comments have been addressed 
and have led to corrective actions being implemented. 
• 
• 
Page | 42  
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 19. Environmental Social And Climate Management Framework
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT COMPETITIVENESS 
PROJECT (PSAC) 
________________________________________________ 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE MANAGEMENT 
FRAMEWORK 
(ESCMF) 
________________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI). 
KG 569 Street. 
Kigali. 
Rwanda. 
_______________________________ 
The  Rwanda  -  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC) 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is intended to provide complete documentation for the 
requirements  of  a  holistic  Stakeholder  Engagement  system  for  the  project.  This  SEP 
contains  the  findings  of  a  study  conducted  for the  agriculture  sector of  Rwanda  and  the 
instrument has been developed based on the local conditions and findings. 
Report no. 
Issue no.   
Date of issue 
001 
001 
……….…………………………………………                      ………………. 
        CHECKED  
DATE 
……….…………………………………………                      ………………. 
        APPROVED 
DATE 
This Report is Available from: 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
KG 569 Street  
Kigali 
Rwanda  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
CONTENTS 
TABLE OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................. vi 
TABLE OF TABLES .................................................................................................................. vii 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ........................................................................................ ix 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... xi 
1. 
INTRODUCTION AND PROJECT CONTEXT. .................................................................. 1 
1.1      BACKGROUND .............................................................................................................. 1 
1.2     THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE. .................................................................... 1 
1.3      PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................... 1 
1.4      PSAC SCOPE AND TARGETING ..................................................................................... 3 
1.4.1    Geographical targeting. ......................................................................................... 3 
1.4.2    Target Groups. ........................................................................................................ 3 
1.5      PROJECT COMPONENTS .............................................................................................. 4 
1.5.1    Component 1: ......................................................................................................... 4 
1.5.2    Component 2: ......................................................................................................... 5 
1.5.3    Component 3: ......................................................................................................... 6 
1.6      ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL CATEGORY ..................................................................... 6 
1.7      CLIMATE RISK CATEGORY ............................................................................................ 7 
2. 
SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY OF THE ESCMF AND ESCMP ........................................... 8 
2.1      JUSTIFICATION FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE ESCMF ............................................. 8 
2.2      PURPOSE OF THIS ESCMF ............................................................................................ 8 
2.3      APPROACH TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ESCMF ..................................................... 9 
3.  POLICY, LEGISLATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS ....................................... 11 
3.1      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 11 
3.2      THE RWANDA CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS .......................................................... 11 
3.3      RELEVANT RWANDA POLICES AND PLANS ................................................................ 11 
3.4      RELEVANT RWANDA LEGISLATION ............................................................................ 17 
3.4.1    Relevant Rwanda legislation ................................................................................ 17 
3.4.2    Relevant Statutory Instruments (SI) ..................................................................... 21 
3.5      INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS AND TREATIES ....................................................... 22 
3.6      GAP ANALYSIS OF LEGISLATION................................................................................. 25 
3.6.1    Project Classification ............................................................................................ 25 
3.6.2    Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures .............................................. 26 
3.7      IFAD SECAP AND POLICIES ......................................................................................... 34 
3.7.1    IFAD Environment and Natural Resources Management (ENRM) Policy ............ 34 
3.7.2    IFAD’s Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change ............... 35 
3.7.3    IFAD Indigenous Peoples’ Policy ........................................................................... 35 
3.7.4    IFAD Gender and Targeting Policy ....................................................................... 36 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
3.7.5    IFAD Land Policy ................................................................................................... 36 
3.7.6    IFAD Guidelines on SECAP .................................................................................... 37 
3.7.7    Free, Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects (FPIC) ................. 39 
3.7.8    FPIC Implementation Plan .................................................................................... 43 
3.7.8.1  The FPIC IMPlementation Plan .............................................................................. 45 
3.7.9    Timeframes for Seeking FPIC. ............................................................................... 47 
3.7.10   FPIC Implementation Arrangements ................................................................... 47 
3.7.11   Assess FPIC Implementation. .............................................................................. 48 
3.7.12   Budget and Financing ......................................................................................... 48 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND BIOPHYSICAL/CLIMATE/SOCIAL BASELINE ........................... 50 
4.1      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 50 
4. 
4.2      CONTEXT .................................................................................................................... 50 
4.3      BIOPHYSICAL BASELINE .............................................................................................. 51 
4.3.1    Topographical Features & Agro-Ecological Zones ............................................... 51 
4.3.2    Biodiversity inventories ........................................................................................ 52 
4.3.3    Hydrology and Water Resources .......................................................................... 54 
4.3.4    Soils ....................................................................................................................... 55 
4.3.5    Geology ................................................................................................................ 56 
4.3.6    Climatic Conditions ............................................................................................... 57 
4.4      SOCIO-ECONOMIC BASELINE ..................................................................................... 61 
4.4.1    Political and Civil Administration ......................................................................... 61 
4.4.2    Population and Demographic Conditions ............................................................ 62 
4.4.3    Land Tenure and Land use.................................................................................... 62 
4.4.4    Socio-Economic Conditions ................................................................................... 64 
4.4.5    Livelihood Conditions ........................................................................................... 66 
4.4.6    Agriculture ............................................................................................................ 67 
4.4.7    Labour and Migration .......................................................................................... 67 
5.  CONSULTATION AND PUBLIC DISCLOSURE ............................................................... 69 
5.1      CONSULTATIONS ........................................................................................................ 69 
5.2      PUBLIC CONSULTATION PLAN ................................................................................... 69 
5.3      OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN .......................................................................................... 69 
5.4      KEY STAKEHOLDERS ................................................................................................... 69 
5.5      CURRENT CONSULTATIONS ....................................................................................... 70 
5.5.1    Stakeholder Engagement ..................................................................................... 70 
5.5.2    The Engagement Process ..................................................................................... 71 
5.5.3    Public Consultations ............................................................................................. 72 
5.6      INFORMATION DISCLOSURE ...................................................................................... 74 
5.6.1    Information Disclosure to Consulted Stakeholders .............................................. 74 
5.6.2    Disclosure of ESCMF Documents .......................................................................... 75 
5.6.3    Public Disclosure Plan ........................................................................................... 75 
5.6.4    Disclosure of documentation related to the SECAP process ................................ 76 
5.7      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM ........................................................................... 76 
5.8      FEEDBACK AND MONITORING ................................................................................... 77 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
iv | P a g e  
6. 
SCREEENING, APPROVAL AND IMPLEMENTATION OF SUBPROJECTS ........................ 78 
6.1      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 78 
6.2      SECAP SCREENING REQUIREMENTS .......................................................................... 78 
6.3      EXCLUSION LIST ......................................................................................................... 79 
6.4      STAGES OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING. .......................................... 79 
6.4.1    Desk Appraisal of the planned activities .............................................................. 80 
6.4.2    Assigning the Environmental and Social Categories ............................................ 80 
6.4.3    Review of Recommendations ............................................................................... 82 
6.4.4    Public Consultation and Disclosure for Sub-projects. ........................................... 82 
6.4.5    Annual Monitoring and Reviews .......................................................................... 82 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE IMPACTS ANALYSIS .............................................. 84 
7.1      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 84 
7. 
7.2      ACTIVITIES AND SOURCES OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS. ................. 84 
7.3      SIGNIFICANCE RATING METHOD ............................................................................... 85 
7.4      ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ANALYSIS ........................................................................ 85 
7.4.1    Environmental Impact Analysis - Planning Phase ................................................ 85 
7.4.2    Environmental Impact Analysis – Construction/Establishment Phase ................. 85 
7.4.3    Environmental Impact Analysis – Operation Phase ............................................. 95 
7.4.4    Summary of the Magnitude of Potential Environmental Impacts ..................... 102 
SOCIAL AND HEALTH IMPACT ANALYSIS ................................................................ 108 
8.1      INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 108 
8. 
8.2      SOCIAL AND HEALTH IMPACT ANALYSIS ................................................................. 108 
8.2.1    Social and Health Impact Analysis - Planning Phase .......................................... 108 
8.2.2    Social and Health Impact Analysis – Construction/Operations Phase. .............. 110 
8.2.3    Summary of the Magnitude of Potential Social Impacts ................................... 116 
ECSMF matrix ........................................................................................................ 119 
9.1      THE ESCMP ............................................................................................................... 119 
9. 
10. 
CAPACITY NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND TRAINING PLAN ......................................... 128 
10.1     INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................... 128 
10.2     CAPACITY BUILDING NEEDS .................................................................................... 128 
10.3     TRAINING REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................... 129 
10.3.1   Capacity building needs for PSAC Partners. ...................................................... 129 
10.3.2   Capacity Building needs for NAEB ..................................................................... 129 
10.3.3   Capacity Building needs for beneficiary communities ...................................... 129 
10.3.4   Necessary training to support business farming:.............................................. 129 
10.3.5   Training on business management. .................................................................. 129 
10.3.6   Training on the use and interpretation of early warning systems. ................... 130 
10.3.7   Training of all farmers on watershed management issues ............................... 130 
10.3.8   Capacity building for gender equity .................................................................. 130 
10.3.9   Social and psychosocial support for PSAC communities ................................... 130 
10.3.10  Training on health, safety and environmental quality issues .......................... 130 
10.4     SUMMARY OF TRAINING REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................ 131 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
v | P a g e  
10.5     PROPOSED APPROACH IN EXECUTING TRAINING ACTIVITIES ................................ 134 
10.6     FUNDING REQUIREMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING .......... 134 
11. 
FUNDING FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ...................... 135 
11.1      COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE ESCMF ................................................................. 135 
11.2     SITE-SPECIFIC ESIAs AND ESMPs ............................................................................. 135 
11.3     MITIGATION MEASURES ......................................................................................... 135 
11.4     MONITORING AND EVALUATION ........................................................................... 136 
11.5     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING ............................................................. 136 
11.6     ANNUAL AUDITS ..................................................................................................... 137 
11.7     ESCMF IMPLEMENTATION BUDGET SUMMARY..................................................... 137 
12.  MONITORING PLAN AND ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................ 138 
12.1     INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................... 138 
12.2     MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING......................................................... 138 
12.3     AREAS TO BE MONITORED ..................................................................................... 138 
12.3.1   Environmental issues .......................................................................................... 139 
12.3.2   Social Issues ....................................................................................................... 139 
12.4     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MONITORING PLAN ............................................. 140 
13. 
14. 
15. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................... 144 
REFERENCES ...................................................................................................... 145 
APPENDICES ...................................................................................................... 147 
APPENDIX 1:    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING FORM ................................... 147 
APPENDIX 2:    METHODOLOGY FOR SIGNIFICANCE RATING OF IMPACTS ....................... 150 
APPENDIX 3:    GUIDELINES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUB-PROJECT ESMPs ............... 154 
APPENDIX 4    PROOF OF PUBLIC CONSULTATION AND DISCLOSURE. .............................. 161 
APPENDIX 5:    INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT PLAN (IPMP) ..................................... 162 
APPENDIX 6:    TARGETED ADAPTATION ASSESSMENT ..................................................... 171 
APPENDIX 7:    LABOUR AND COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT PLAN . 181 
APPENDIX 8:    GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM ........................................................... 197 
TABLE OF FIGURES 
Figure 1-1      Project Organigram .............................................................................................. 2 
Figure 1-2      PSAC Implementation Arrangements .................................................................. 2 
Figure 1-3      Map of the Project Area. ...................................................................................... 4 
Figure 3-1      The Local Governance structures in The Kingdom of Rwanda .......................... 40 
Figure 3-2      Implementation Arrangements for FPIC. ........................................................... 48 
Figure 4-1      Topography of Rwanda ...................................................................................... 52 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
vi | P a g e  
Figure 4-2      Geological Map of Eastern Province .................................................................. 56 
Figure 5-1      Stakeholder Consultation Meeting at Abahuzamugambi Co-op. ...................... 72 
Figure 6-1      IFAD's Screening Procedure for Projects ........................................................... 79 
Figure 6-2      Subproject Screening Process ............................................................................ 81 
TABLE OF TABLES 
Table 3-1      Relevant Policies ................................................................................................. 12 
Table 3-2      Relevant Rwanda legislation. .............................................................................. 17 
Table 3-3      Relevant Statutory Instruments (SI). ................................................................... 21 
Table 3-4      Overview of the relevant International Conventions and Treaties. ................... 22 
Table 3-5      Comparison of Rwanda and IFAD Classification. .................................................. 25 
Table 3-6      Comparison between IFAD and Rwanda ESA Procedures. ................................... 26 
Table 3-7      Comparison of Screening Criteria Requirements. ................................................ 26 
Table 3-8      Climate Risk Classification. .................................................................................. 27 
Table 3-9      Comparison of disclosure Requirements. ............................................................ 28 
Table 3-10    Comparison of the Framework Approach Requirements. ................................... 29 
Table 3-11    Comparison of specific Instruments Requirements. ............................................ 29 
Table 3-12    Comparison of public consultation Requirements. .............................................. 30 
Table 3-13    Comparison of health and labour safety requirements. ...................................... 30 
Table 3-14    Comparison of Physical Cultural Resources Requirements. ................................. 31 
Table 3-15    Grievance Mechanisms. ...................................................................................... 32 
Table 3-16    Comparison of Involuntary Resettlement Requirements. ................................... 33 
Table 3-17    Standards most relevant to PSAC ....................................................................... 39 
Table 3-18    FPIC requirements ............................................................................................... 42 
Table 4-1      Summarised PSAC FPIC Implementation Plan .................................................... 45 
Table 3-20      Estimated Budget for ESMF Implementation (US$).......................................... 48 
Table 4-1      Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly temperature (°C). ..... 58 
Table 4-2      Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly precipitation. ........... 60 
Table 4-3      Scenarios analysis of potential climate change impacts on agriculture sector. .. 61 
Table 5-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques ................................................................. 71 
Table 5-2      Summary Overview of a Public Consultation Plan for PSAC ............................... 74 
Table 6-1      Subproject and Activity Exclusion List ................................................................. 79 
Table 7-1      Vegetation Clearing for Cutlines. ........................................................................ 85 
Table 7-2      Vegetation Clearing. ............................................................................................ 87 
Table 7-3      Temporary Visual Intrusion (Marred landscape). ............................................... 87 
Table 7-4      Soil Erosion .......................................................................................................... 88 
Table 7-5      Solid waste nuisance ........................................................................................... 89 
Table 7-6      Loss of natural and cultural heritage .................................................................. 90 
Table 7-7      Bio-diversity disturbances ................................................................................... 91 
Table 7-8      Ambient air pollution .......................................................................................... 92 
Table 7-9      Ambient Water pollution .................................................................................... 93 
Table 7-10    revegetation ........................................................................................................ 94 
Table 7-11    Rehabilitation of fragile ecosystems ................................................................... 95 
Table 7-12    Soil Erosion .......................................................................................................... 96 
Table 7-13    solid wastes ......................................................................................................... 97 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
vii | P a g e  
Table 7-14    effluent discharge ............................................................................................... 97 
Table 7-15    Agro-chemical pollution ...................................................................................... 99 
Table 7-16    Ambient Water pollution .................................................................................. 100 
Table 7-17    revegetation ...................................................................................................... 101 
Table 7-18    Magnitude of Potential Environmental Impacts ................................................ 102 
Table 8-1      Impact of Limited Stakeholder Participation .................................................... 109 
Table 8-2      Impact of Poor Project inception ...................................................................... 109 
Table 8-3      Impact of Project as uniting centre ................................................................... 110 
Table 8-4      Disturbance from Gender Based Violence (GBV) .............................................. 112 
Table 8-5      Loss of agricultural fields ................................................................................... 114 
Table 8-6      Economic Opportunities and Improved Livelihoods ......................................... 115 
Table 8-7      Magnitude of Potential Social Impacts .............................................................. 116 
Table 9-1      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP). ................................... 120 
Table 10-1    Environmental and Social Training ................................................................... 131 
Table 11-1    Site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs Budget .............................................................. 135 
Table 11-2    Mitigation and enhancement measures Budget .............................................. 136 
Table 11-3    Monitoring and Evaluation Budget ................................................................... 136 
Table 11-4    Environmental and Social Training Budget ....................................................... 136 
Table 11-5    Monitoring and Evaluation Budget ................................................................... 137 
Table 11-6    Estimated Budget for ESCMF Implementation (US$) ....................................... 137 
Table 12-1    Monitoring Activities and Indicators ................................................................... 141 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
viii | P a g e  
AEZ 
AIDS   
AWPB  
BDF 
BMOs  
BRD 
CEO 
CEPAR 
CRA 
CSA 
CSNs   
DGs 
DRC 
EA 
EDPRS  
EIA 
EICV 
ESCMF 
ESIA 
ESMP  
FAO 
FPIC 
GBV 
GDP 
GEF 
GGCRS 
GII 
GoR 
GRM   
GVTC   
HCoE   
HIV 
IEC 
IFAD   
ILO 
IMCE   
INDC   
IPMP   
ITCZ 
JICA 
KIIWP  
LAC 
LMP    
M&E   
MIGEPROF 
MINAFFET 
MINAGRI 
MINALOC 
MININFRA 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
Agro Ecological Zone 
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business Development Fund. 
Business Membership Organizations 
Rwanda Development Bank. 
Chief Executive Officer 
Coffee Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda. 
Climate Risk Analysis 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
country strategy notes. 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Democratic Republic of Congo  
Environmental Assessment 
Economic Development and Poverty reduction Strategy 
Environmental Impact assessment 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey. 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Free, prior and informed consent 
Gender Based Violence. 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy. 
Gender Inequality Index. 
Government of Rwanda 
Grievance redress mechanism 
Greater Virunga Trans-boundary Collaboration. 
Rwanda-Israel Horticulture Centre of Excellence 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Information, Education and Communication () 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International labour Organisation 
Integrated Management of Critical Ecosystems. 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
Integrated Pest Management Plan 
Inter-Tropical Conversion Zone 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 
Land Adjudication Committee 
Labour management plan 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Minister of Gender and Family Promotion 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. 
Ministry of Agriculture and livestock  
Minister of Local Government 
Minister of Infrastructure 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
MINITERE 
MoU   
NAEB  
NBI 
NBSAP 
NDC 
NGO   
NISR   
NLUDMP 
NST1   
OHS 
OSHA  
PAPs   
PCP 
PDO 
PDR 
PMU   
POs  
PPE 
PRICE  
PSAC   
PSC 
PSTA 4 
PSTA 4 
PWD   
RAB 
RAFs   
RAP 
RB-COSOPs   
RCA  
REMA  
RPF 
RSB  
SEA 
SECAP 
SEP  
SMEs   
SPIU    
UN 
UNCCD 
UNDP  
UNEP  
UNESCO 
UNFCCC 
UNICEF 
VC 
WB 
WFP 
Ministry of Lands, Environment, Forests, Water and Mines  
Memorandum of Understanding. 
National Agricultural Export Development Board. 
Nile Basin Initiative. 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan. 
Nationally Determined Contribution. 
Non–Governmental Organisation. 
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. 
National Land Use and Development Master Plan. 
First phase of the National Strategy for Transformation 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
Project Affected Persons 
public consultation plan 
Programme Development Objective 
Project Design Report 
Project Management Unit 
Producer Organizations  
Personal Protective Equipment 
Rwanda Project for Rural Income through Exports 
Promoting Smallholder Agro-export Competitiveness Project 
Project Steering Committee 
Fourth phase of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation ( 
4th phase of the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture 
Persons With Disabilities. 
Rwanda Agriculture Board 
Resettlement Action Frameworks 
Resettlement Action Plan 
Results-Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programmes. 
Rwanda Cooperative Agency 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
Rwanda Standards Board 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Small and medium enterprises 
Single Project Implementation Unit  
United Nations 
UN Convention to Combat Desertification 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Environmental Programme. 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,  
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
United Nations Children's Fund 
Value Chains 
World Bank  
World Food Programme 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
x | P a g e  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Introduction. 
The Government of Rwanda is in the process of preparing the “Promoting Smallholder Agro-
export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), with the assistance from IFAD. PSAC will support the 
inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted  export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-
resilient productive capacity and market access. As one of the prerequisites for the project 
through IFAD, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) must 
be  developed  in  accordance  with  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP). 
The PSAC Project Development Objective. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “To support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted 
export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-resilient  productive  capacity  and 
market access”. 
Project Components. 
The  proposed  project  consists  of  three  main  components:  The  first  two  (technical 
components) will generate varying effects to different components of the environment and 
the society at large: 
Component 1: Investments to enhance climate smart production and productivity 
of selected export-driven value chains  
This component will support the intensification and improve the competitiveness of 
the  production  levels  of  the  selected  export-driven  value  chains  through  targeted 
investments along two sets of interventions: 
•  Sub-component  1.1  –  Support  smallholder  farmers’  production  and 
productivity.  
•  Sub-component 1.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities.  
Component  2:  Enabling  business  environment  along  selected  export-driven  value 
chains) 
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted 
VCs  by  improving  smallholder  value  chain  actors’  access  to  advisory  services, 
sustainable  markets  and  financial  services  through  various  components  of  the 
following sub-components: 
•  Sub-component 2.1 – Capacity building of Producer Organizations.  
o  Quality control and market-driven certification. 
o  Backward and forward market linkages. 
o  Enhanced access to financial services. 
Component 3: Policy support and coordination  
This component will support policy and coordination through the following activities: 
•  Policy dialogue  
•  Enabling rural finance environment.  
•  Other issues affecting PSAC export-driven value chains.  
•  Specific support to value chain platforms: In this area PSAC intends to:  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Objectives of the Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework. 
The proposed programme constitutes several components or activities, which will generate 
varying effects to different components of the environment and the society at large. The PSAC 
activities  will  directly  and  indirectly  generate  impacts  that  may  result  in  varied  social  and 
environmental impacts, necessitating the establishment of an ESCMF.  
This ESCMF has been prepared because the location and design of the Program activities and 
subprojects, and the magnitude of their impacts are not precisely known at project appraisal 
stage,  although  the  types  of  potential  Program  activities  that  could  take  place  have  been 
defined.  The  principal  aim  of  this  ESCMF  is  to  provide  a  framework  for  addressing  all 
environmental and social safeguards issues in PSAC activities and subprojects from screening, 
preparation, through review and approval, to implementation.  
The ESCMF Process. 
The  ESCMF  development  process  consisted  of  the  following  aspects:  (i)  establishment  of 
baseline socio-environmental conditions, (ii) development of the screening criteria/tool, (iii) 
institutional  framework,  (iv)  assessment  of  potential 
review  of  policy,  regulations, 
environmental impacts, (v) assessment of potential social impacts (vi) preparation of the 
environmental  and  social  mitigation  plan  and  a  monitoring  plan  and  (vii)  providing 
guidelines for the implementation of the measures.  
The process involved extensive review of related literature from published and unpublished 
documents, investigations and scanning of the potential project areas, and consultations with 
the  various  stakeholders.  The  consultations  ensured  that  the  substantive  concerns  of  the 
relevant 
legislation  will  be  considered  during  the 
implementation of the PSAC activities. 
IFAD  policies  and  the  Rwanda 
Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework. 
This  chapter  assessed  the  relevant  Rwanda  policies,  regulations  and  acts  that  guide  the 
environmental and social assessment for the PSAC activities, including relevant IFAD SECAP 
and international conventions. 
The policy and legal review established that the  PSAC will be supported by a host of laws, 
regulations and institutions that promote sustainable natural resources use, whilst protecting 
the environment and the well-being of the population of Rwanda. All these instruments are 
guided  by  the  Rwanda  Constitution  which  emphasizes  on  prudent  management  of  the 
environment  and  accords  future  generations  full  rights  to  the  environment  and  benefits 
thereof.  
Environmental and Social Baseline Conditions. 
Rwanda is well endowed with natural resource which includes very fertile soils, mountains, 
forests  and  water  resources  which  accommodate  diverse  species  of  flora,  fauna  and  fish 
resources.  However,  these  resources  are  currently  challenged  by  a  complex  interaction  of 
several factors which include the rapid industrialisation and extensive farming.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
xii | P a g e  
Rwanda is a landlocked country situated in central Africa. It is known as ’The Land of a 
Thousand Hills’ and has five volcanoes, 23 lakes and numerous rivers, some forming the 
source of the river Nile. The Main lakes include Kivu, Muhazi, Ihema, Bulera, Ruhondo, 
and Mugesera.  
Rwanda's  Vegetation  ranges  from  dense  equatorial  forest  in  the  north-west  of  the 
country to tropical savannah in the east. Rwanda has two rainy seasons, with an average 
rainfall of 110-200 mm per month. 
The country is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological 
network is composed of nine catchments. The topography is characterized by hills and 
mountains and widely varying altitudes. The lowest altitude in the country is 950 m above 
the sea level. The country is divided into 12 agro-ecological zones that can be clustered 
into three natural regions: highlands, midlands, and lowlands.  
Agriculture is the main economic activity in Rwanda with 70% of the population engaged 
in  the  sector,  and  around  72%  of  the  working  population  employed  in  agriculture.  It 
accounts for 33% of the national GDP (FAO, 2022). it is estimated that 90% of domestic 
cropland  is  on  slopes  ranging  from  5%  to  55%.  Tea  and  coffee  are  the  major  exports 
followed by exports of dry beans, potatoes, maize, rice, cassava flour, maize flour, poultry, 
and live animals within Eastern Africa. (GoR 2015). 
Climate Change Adaptation 
The  project  activities  are  expected  to  improve  the  climate  resilience  of  the  smallholder 
farmers,  which  includes  i)  the  reduction  of  soil  erosion  and  the  improved  retention  of 
rainwater  contributing  to  the  buffer  capacity  of  agricultural  lands,  ii)  the  adoption  of 
improved,  environmentally  sustainable  practices  contributing  to  a  more  efficient  usage  of 
natural resources, and iii) planning future plantations in locations that take account of the 
warmer climate such as higher, cooler regions. 
The  PSAC project  will  promote  sustainable  practices  which  will  be  consistent  with  Climate 
Smart  Agriculture  (CSA)  approaches.  It  will  also  build  on  the  work  carried  out  within  the 
existing IFAD project portfolio like PRICE and KIIWP.  
Screening, Approval and Implementation of Subprojects 
Every sub-project that will be funded through PSAC will have to be screened for social and 
environmental issues. NAEB/PSAC-PMU will conduct the environmental and social screening 
at district  level, using  the  Environmental  and  Social  Screening Form  (Appendix  1)  together 
with information on typical subproject impacts and mitigation measures in the environmental 
and social management plan (ESMP). In some cases, special planning reports (e.g., site specific 
ESMPs, ESIAs, IPMPs) may have to be developed and implemented.  
Programme Categorisation 
The Environmental and Social Category for PSAC is “Moderate” because of the anticipated 
risks emanating from the construction, agricultural and other rural economic activities. This 
Categorisation was arrived at using IFAD’s SECAP requirements. Where several sub-projects 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
xiii | P a g e  
are involved, IFAD categorisation for the programme is based on those sub-projects having 
the highest risk level. These are all expected to pose medium risks to the environment and 
social  system.  These  risks  will  be 
localised,  manageable  and/or  reversible  through 
recommended mitigation measures. 
Environmental and Social Management in PSAC. 
The potential associated impacts were analysed and mitigation measures for the identified 
impacts proposed.  The ESCMF  then  establishes a  process  for  addressing  all environmental 
and  social policy  issues  in  sub-projects from preparation, through  review  and  approval, to 
implementation. The expected positive impacts of the proposed project include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Revegetation resulting in reduction in environmental degradation, retention of soil 
and water, 
Rehabilitation of fragile ecosystems (mountain sides and wetlands) 
Improved management of catchments and mountainsides, 
Reduce vulnerability of rural communities to environmental degradation and climate 
shocks because of diversified income, 
Increased health awareness.  
Economic Opportunities Employment (job creation) 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
The project’s main potential negative impacts prior to mitigation measures include: 
Vegetation Clearing and potential soil erosion from bare ground. 
Habitat loss and Biodiversity disturbances and natural resource pollution (air and 
water). 
Solid waste generation and Effluent Discharges from processing plants. 
Potential abuse and misuse of Agro-Chemicals resulting in pollution and poisoning 
Limited 
and 
Inception/Introduction. 
Vulnerable  groups  excluded  from  decision-making  and  affected  by  fencing  off 
plantations.  
Gender Based Violence 
Poor working conditions for people implementing project activities resulting in 
occupational Health and Safety Issues  
and  Poor  project 
Involvement 
Stakeholder 
inadequate 
g) 
h) 
f) 
Expected mitigation benefits. 
PSAC  will  implement  “multiple-benefit”  approaches  which  will  typically  build  climate 
resilience  alongside  other  benefits,  contributing  to  poverty  reduction,  enhancement  of 
biodiversity,  increased  agricultural  productivity  and  lowering  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
from the agriculture sector. Climate change mitigation benefits in PSAC are expected from: 
(i) 
(ii) 
the use of shade trees such as carbon sequestration, 
improved  net  assimilation  of  tealeaf and  additional  organic  matter from  leaf  litter 
and minimized wind damage, and reduced soil erosion. 
(iii)  capacity  building  in  timing  of  husbandry  activities  such  as  pruning  and  fertilizer 
application, 
(iv)  when to plant, which varieties to plant and which inputs to use, 
(v) 
adjustment  of  spraying  programs  and  wider  use  of  improved  coffee  varieties  and 
tested tea clones, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
xiv | P a g e  
(vi) 
intercropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops,  
(vii)  construction of erosion control and water holding structures and 
(viii)  composting and mulching among others.  
The agro-forestry activities will also have GHG benefits from reduced soil carbon loss through 
tree planting and regeneration of degraded soils through increased agroforestry practices. 
Public Consultation Plan and The Grievance Redress Mechanism 
The  NAEB/PSAC-PMU  must  continuously  engage  the  project  stakeholders  throughout  the 
programme cycle to achieve successful implementation and monitoring. The ESCMF outlines 
a  public  consultation  plan  (PCP)  which  describes  the  objectives  of  the  PCP,  the  key 
stakeholders, 
information  disclosure  and  consultation  approach,  grievance  redress 
mechanism, feedback, and monitoring.  
As part of the continuous consultation process, a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has 
been developed. The GRM will be a system by which queries or clarifications about the project 
will  be  responded  to, problems  with  implementation  will  be  resolved,  and  complaints  and 
grievances  will  be  addressed  efficiently  and  effectively.  The  GRM  will  mainly  serve  the 
purpose  of  responding  to  the  needs  of  beneficiaries  and  addressing  and  resolving  their 
grievances. 
Environmental And Social Monitoring Plan 
The  PMU  with  the  help  of  relevant  authorities  will  monitor  the  environmental  and  social 
effects  of  project  implementation  and  the  success  of  mitigation  measures.  In  addition  to 
monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures proposed to address environmental 
and  social  impacts  of  the  PSAC  project,  the  overall  performance  and  effectiveness  of  the 
Program can be assessed through monitoring the following indicators: 
Environmental Indicators. 
Evidence of anti-soil erosion measures such as terraces,  
(i) 
(ii)  Re-planted vegetation,  
(iii) 
(iv)  Constructed drainage channels,  
(v) 
Filled up burrow pits, etc 
intercropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops 
Social indicators. 
Representation on the community management committees, 
Equitable sharing of benefits from the programme intervention, 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Numbers  of  members  attending  programme  planning  and 
implementation 
meetings, 
(iv)  Effect of programme implementation on local household economies. 
Capacity Building and Training For E&S Management 
Currently there is little capacity within the MINAGRI/NAEB to implement environmental and 
social requirements necessary to manage the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts  resulting  from  the  PSAC  project  activities.  Thus,  the  ESCMF  recommends  various 
trainings in order to build capacity within the MINAGRI/NAEB to manage environmental and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
xv | P a g e  
social risks. This includes training in environmental and social risks of  PSAC, Environmental 
and  Social  Risks  and  Impacts  of  PSAC,  Environmental  and  Social  Impact Assessment  of  the 
Projects,  Gender,  HIV/AIDS  awareness,  Water  and  crop  Management,  and  Agro-chemicals 
and  Agro-facility  Management.  Total  training  costs  are  estimated  at  approximately  USD 
137,000.00.  
Funding for the Environmental Management Activities 
The estimated cost for the implementation of the ESCMF, which covers technical assistance, 
site  specific  ESIAs  and  ESMPs,  mitigation  measures,  monitoring, training  and audits  is  USD 
677,600.00. 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
The  proposed  PSAC  programme  has  potential  to  significantly  enhance  the  agricultural 
productivity and improve the livelihoods of smallholder tea, coffee and horticulture farmers 
in  the  target  districts.  An  improvement  in the productivity of the  Smallholder  farmers  will 
translate to improved livelihoods as they now will have cash to secure other needs.  
impacts 
include  disturbance  of  soil  from 
The  envisaged  environmental  and  social 
infrastructure  construction,  establishment  of  new  plantations,  rehabilitation  of  existing 
plantations, other agricultural activities, digging of pits and foundations, and irrigation and 
value addition infrastructures construction activities, Solid and liquid waste generation, tree 
cutting  and  general  vegetation  clearing,  emission  of  dust  and  generation  of  noise.  These 
envisaged environmental impacts will generally be localized, minimal, short term and can 
be mitigated. However, this will entail adhering to the requirements of the current ESCMF. 
The  Final  benefits  of  this  programme  to  the  nation  will,  by  far  outweigh  any  potential 
negative  effects.  The  programme  overall  will  not  have  any  apparent  significant 
environmental impacts if the recommended mitigations are carried out. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
xvi | P a g e  
1. 
INTRODUCTION AND PROJECT CONTEXT. 
1.1      BACKGROUND  
The Government of Rwanda is in the process of preparing the “Promoting Smallholder Agro-
export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), with the assistance from IFAD. PSAC will support the 
inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted  export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-
resilient productive capacity and market access. As one of the prerequisites for the project 
through IFAD, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) must 
be  developed  in  accordance  with  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP). 
The  development  of  the  ESCMF  was  effected  through  carrying  out  a  literature  survey, 
consulting the main stakeholders and inspecting a selection of several potential beneficiaries, 
representative  of  the  country  -  to  gather  the  essential  data  necessary  to  have  a  sufficient 
understanding of the situation regarding the status of the selected agricultural value chains 
(tea,  coffee  and  horticulture)  and  to  determine  the  potential  social  and  environmental 
impacts any developmental project may exhibit in this sector. 
Besides the ESCMF, PSAC will also develop appropriate SECAP risk management instruments 
which will include a Targeted Climate Change Risk Assessment, site specific Environmental and 
Social  Management Plans  (ESMPs),  Environmental  Checklists,  Integrated Pest Management 
Plans (IPMPs), Labour Management Plan, etc. Through a dedicated Environmental Specialist 
PSAC will ensure that the developed SECAP risk management instruments are implemented 
and that mitigation measures are instituted.  
1.2     THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE. 
The  Project  Development  Objective  is  “To  support  the  inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted 
export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-resilient  productive  capacity  and 
market access”. 
1.3      PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
The Lead Implementation Agency will be the National Agriculture Export Development Board 
(NAEB), under the responsibility of its Chief Executive Officer (CEO)1. NAEB will host all the key 
technical positions, and one NAEB Focal Person will be posted in each target district to ensure 
smooth coordination at field level. See Figure 1-1 below. 
The  Single  Project  Implementation  Unit  (SPIU)  will  retain  the  core  functions  of  financial 
management, procurement and Management Information System (MIS), for which, and it has 
a long-standing experience with IFAD, as they have been key element contributing to the good 
performance of the IFAD portfolio in Rwanda. 
1 NAEB is the Government authority that is in charge of developing and implementing policies and strategies for expanding 
exports  of  agricultural  products  meeting  international  market  requirements.  NAEB  has  the  appropriate  structure  to 
implement PSAC interventions through its Traditional Commodities Division (for tea and coffee), Emerging Commodities 
Division (for horticulture), Quality Assurance and Regulatory Division and Export Services Division. NAEB has also gained 
relevant expertise and capacity to lead the implementation of large projects and programmes, including the 9-year IFAD-
funded PRICE project. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Figure 1-1      Project Organigram 
The project implementation arrangements will be as depicted in Figure 1-2 with a steering 
Committee at the top and several partnerships with relevant government and international 
institutions,  notably:  (i)  MINALOC,  (ii)  Rwanda  Agriculture  Board  (RAB),  (iii)  MINAFFET,  (iv) 
MIGEPROF, (v) BRD, (vi) BDF, (vii) Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), (viii) 
Rwanda Standards Board (RSB), (ix) Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), and (x) HCoE.  
Figure 1-2      PSAC Implementation Arrangements 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
2 | P a g e  
1.4      PSAC SCOPE AND TARGETING 
1.4.1    Geographical targeting.  
The  project  will  target  a  total  of  fourteen  (14)  districts  distributed  across  Rwanda,  with  a 
particular emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, that are also including some of the 
most vulnerable rural populations (Figure 1-3). These will be: Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, 
Nyabihu and Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe, Ruhango and Nyanza 
in  Southern  Province;  Rulindo  and  Musanze  in  Northern  Province  and  Rwamagana  and 
Bugesera in Eastern Province. In addition to these, Kayonza district will be targeted solely for 
the purpose of conducting trials on new improved essential oils varieties. 
1.4.2    Target Groups. 
Two main categories of beneficiaries will be targeted through complementary interventions 
meant to  support their participation  in  commercial  and  inclusive  VCs:  (i) rural  smallholder 
farmers,  grouped  as  much  as  possible  along  Producer  Organizations  (POs)2,  with  a  strong 
focus on women and youth; (ii) off-takers processors/exporters, who can be cooperatives, 
individuals or rural SMEs. PSAC will mostly focus on existing actors with proven track record 
in inclusive VC development; yet new producers/off-takers will also be given an opportunity 
to  benefit  from  project  support,  especially  in  the  more  nascent  horticulture  sector.  The 
targeting mechanisms will be based on the Ubudehe system, as is currently done for all IFAD-
funded projects in Rwanda. 
The  revised  estimation  indicates  that  the  main  direct  beneficiary  group  will  be  composed 
mostly of 90,000 households (approximately 405,000 household members3, of which 300,000 
persons receiving direct project services), giving preferential attention to Categories 2 and 34 
amongst whom the project will give priority to women (40%) (and among them to women 
heads of households) and youth (30%). Possible graduation pathways for the poorest and the 
most vulnerable households such as those with persons with disabilities will be explored. (See 
PDR for the Target Group Profiles) 
2 This includes cooperatives, smallholder farmers grouped along out-grower schemes, informal associations, community-based nurseries, 
FFS groups, etc. Individual farmers may also be considered on a case-by-case basis according to their role in the target VCs and the services 
they can offer to the community. 
3 Current ratio is 1 household = average 4.5 members 
4 As per Rwanda’s classification, Ubudehe Category 2, Subsistence and vulnerable poor, have limited access to resources and less than 0.5 
ha of land, and depend on crop production, seasonal labour or external support – Ubudehe Category 3, Market-oriented producers are less 
vulnerable and go beyond subsistence farming. These farmers have on average 0.5 ha or more, are engaged in a more entrepreneurial logic.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
3 | P a g e  
Figure 1-3      Map of the Project Area. 
1.5      PROJECT COMPONENTS 
To  address  the  Smallholder  Agro-export  Competitiveness  challenges  and  support  the 
achievement of the PDO, the proposed project consists of three main components: The first 
two  (technical  components)  will  generate  varying  effects  to  different  components  of  the 
environment and the society at large: 
1.5.1    Component 1:  
Investments  to  enhance  climate  smart  production  and  productivity  of  selected 
export-driven value chains  
This component will support the intensification and improve the competitiveness of 
the  production  levels  of  the  selected  export-driven  value  chains  through  targeted 
investments along two sets of interventions as detailed below: 
Sub-component 1.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
4 | P a g e  
This  sub-component  (SC)  will  focus  on  expansion  and  rehabilitation  of  plantation 
areas,  supported  by  the  development  and  adoption  of  innovative  climate-resilient 
technologies  and  practices.  At  the  inception  level  the project  will  conduct  study  to 
determine the most cost-effective strategies in coffee processing and production. It 
will  support  the  coffee  drying  parabolic  structures  to  address  the  challenges  of 
increasing  wet  periods  affecting  the  quality  of  the  coffee  during  harvest.  Support 
conservation measures at tea plantations and promote a community-based approach 
for the production of avocado and mango seedlings  
Sub-component 1.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities.  
PSAC  will  address  the  key  infrastructure  gaps  that  are  hindering  smallholder 
cooperatives/POs in each export-driven VC. Acquisition of trucks to fast-track delivery 
of fresh tea leaves. The investment in an Avocado grading acquisition of Complete Soil 
and Water Testing Kit Investments in new hangar construction in 52 tea and 2 coffee 
cooperatives. Basic facilities, tools and equipment to all investments involving a grant 
will be supported under component 2 for business planning and linkage to financing, 
in  addition  to  the  overall  capacity  building  support  to  be  provided  for  improved 
cooperative governance and enhanced technical skills. 
1.5.2    Component 2: 
Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains) 
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted 
VCs  by  improving  smallholder  value  chain  actors’  access  to  advisory  services, 
sustainable markets and financial services. 
Sub-component 2.1 – Capacity building of Producer Organizations.  
The support will be provided to both established cooperatives, especially the ones that 
have  been  identified  as  weak  in  previous  assessments,  the  new  cooperatives,  out-
grower schemes, farmer groups that will be formed to accompany the expansion of 
certain crops as foreseen under component 1. Issues to be addressed will focus will 
include  
governance,  decision-making  process  and  management;  group  dynamics,  gender 
equality  climate  change  adaptation  approaches,  and  environmental  and  natural 
resources management.  
Quality  control  and  market-driven  certification:    PSAC  support  will  support  in  the 
accreditation of certain testing services, creating a national pool of various voluntary 
standards certified lead trainers  
Backward and forward market linkages: The project will support efforts that promote 
brands that display the uniqueness of the Rwandan produce in Tea and coffee as well 
as  horticulture  through  digital  marketing  and  capacity  building  of  exporters  about 
international business environment   
Enhanced access to financial services: The project, through its business development 
services will support the quality and outreach of rural financial services by financial 
institutions, and build the capacity of the target groups to access financial services 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
5 | P a g e  
1.5.3    Component 3:  
Policy support and coordination  
Policy  dialogue:  in  PSAC  will  aim  at  efficiently  completing  the  work  undertaken  by 
other development projects and agencies.  
Enabling  rural  finance  environment.  To  ensure  enabling  agriculture  finance 
environment, especially for export agriculture, PSAC in collaboration with Cordaid and 
AFR will create a platform to coordinate the proposed activities of the final strategy.  
Other  issues  affecting  PSAC  export-driven  value  chains:  PSAC,  through  NAEB  will 
contribute  and  will  ensure  close  follow  up  on  policy  products  that  are  expected  to 
have a positive impact on the project’s target group.  
Specific support to value chain platforms: In this area PSAC intends to:  
(i) 
(ii) 
support roundtables for policy formulation in the coffee VC.  
build  Capacity  of  Business  Membership  Organizations  (BMOs)  like  Coffee 
Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR 
1.6      ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL CATEGORY 
The environment and social category for PSAC is substantial, recognizing that some activities 
can have adverse impacts on the environment and increase pressure on the natural resources. 
This categorisation and classification are in cognisance of the activities of PSAC that focus on 
productivity and the enabling environment for the tea, coffee and horticulture value chains. 
However, the potential adverse impacts are predictable, will be localized, mostly reversible 
and can be managed with appropriate measures. The activities will take place in non-sensitive 
areas and the infrastructure being developed will be small scale. 
The activities to improve production may have some adverse effects on the environmental 
and  natural  resources  such  as  increased  erosion,  particularly  when  cultivating  on  slopes, 
possible siltation of water channels, increased demand for water resources at particular times; 
diffuse pollution from increased use of agro-chemicals; point source pollution from increased 
effluent  discharges  from  processing  plants  and  washing  stations;  and  organic  waste  from 
processing of all the value chains, vegetation removal and land use change as infrastructure 
such as roads and storage facilities are being developed. However, these effects are expected 
to be localised with minimal adverse impacts that can be managed with appropriate actions. 
PSAC also envisages expansion of production areas (approx. 4,800 ha), which may result in 
land  use  change  or  deforestation  and  loss  of  biodiversity  as  additional  risks  as  well  as 
increased  pressure  on  water  and  energy  resources.  The  adverse  impacts  from  the 
development  of  infrastructure  (roads  rehabilitation,  hanger  construction  and  cold  storage 
facilities)  in  non-sensitive  areas  will be  localized  and  can  be  managed through  site-specific 
environment  and  social  management  plans  that  will  be  developed  during  the  project 
implementation.  
The main social risks include labour, health and safety related to handling of pesticides and 
conditions for the seasonal labour, which is mainly informal and hardly skilled.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
6 | P a g e  
1.7      CLIMATE RISK CATEGORY 
The climate risk classification for PSAC is moderate. The main climate change risks facing the 
smallholders in the PSAC target areas include rising temperatures and rainfall variability with 
more  intense  rainfall  in  some  areas,  shorter  rain  seasons  and  potential  droughts  in  some 
locations. The increases in temperature (1.7–2.1⁰C) in the rainy season months will increase 
crop water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water from agricultural soils; reduced 
rainfall is also predicted during these months.  
PSAC will invest in climate adaptation and resilience measures with mitigation co-benefits. 
These include:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
climate smart agricultural practices, 
climate and weather advisories, 
climate insurance, 
drought tolerant varieties, 
shade nets and greenhouses, 
climate proofing of infrastructure, 
renewable energy (solar), 
agroforestry and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
7 | P a g e  
2. 
SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY OF THE ESCMF AND ESCMP 
2.1      JUSTIFICATION FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE ESCMF  
This  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management  Framework  (ESCMF)  has  been 
developed in order to meet the environmental, social and climate safeguards requirements 
of  the  Government  of  Rwanda  (GoR)  as  well  as  of  IFAD  when  development  is  being 
undertaken. 
The main activities in components 1 and 2 of the programme will have environmental and 
social concern. These activities may cause various impacts, most of which are localized to the 
project  site,  short  term  and  most  importantly  can  be  avoided/reduced  or  mitigated  by 
properly applying mitigation measures. 
The environmental and social category of the project is “Substantial”. The project may lead 
to  adverse  risks  to  the  environment  and  humans  which  are  reversible  through  proposed 
mitigation actions. Some of the sub-project’s activities which are likely to have significant or 
adverse risks include: a) rehabilitation and or establishment of tea, coffee and horticulture 
plantations;  b)  irrigation  schemes  infrastructure  installations;  c)  agro-processing  facilities 
construction and operations; d) operations of washing stations; e) rural roads’ rehabilitation; 
and f) use of agrochemicals.  
Potential  environmental,  social  and  climatic  risks  include  deforestation;  land  degradation; 
inappropriate  use  of  agrochemicals  leading  to  pollution;  conflicts;  gender-based  violence; 
child  labour  and  social  unrests.  These  lead  to  the  requirement  to  prepare  safeguard 
instruments  to  mitigate  the  potential  adverse  impacts  from  the  project.  In  this  case  an 
Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management  Framework  (ESCMF)  is  required  since  the 
actual  project  sites  are  not  yet  known.  The  ESCMF  must  contain  a  generic  Environmental 
Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP), which will be adopted by the individual sub-
projects  when  they  finally  get  selected.  An  ESCMF  is  a  useful  tool  meant  to  guide 
environmental and social risk management considerations of the project Implementation. 
2.2      PURPOSE OF THIS ESCMF 
IFAD  is  continuously  updating  its  approach  to  environmental,  social  and  climate  risk 
management  and  is  currently  applying  the  “Social  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures  (SECAP,  2021).  IFAD’s  SECAP,  2021  describe  how  to  better  mainstream 
environmental, social and climate change considerations into the project cycle, going beyond 
“doing  no  harm”  to  maximize  development  gains.  The  SECAP  have  a  dual  nature  of 
safeguarding  (minimizing  negative  impact)  and  increasing  positive  impact,  including  those 
related to climate change. 
In line with IFAD policy, a SECAP review note was prepared for  PSAC, which identified the 
project  as  “Moderate”  category  in  terms  of  environmental  and  social  risks.  Given  the 
environmental management thrust of the project, the expected environmental impacts are 
predominantly  positive.  Potential  negative  social  impacts  may  emanate  from  the  reduced 
access to natural resources, particularly grazing land that may be caused by the project. The 
project  will  deploy  participatory  methods  to  ensure  these  effects  are  recognized  and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
minimized  and  that  alternatives  are  offered  to  those  people  affected.  Further  details  on 
project  interventions  and  mitigation  measures  can  be  found  in  Chapter  7,  and  8  of  this 
document. 
The  ESCMF  should  be  disclosed  on  the  Rwanda/MINAGRI  website  and  various  elements 
thereof, primarily the procedures and forms used in screening and monitoring of subprojects 
will  be  integrated  into  the  project’s  overall  implementation  documentation  and  made 
accessible to  local  stakeholders.  The  IFAD  SECAP  and this  ESCMF  apply to  all  components, 
sub-projects and activities of PSAC, even if these are funded entirely by another Development 
Partner or private party. 
2.3      APPROACH TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ESCMF 
The focus of the ESCMF is to highlight the potential environmental, Social and Climate impacts 
for the planned future activities of the programme and recommend a management plan for 
addressing potential negative impacts. To achieve these targets, the ESCMF takes on board 
views from a cross section of people, at least from the local level, District level, and National 
government level. 
The strategies of preparing the ESMF followed the following six steps: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Review  current  conditions  of  the  existing  agricultural  livelihood  activities,  and 
provide an assessment of their status and operation levels, 
Review and analysis of the level of degradation of the plantations, and potential 
fields (Baseline Conditions) in the potential project areas. 
Review  of  typical  implementation  approach  and  processes  for  the  proposed 
development activities within the smallholder sector, 
Identification  and  analysis  of  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts  the 
implementation processes will likely trigger and generate within and around the 
agriculture activities, 
Development  of  a  screening  process  for  negative 
programme sites and activities, 
Identification of appropriate mitigation measures for the predicted impacts and 
compilation  of  a  management  plan  for  addressing  environmental,  social  and 
climate  impacts  during  implementation,  operation,  and  maintenance  of  the 
programme activities. 
impacts  for  proposed 
In  general,  the  study  was  then  prepared  in  accordance  with  applicable  IFAD’s  SECAP  and 
policy documents and Rwanda’s Environmental Impact Assessment Guidelines, 2006, 2000, 
and EIA Regulations: Ministerial Order Nos. 003/2008 & 004/2008. The distinct phases of the 
study included: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Data Gathering,  
Literature review,  
Characterization of the baseline conditions,  
Identification of potential impacts,  
Identification of impact mitigation measures,  
Preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan, and  
Preparation of sub-project guidelines  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
9 | P a g e  
The  consultant  assembled  and  evaluated  relevant  baseline  data  related  to  the  physical, 
biological  and  socio-cultural  environment  of  the  country  through  a  number  of  research 
methods, which include field surveys, and investigations, stakeholder consultations, review 
of related literature from published and unpublished documents: 
Field surveys. 
(i) 
The field surveys were a bit restricted by the travel restrictions caused by the COVID-19 
Pandemic. 
Stakeholder consultations. 
1) 
Comprehensive stakeholder consultations were conducted in the process of developing 
the  PDR  and  this  current  ESCMF  to  solicit  their  views  and  concerns  as  regards  the 
proposed agricultural livelihoods activities. The strategy that was applied included the 
following: 
• 
• 
• 
Desk  Study  of  available  documents  and  literature  about  the  project  and 
Rwanda at large. 
Virtual (Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Skype, etc.) Meetings with some of the key 
stakeholders in IFAD, MINAGRI, NAEB, etc 
Physical meetings with some of the key stakeholders  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
10 | P a g e  
3. 
POLICY, LEGISLATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS 
3.1      INTRODUCTION  
This  chapter  describes  the  administrative,  policy  and  regulatory  framework  relevant  to 
environmental and climate change concerns in Rwanda that my trigger the IFAD SECAP. The objective 
is to ensure that project activities and implementation processes are consistent with local laws and 
policies and IFAD Safeguards Policies, and to point out possible gaps in local legislation in view of full 
compliance with IFAD Safeguards Policies. The proposed PSAC project will be subject to a number of 
these pieces of legislation. The following paragraphs highlight some selected policies and laws which 
are applicable in the planning and implementation of the project: 
3.2      THE RWANDA CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda, promulgated in 2003 and revised in December 2015, 
articulates  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  all  citizens  and  the  role  of  the  state  regarding  the 
environment by providing that every citizen is entitled to a healthy and satisfying environment and 
that every person has the duty to protect, safeguard and promote the environment under Articles 22 
and 53 respectively. Guidance of the Constitution on environmental preservation and management 
as a cross cutting issue is reflected in the National Vision 2020 and the National Policy on Environment 
of 2003.  
The  Constitution  recognizes  ownership  of  property  and  every  person’s  right  to  private  property 
(Article 34). Consequently, private property, whether individually or collectively owned, is inviolable. 
Exceptionally, the right to property may be overruled in the case of public interest. In these cases, 
circumstances and procedures are determined by the law and subject to fair and prior compensation 
(Article 34). Article 35 stipulates that private ownership of land and other rights related to land are 
granted by the State. The constitution provides that a law should be in place to specify modalities of 
acquisition, transfer and use of land. 
The  Constitutional  rights  as  articulated  in  Vision 2020  and  Environment Policy are  given  effect  by 
Organic Law No. 4/2005 of 8 April 2005 as amended in 2018. Principle 1 of Article 7 in the Organic 
Law  stipulates  precautionary  measures  that  are  informed  by  the  results  of  both  environmental 
assessment  of  policies,  plans,  projects,  and  development  activities  and  the  assessment  of  social 
wellbeing. 
3.3      RELEVANT RWANDA POLICES AND PLANS 
Table 3-2 below discusses the relevant Rwanda legislation, their interpretation and relevance to the 
PSAC Project. On implementation, PSAC must recognize the requirements of these acts. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
11 | P a g e  
Table 3-1      Relevant Policies 
No. 
1. 
RELEVANT  POLICIES  and 
Strategic Provisions 
The 
National 
Environment Policy of 
2003 
National 
Environment 
and 
Climate Change Policy 
(2019) 
INTERPRETATION 
The National Environment Policy of 2003 seeks to achieve its overall objective of the improvement of 
human  wellbeing,  the  judicious  utilization  of  natural  resources  and  the  protection  and  rational 
management of ecosystems for a sustainable and fair development through improved health and quality 
of life for every citizen and promotion of sustainable socio-economic development through a rational 
management and utilization of resources and environment, integrating environmental aspects into all 
the development policies, planning and in all activities carried out at the national, provincial and local 
level, with the full participation of the population, conservation, preserve and restoration of ecosystems 
and maintenance of ecological and systems functions.   
The  key  principles  include  issues  such  as  a  safe  and  stable  environment,  rational  use  of  resources, 
inclusive  participation  of  members  of  public  for  environment  protection  and  management, 
environmental  education  and  sensitization  programme  at  all  levels  with  more  women  and  youth 
representation. 
Further, the policy proposes the elaboration or updating of master plans and special planning in urban 
areas. 
It  proposes  the  following  in  regard  to  biodiversity,  forests,  wetlands  management  and  other  natural 
reserves and or ecosystems:  
i. 
ii. 
Set up protection measures for slopes to avoid degradation of swamps, 
Promote the rehabilitation of ecosystems under degradation and restoring endangered 
species.  
Rwanda  to  be  a  nation  that  has  a  clean  and  healthy  environment,  resilient  to  climate  variability  and 
change that supports a high quality of life for its society 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
The 
Policy 
Environment 
harmonizes  other  policies  like  on 
agriculture,  energy.  The  policy 
further proposes that the Central 
Government  will  be  concerned 
with conservation and protection 
and 
policies  while 
environmental  management  will 
be transferred to the District and 
Kigali City levels.   
tourism 
principles 
ESF 
Policy  requires  sub-project  to 
that 
consider 
complement 
including 
Assessment  of  environmental 
risks and impacts for development 
projects; 
and 
Adaptation; 
Information 
dissemination  and  community 
the 
raising 
awareness 
conservation  and  protection  of 
Promoting 
the 
environment; 
Mitigation 
in 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
12 | P a g e  
No. 
RELEVANT  POLICIES  and 
Strategic Provisions 
INTERPRETATION 
2. 
The Land Policy of 2004 
The  Land  Policy  of  2004  introduces  the  consideration  of  master  plans  for  use  and  sound 
management of land resources. The policy also provides development of land use plans based on 
suitability of the areas/lands thus distinguishing the different categories of land and their purpose. 
The policy promotes irrigating areas that are more or less flat and semi-arid to support agricultural 
production while discouraging overgrazing and pasture burning. On the use and management  of 
hillsides  and  marshlands,  the  policy  stipulates  that  marshlands  meant  for  agriculture  should  be 
cultivated after adequate planning and Environmental Impact Assessment. 
3. 
Agriculture Policy of 2018 
The objectives of national Agriculture Policy of 2018 are aligned to the Malabo Declaration (2014) under 
the  CAADP  framework  of  the  AU  and  cover  increased  contribution  to  wealth  creation;  economic 
opportunities  and  prosperity;  improved  food  security  and  nutrition;  and  increased  resilience  and 
sustainability.  Pillar  3  of  the  policy  stipulates  productivity  and  sustainability  through  the  increase  of 
countering  of  the  adverse  effects  on  land  resources  and  climate  change  with  continued  efforts  to 
increase inputs and sustainable climate smart practices.  Actions under this pillar for the promotion of 
irrigation and sustainable water management include the following:  
• 
• 
Increase the area under irrigation, 
Promote  private  sector-led  models  of  irrigation  scheme  management  and  establish 
maintenance fee collection, 
•  Attract private sector and external finance for irrigation development, 
• 
Support efforts to increase the capacity of on-farm water harvesting, storage, and use; 
develop groundwater and improve drainage and flood management. 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
Circular  Economy  and  industrial 
symbiosis 
The  development  of  ESCMF  for 
PSAC is in line with provisions of 
the land policy which  is basically 
intended 
risks 
associated  to  changes  in  climate 
agricultural 
impacting 
productivity  and  adoption  of 
mitigation  strategies  such  as 
climate smart agriculture  
identify 
to 
PSAC is very relevant to this policy 
as  it  focuses  on  improving  food 
security, nutrition; and increased 
external 
resilience 
environmental shocks  . 
the 
to 
The  national 
Policy of 2014 
Fertilizer 
The national Fertilizer Policy of 2014 aims to contribute to increased agricultural productivity, economic 
returns and incomes through increased and sustainable access and use of fertilizers.  
The policy’s specific objectives among others include:  
• 
• 
Create an enabling environment for the development of a privately driven and liberalized 
fertilizer importation and distribution system that fosters competition and innovation.  
Promote  fertilizer  trade  by  introducing  appropriate  and  effective  incentives  that 
encourage investment by the private sector.  
which 
PSAC complements the policy by 
encouraging  appropriate  use  of 
fertilizers 
could 
detrimental  to  the  environment  
if misused. Especially leaching to 
underground  water  sources  and 
the  emission  of  “greenhouse 
gases”, which contribute to global 
13 | P a g e  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
No. 
RELEVANT  POLICIES  and 
Strategic Provisions 
INTERPRETATION 
• 
Establish an efficient regulatory and monitoring system that is private sector friendly and 
ensures the sustainable supply to high quality fertilizer products along the distribution 
chain  
in a manner that safeguards human health and the environment.  
The  policy  recognizes  that  inappropriate  use  of  fertilizers  could  have  a  negative  effect  on  the 
environment. It provides for mitigation actions for minimizing greenhouse gas emissions from fertilizer 
application practices as well as environmental safety and sustainability.   
The policy stipulates that Government shall be responsible for regulating fertilizers the quality fertilizer 
products that traded in the country according to the law governing the use of Agrochemicals and the 
Ministerial Instructions Regulating the control of Agro chemicals, agro dealers and premises.  
The policy recognizes women participation in agriculture and stipulates the assurance that women have 
a fair chance to benefit from opportunities in fertilizer extension, trade, and use.  
The goal of the national Policy for Water Resources Management of 2011 is to manage and develop the 
water resources of Rwanda in an integrated and sustainable manner, so as to secure and provide water 
of adequate quantity and quality for all social and economic needs of the present and future generations 
with the full participation of all stakeholders in decisions affecting water resources management. The 
policy  recognizes  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  the  water  resources  and  provides  for  a 
comprehensive  programme  to  introduce  flow  control,  irrigation  and  storage.  The  policy  further 
recognizes  that  as  climatic  variability  increases  over  the  medium  term,  decision-makers  will  be 
increasingly challenged to manage the water resource as the objectives of different sectors diverge.  
The  national  Policy  for 
Water 
Resources 
Management of 2011 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
warming and climate change 
PSAC will ensure that its activities 
do  not  pollute  water  bodies  and 
guarantee  an  effective  use  of 
liquid 
water  resources.  If  any 
waste  is  generated  from  project 
activities, it must be collected in a 
treatment  plant  for  purification 
before being released into a river, 
lake  or  a  pond. 
a  stream,  a 
Furthermore, 
separate  water 
supply  and  sanitation  will  be 
provided 
temporary 
for 
offices, 
including 
facilities 
construction  camps  and  workers 
workshops  in order not  to cause 
shortages  and/or  contamination 
drinking  water 
of 
sources.  
existing 
the 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
14 | P a g e  
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
GGCRS 
strategic 
stipulates 
objectives aligned with the PSAC 
requiring sub-projects to practice 
sustainable  land  use  and  water 
that 
resource  management 
results 
security; 
appropriate  rural  development 
and  preservation  of  biodiversity 
and  ecosystem  Services;  and 
social 
improved 
health and disaster risk reduction 
to 
reduce  vulnerability 
that 
climate change. 
protection, 
food 
in 
No. 
RELEVANT  POLICIES  and 
Strategic Provisions 
The  Green  Growth  and 
Climate 
Resilience 
Strategy  
INTERPRETATION 
Rwanda adopted the national Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy (GGCRS) in 2011 with the 
vision  for  Rwanda  to  be  a  developed  climate-resilient  and  low-carbon  economy  by  2050.  The 
mainstreaming  and  implementation  of  the  GGCRS  is  mandated  to  the  ministry  responsible  for 
environment and climate change, which is currently the Ministry of Environment. The GGCRS stipulates 
4 strategic objectives:  
i.  
Energy security and a low-carbon energy supply that supports the development of Green  
Industry and Services; ii.   Sustainable  land  use  and  water  resource  management  that  results  in  food 
security. 
iii.  Appropriate  urban  development  and  preservation  of  biodiversity  and  ecosystem 
Services; and  
iv.  Social protection, improved health and disaster risk reduction that reduce vulnerability 
to climate change.  
The strategic objectives are elaborated in an implementation framework of 14 Programmes of Action. 
Rwanda  submitted  its  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (INDC)  for  adaptation  and 
mitigation  under  the  requirements  of  the  UNFCCC  in  2015  and  subsequently  confirmed  Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) in 2016 following the ratification of the Paris Agreement. The NDCs 
were developed with the 14 Programmes of Action of the GGCRS as the main reference. Rwanda’s NDCs 
are also appropriately aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda 2030.  
Adaptation and climate risk management programmes of action of the GGCRS involve the “Sustainable 
Intensification of Small-Scale Agriculture” and “Agricultural Diversity in Local and Export Markets” which 
are  aligned  to  NDC  measures  for  mainstreaming  agro  ecology,  utilizing  resource  recovery  and  reuse, 
using  fertilizer  enriched  compost,  mainstreaming  IPM  and  adding  value  to  agricultural  products.  The 
programmes are also in alignment with SDG 2: “End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition 
and promote sustainable agriculture”.  
GGCRS programmes of action, NDCs measures and SDGs targets are also linked to the fourth phase of 
the  Strategic  Plan  for  Agricultural  Transformation  (PSTA  4)  and  the  first  phase  of  the  7-year  National 
Strategy for Transformation (NST1) that runs from 2018 to 2024. PSTA 4 actions as featured in NST-1 
include the following:  
•  Development of biological soil conservation practices.   
• 
Farmer practice of integrated pest management. 
• 
Farmer improvement feed and fodder through technologies; and 
•  Dissemination of weather and climate information products and services to farmers.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
15 | P a g e  
No. 
RELEVANT  POLICIES  and 
Strategic Provisions 
INTERPRETATION 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
National 
Biodiversity 
Strategy  and  Action  Plan  
NBSAP) (2016-2020) 
This strategy defines the objectives and priorities for the conservation and sustainable management of 
biodiversity. The plan includes hillsides and wetlands and protected areas as some of the areas that need 
to be conservation. The strategy focuses on five major aims: improved conservation of protected areas 
and wetlands; sustainable use of biodiversity in natural ecosystems and agroecosystems; rational use of 
biotechnology;  development  and  strengthening  of  policy,  institutional,  legal  and  human  resources 
frameworks; and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the use of biological resources. The Action 
Plan consists of urgent and priority actions which are attainable in a period of five years. However, the 
plan is not based on the actual status quo of wetlands which is one of the most important ecosystems in 
Rwanda. There is need to undertake inventory of wetlands in the country which will allow planning of 
these ecosystems.   
The national Health Sector 
Policy of 2015 
The overall objective of the national Health Sector Policy of 2015 is to ensure universal of equitable and 
affordable quality health services (preventative, curative, rehabilitative and promotional services) for all 
Rwandans.  The  policy  recognizes  the 
importance  of  strengthening  coordination  with  several 
development sectors (agriculture, education, social protection) in the fight against malnutrition.  
The  National  Strategy  for 
Transformation 
(NST) 
(2019) 
Rwanda’s  medium  term  development  implementation  framework  followed  a  phase  5year  Economic 
Development and Poverty reduction Strategy (EDPRS) that started in 2008 -2012 as phase 1 and 2013-
2018 as phase 2. The EDPRS framework ran parallel to the 7 Government Programme but was out of 
phase by 2 years. A new 7-year framework that merges the 2 frameworks known as the National Strategy 
for Transformation (NST) has been adopted with the phase 1 running from 2019 to 2024 as NST-1. NST-
1 lays out Priority 7 as “Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Environment to Transition 
Rwanda  towards  a  Carbon  Neutral  Economy”.  The  carbon  neutral  transformation  priority  includes 
increased  sustainability  and profitability  of  forestry  management,  increased  sustainability  of  land  use 
systems, integrated water resource management and accelerated growth in Green Innovation.  
PSAC sub projects are required to 
environmental 
comply  with 
and  management 
protection 
instruments  meant  to  provide 
insights  on  biodiversity  use  and 
ecosystem 
services, 
environmental  sustainability  and 
restoration 
degraded 
of 
ecosystems.  Additionally,  flood 
risk  management  will  enhance 
resilience  of  urban 
overall 
planning 
infrastructure 
development. 
PSAC  will  provide  workers  with 
PPE, facilities for a safe and clean 
environment  to  eat  and  change, 
sanitation  facilities,  and  first  aid 
kits at workplace 
NST1  requires  sub-project  to 
that 
consider 
complement 
including 
Assessment  of  environmental 
for 
and 
risks 
development projects. 
principles 
ESF 
impacts 
and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
16 | P a g e  
3.4      RELEVANT RWANDA LEGISLATION 
3.4.1    Relevant Rwanda legislation 
Table 3-2 below discusses the relevant Rwanda legislation, their interpretation and relevance to the PSAC Project. On implementation, PSAC 
must recognize the requirements of these acts. 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC  
PSAC project will be implemented along with impact 
assessment  instruments  developed  in  compliance 
with the provisions of the environmental law   
Table 3-2      Relevant Rwanda legislation. 
No. 
LEGISLATION 
INTERPRETATION 
National 
Law    
Environment 
Chapter IV of Title III of the Organic Law n° 04/2005 of 08/04/2005 determining the 
modalities  of  protection,  conservation  and  promotion  of  environment  in  Rwanda 
regulate the Environmental impact Assessments. In its Article 67, every project shall be 
subjected to environmental impact assessment, before obtaining authorization for its 
implementation.  This  applies  to  programmes  and  policies  that  may  affect  the 
environment.   
Article  68  specifies  the  main  points  that  an  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  must 
include. Article  
69  stipulates  that  the  environmental  impact  assessment  shall  be  examined  and 
approved by the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA) or any other 
person  given  a  written  authorization  by  the  Authority.  The  environment  impact 
assessment shall be carried out at the expense of the promoter. Article 70 states that 
an order of the Minister having environment in his attributions establishes the list of 
projects  for  which  the  public  administration  shall  not  warrant  any  authorization 
indirect 
without  an  Environmental 
consequences of the project to the environment.   
Impact  Assessment  describing  direct  and 
Under Title VI of this Organic Law, Article 81 stipulates that the following activities are 
prohibited:   
•  Dumping  or  disposal  of  any  solid,  liquid  waste  or  hazardous  gaseous 
Substances in a stream, river, lake and in their surroundings.   
•  Damaging the quality of air and of the surface or underground water.   
•  Non authorized bush burning.   
• 
•  Defecating or urinating in an inappropriate place. 
• 
Smoking in public and in any other place where many people meet.  
Spitting, discarding mucus and other human waste in any place.   
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
17 | P a g e  
No. 
LEGISLATION 
INTERPRETATION 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC  
For Article 87, it is prohibited to construct houses in wetlands (rivers, lakes, big or small 
swamps), in urban or rural areas, to build markets there, a sewage plant, a cemetery 
and any other buildings that may damage such a place in various ways. All buildings 
shall be constructed in a distance of at least twenty (20) meters away from the bank of 
the  swamp.  If  it  is  considered  necessary,  construction  of  buildings  intended  for  the 
promotion of tourism may be authorized by the Minister having environment in his or 
her attributions. 
It is also prohibited  to  carry out  any activities,  except  those related to research and 
science, in reserved swamps. For  the purpose of enforcement, Article 95 announces 
that anyone or association that does not carry out environmental impact assessment 
prior  to  launching  any  project  that  may  have  harmful  effects  on  the  environment  is 
punished by suspension of his or her activities and closure of his or her association and 
without  prejudice  to  be  ordered  to  rehabilitate  the  damaged  property,  the 
environment,  people  and  the  property.  Falsification  and  alteration  of  documents  of 
environmental impact assessment is punished in the same manner as what is provided 
for in paragraph one of this Article.  
Article 3: Precautionary principle - Activities considered or suspected to have negative 
impacts  on  environment  must  not  be  implemented  pending  results  of  a  scientific 
assessment ruling out the potentiality of such impacts. 
The Land Law has been developed to determine the modalities of allocating, acquiring, 
transferring,  using  and  managing  land  in  Rwanda.  Article  3  of  the  law  reaffirms  the 
States supreme power in management of land and the right to expropriate in the public 
interest. Under Article 6, any citizen can be granted freehold title, and as per Article 7, 
for an area up to 5 hectares. The Minister may allow for freehold titles in excess of 5 
hectares. 
Article 10 notes that private individual land shall comprise land acquired either through 
customary or written law. Article 17 notes that in addition to freehold title, the right to 
land may be granted by the State in the form of emphyteutic lease (specifying that the 
lessee  must  improve  the  property  with  construction),  for  between  3  and  99  years, 
which can be renewed. Article 18 states that allocated or leased land shall be evidenced 
by a certificate of land registration issued by the registrar of land titles. Article 20 notes 
that registration of land is obligatory.  
law  will  apply  to  sub-projects 
The 
involving 
construction  activities  that  may  have  negative 
environmental and social impacts which will need EIA 
certification before any works start. 
The  land  law  will  be  applicable  to  PSAC  where 
farmers in the project areas realizes a need to acquire 
land and provisions of this law will apply. 
N°48/2018 
Law 
Environment 
on 
No. 
Law 
Governing 
Rwanda (2013)   
43/2013 
in 
Land 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
18 | P a g e  
No. 
LEGISLATION 
INTERPRETATION 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC  
In terms of land use consolidation, Article 30 notes that it is prohibited to subdivide 
agricultural land plots if this would result in a plot of less than 1 hectare. Owners of 
lands which are prohibited from subdivision should co-own and use the land. Article 34 
notes that landowners have the right to exploit their land in accordance with the law, 
and freely own land, except in the case of expropriation in the public interest.  
This  Law  defines  the  applicable  rules  to  the  use,  conservation,  protection  and 
management of water resources. The law further defines water reserves, public water 
domain  of  the  State  in  the  districts,  natural  public  water  domain  and  provides 
modalities  of  compensation  for  damage  to  a  water  resource  and  penalty  on  water 
polluting 
Article 2 defines expropriation in the public interest and fair compensation. Article 3 
notes that, ‘No person shall hinder the implementation of the program of expropriation 
in the public interest on pretext of self-centred interests.’  Though Article 17 requires 
the publication of a decision on expropriation with a list of holders of rights registered 
on land titles and property incorporated on land, 
Articles 22,23, 25 and 28 deal with valuation of the property, while Article 27 reaffirms 
that  compensation  for  land  must  include  any  improvements  on  the  land  and 
compensation for disruption associated with expropriation.   
In terms of payment of compensation, Article 35 notes that, ‘fair compensation can be 
paid in monetary form, Article 36 notes that compensation must be paid within 120 
days of approval by the Ministry, or otherwise becomes null and void, unless mutually 
agreed  otherwise.  After  payment,  the  affected  person  has  a  further  120  days  to 
relocate. In this time, they should not plant any crops that would take more than 120 
days of growth before harvesting.  
Defines tangible cultural heritage, provides classification criteria, organs in charge of 
classification  and  stresses  on  the  preservation  of  cultural  heritage  and  traditional 
knowledge  
The  project  contractors  will  carry  out 
the 
construction  of  the  civil  works  while  observing  the 
applicable rules to the use, conservation, protection 
and  management  of  water  resources.  In  case  the 
water utility services are to be relocated or damaged, 
the  contractor  will  be  responsible  for  expenses  for 
relocation by the utility providers and compensation 
The  law  will  apply  to  sub-projects  whose  activities 
will entail resettlement and compensation guided by 
the  modalities  of 
RPF  document,  detailing 
resettlement and compensation.  
The  project  will  protect  and  preserve  the  historical 
area, 
and 
monuments showing artistic talent. 
representation, 
building, 
visual 
This  Law  governs  the  manufacturing,  importing,  distribution,  use,  storage,  sale  and 
disposal and burial of agrochemicals for the protection of human and animal health and 
the environment, to avoid injury and contamination which may result from their use.  
This  Act  will  be  relevant  in  PSAC  activities  by 
facilitating  training  of  farmers  to  strictly  adhere  to 
the approved use of agrochemicals and safe disposal 
National  Water  Law:  Law 
n°62/2008  of  10/09/2008 
putting  in  place  the  use, 
conservation,  protection 
and management of water 
resources regulations 
Law No. 32/2015 Relating 
to  Expropriation 
in  the 
Public Interest   
Law  nº  28/2016  on  the 
preservation  of  cultural 
heritage  and  traditional 
knowledge 
Law  N° 
01/08/23012 
30/2012 
of 
On 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
19 | P a g e  
No. 
LEGISLATION 
INTERPRETATION 
of 
Governing 
Agrochemicals  
Ministerial  Order  No. 
001/2006 Determining the 
Structure of Lands (2006)   
Law: 
Wetlands 
Minister’s 
006/03 of 30/01/2017 
order 
Prime 
No 
Law: 
Law 
Forest 
Nº47bis/2013 
of 
28/06/2013  determining 
and 
the  management 
utilization  of  forests 
in 
Rwanda 
Law 
regulating 
Rwanda 
66/2018 
in 
labour 
no 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) has the responsibility for 
its implementation. 
This  ministerial  order  determines  the  structure  of  Land  Registers,  and  the 
responsibilities  and  functions  of  the  District  Land  Bureau. The  responsibilities  of  the 
land bureau include among others to implement land registration, keep land registers, 
monitor  and  approve  activities  pertaining  to  valuation  of  land  and  property,  and 
demarcate and approve land cadastral maps. Rural populations with customary land 
rights are being encouraged to register their land through these institutions.  
Wetlands (and lakes) are protected by levels of exploitation published in a list of swamp 
lands,  their  characteristics  and  boundaries  and  determining  modalities  of  their  use, 
development  and  management.  The  order  prescribes  three  management  levels  for 
specific lakes and wetlands: “Full Protection”; “Use under Specific Conditions” and “Use 
without Specific Conditions” 
The law provides modalities of protecting the State forests and isolated trees. The law 
also  stresses  on  planting  trees  in  urban  areas  and  on  roadsides,  protection  and 
conservation of protected trees 
Stipulates several provisions for employment contract, Occupational Health and Safety 
(OHS) and general working conditions. 
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC  
thereof to preserve the environment  
The  project  will  consider 
the  environmental 
management  instruments  in  place      which  among 
other things, determine the legal management level 
prescriptions  of  wetlands  and/or  lakes  that  may  be 
affected  by  sub-project  works  and  recommend 
mitigation measures. 
The  project  contractors  will  record  the  number  of 
trees to be cut and get an approval from the districts. 
Trees  cut  will  be  planted,  upon  completion  of  civil 
works, in urban areas and on roadsides for protection 
and beautification purposes.  
Contractors  will 
The  law  will  apply  to  sub-projects  that  will  entail 
employment  of  workers  to  ensure  their  health  and 
safety.  Any  form  of  sexual  harassment  will  be 
an 
prohibited. 
employment  contract  with  workers  and  paid  their 
salary as agreed by two parties. The project will put 
in place mechanisms and strategies to prevent and / 
or  report  any  work-  related  accident  or  death  of  a 
staff/worker 
in  accordance  with  established 
modalities.  
conclude 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
20 | P a g e  
3.4.2    Relevant Statutory Instruments (SI) 
Several regulations have been enacted to support the implementation of the main Acts. Table 3-3 below discus the subsidiary legislation which 
supports the legislation in table 3-2. These are the regulations which give teeth to the legislation and on implementation, PSAC must recognize 
the requirements of these regulations. 
Table 3-3      Relevant Statutory Instruments (SI). 
No. 
STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 
INTERPRETATION 
Ministerial  order  N° 
003/2008  relating  to 
the requirements and 
procedure for EIA 
Ministerial  Order  No. 
Determining 
002/2008 
Modalities 
Land 
Registration (2008)   
of 
to 
order 
N° 
Ministerial 
003/2008  of  15/08/2008 
the 
relating 
and 
requirements 
for 
procedure 
impact 
environmental 
Assessment (EIA)   
Provides roles and responsibilities of all participants in the EIA process and a General Guidelines 
and Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment-by step guide of the procced 
The Ministerial Order includes dispute resolution procedures in relation to land registration, 
including the use of a Cell Land Adjudication Committee (LAC). The LACs are comprised of five 
members,  supplemented  by  five  members  of  the  particular  village  (imidugudu)  where 
demarcation  and  adjudication  is  taking  place.  The  cell  executive  secretary  acts  as  the  LAC 
secretary, although he or she has no voting rights.   
Article 17 grants parties to a dispute the right to take that dispute to the LAC. Where disputes 
are resolved with the assistance of the LAC, the parties are bound by that agreement, and may 
not  later raise the issue. Article 20 provides procedures for the LAC when hearing disputes, 
including that the hearing is open to the public and announced eight days in advance.  
Article  1  (1)  stipulates  that  Environmental  Impact  study  is  a  systematic  way  of  identifying 
environmental, social and economic impacts of a project before a decision of its acceptance is 
made. In Article 3, the developer submits an official application which includes a project brief 
of the proposed project to the authority. Article 4 specifies that within thirty (30) calendar days 
after receipt of the project brief and after its analysis, the Authority shall submit the Terms of 
reference to the developer for the Environmental impact study.  
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
The  order  will  apply  to  sub-projects 
involving  construction  activities  that  may 
have  negative  environmental  and  social 
impacts 
the  preparation  of  EIAs 
according to Rwandan law. 
In  the  instance  where  there  is  a  land 
dispute during the project implementation 
the Ministerial order will provide guidance   
in 
The implementation of PSAC is preceded by 
the Environmental Impact study which is a 
identifying 
systematic 
environmental, 
and  economic 
social 
impacts  of  a  project  to  inform  a  decision-
making process   
way 
of 
order 
Ministerial 
N°004/2008 
of 
15/08/2008  establishing 
the list of works, activities 
Article 2 and the appendix of this Order specify the works, activities and projects that have to 
undertake  an  environmental 
impact  assessment  before  being  granted  permission  to 
commence.  
The  present  project  has  adhered  to  this 
order  by  listing  works,  activities  that  the 
project is going to do  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
21 | P a g e  
No. 
STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 
INTERPRETATION 
and  projects  that  have  to 
an 
undertake 
environment 
impact 
assessment  
RELEVANCE TO 
PSAC 
3.5      INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS AND TREATIES 
Rwanda  is  a  signatory  and  party  to  international,  conventions,  treaties,  and  protocols,  the  following  listed  in  table  3-4  are  relevant  to  the 
implementation of PSAC. 
Table 3-4      Overview of the relevant International Conventions and Treaties. 
No. 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONVENTIONS 
Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity (CBD1992)   
INTERPRETATION 
RELAVANCE TO PSAC 
Aims  to  conserve  biological  diversity,  promote  the  sustainable  use  of  the  components  of  biological 
diversity, and ensure fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic 
resources. 
to 
Cartagena  Protocol  on 
Biosafety 
the 
Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity 
The  Nagoya  Protocol  on 
Access 
Genetic 
to 
Resources  and  the  Fair 
and  Equitable  Sharing  of 
Benefits Arising from their 
Utilization    
Aims to ensure the safe handling, transport and use of living modified organisms (LMOs) resulting from 
modern biotechnology that may have adverse  effects on biological diversity, taking also into account 
risks to human health. 
A supplementary agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity which provides a legal framework 
for the effective implementation of the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization 
of genetic resources. The Protocol addresses traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources 
with provisions on access, benefit-sharing and compliance. It also addresses genetic resources  where 
indigenous and local communities have the established right to grant access to them. 
Convention 
the 
Conservation of Migratory 
on 
A framework convention which provides a global platform for the conservation and sustainable use of 
migratory animals and their habitats. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
require 
Schemes  may 
the 
clearing  of  vegetation  but  also 
may  affect  aquatic  ecology  if 
if  not 
environmental 
maintained. 
Will  be  relevant 
instance 
where  modified  seed  is  to  be 
used on the schemes. 
flow 
in 
May  be  relevant  if  traditional 
legumes  are  to  be  replaced  by 
cash  crops,  and  where  plants 
traditionally used for medical or 
cultural  practices  may  be 
destroyed due to conversion of 
wetlands or Catchments. 
Project  activities  will  affect 
marshlands/wetlands  where 
migratory fowl frequent, across  
22 | P a g e  
No. 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONVENTIONS 
Species  of  Wild  Animals 
(CMS) 
UN 
Convention on Climate  
Change (UNFCCC) 
Framework 
INTERPRETATION 
RELAVANCE TO PSAC 
wetlands 
Provides a framework for international cooperation to combat climate change by limiting average global 
temperature increases and the resulting climate change and coping with its impacts.  
Paris  Agreement 
UNFCCC (2015)  
to 
the 
Seeks to accelerate and intensify the actions and investment needed for a sustainable low carbon future. Its central 
aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this 
century  well  below  2  degrees  Celsius  above  pre-industrial  levels  and  to  pursue  efforts  to  limit  the  temperature 
increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. The Agreement also aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal 
with the impacts of climate change  
United  Nations  Convention 
to  Combat  Desertification 
(UNCCD, 1994)   
The Basel Convention on the 
Control of  
Transboundary   Movements 
of  
Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their 
Disposal  
(the Basel Convention, 1989)  
The 
Rotterdam 
Convention  (formally,  the 
Rotterdam Convention on 
Informed 
the 
Prior 
for 
Consent  Procedure 
Hazardous 
Certain 
Chemicals  and  Pesticides 
in  
International Trade)  
Aims  to  combat  desertification  and  mitigate  the  effects  of  drought 
drought   and/or   desertification, particularly in Africa, through effective action at  
supported  
in  countries  experiencing  serious 
levels, 
international  cooperation  and  partnership  arrangements.    It  specifically 
by  
all  
addresses the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, known as the drylands, where  
some  
of  
the 
most  
vulnerable ecosystems and peoples can be found.  
Designed to reduce the movements of hazardous waste  between nations, and specifically  to prevent transfer of 
hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries (LDCs). It does not, however, address the movement 
of  radioactive  waste.  Also  intended  to  minimize  the  amount  and  toxicity  of  wastes  generated,  to  ensure  their 
environmentally  sound  management  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  source  of  generation,  and  to  assist  LDCs  in 
environmentally sound management of the hazardous and other wastes they generate.  
Promotes shared  responsibilities in relation to importation of hazardous chemicals. The convention promotes 
open  exchange  of  information  and  calls  on  exporters  of  hazardous  chemicals  to  use  proper  labelling,  include 
directions on safe handling, and inform purchasers of any known restrictions or bans.   
Signatory nations can decide whether to allow or ban the importation of chemicals listed in the treaty, and exporting 
countries are obliged to make sure that producers within their jurisdiction comply.  
PSAC  focusses  on  sustainable 
agro  value  chains  and  requires 
a climate risk assessment to be 
undertaken  in  order  to  guide 
detailed  sub-project  designs  in 
coping  with  climate-related 
impacts on livelihoods 
PSAC  focusses  on  sustainable 
agro  value  chains  and  requires 
a climate risk assessment to be 
undertaken  in  order  to  guide 
detailed  sub-project  designs  in 
coping  with  climate-related 
impacts on livelihoods 
PSAC focuses on smart agricultural 
to 
productivity  with  a  view 
minimize 
poor 
resource management.  
incidents 
of 
in 
 PSAC subscribes to provisions that 
assist 
the  management  of 
hazardous  and  other  wastes  –  in 
this  case  it  applies  to  the  disposal 
of expired agrochemicals and their 
containers.  
on 
used 
Agrochemicals 
the 
schemes  must  be  those  that  are 
registered  with,  and  approved  by, 
the MINAGRI and properly labelled 
for safe handling, disposal, etc.  In 
addition,  farmers  must  be  trained 
on 
these 
hazards 
agrochemicals  and  how  to  store, 
handle and use them.   
the 
of 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
23 | P a g e  
No. 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONVENTIONS 
Convention  concerning  the 
Protection  of 
the  World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage 
(World  Heritage Convention, 
1972)   
INTERPRETATION 
Requires state parties to recognize that the duty of ensuring the identification, protection, conservation, 
presentation and transmission to future generations of the cultural and natural heritage situated on its 
territory, belongs primarily to that State. It will do all it can to this end, to the utmost of its own resources 
and,  where  appropriate,  with  any  international  assistance  and  co-operation,  in  particular,  financial, 
artistic, scientific and technical, which it may be able to obtain.  
Aims to eliminate or restrict the production and use of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). 
Aims to protect endangered plants and animals and to ensure that international trade in specimens of 
wild  animals  and  plants  does  not  threaten  the  survival  of  the  species  in  the  wild.    It  accords  varying 
degrees of protection to more than 35,000 species of animals and plants. 
Prohibits the import of any hazardous Relevant in the event that expired (including radioactive) waste 
into Africa agrochemicals and their containers are taken to other countries for disposal.   
Stockholm  Convention  on 
Persistent  
Pollutants (1992)   
Organic 
Convention  on  International 
Trade in Endangered Species 
of  Wild  Fauna  and  Flora 
(Washington 
(CITES) 
Convention, 1975).   
The  Bamako  Convention  on 
the  ban  on  the  Import  into 
Africa  and  the  Control  of 
Transboundary  Movement 
and Management   of 
Hazardous  
within   Africa  
Convention,  
1991). 
Wastes 
(Bamako 
RELAVANCE TO PSAC 
Rwanda  has  a  number  of 
UNESCO  World  Heritage  Sites. 
However, the Project  will  have 
no  interaction  with  these.  As 
such,  requirements  under  the 
convention will not be triggered  
in  PSAC 
Agrochemicals  used 
schemes  
must  be 
that  are 
those 
registered  with  and  approved 
by MINAGRI.  
trade 
PSAC schemes’ proximity to the 
Akagera  National  Park  may 
indirectly  encourage  poaching 
and 
in  endangered 
species. 
PSAC  will 
that 
environment  is  well  protected 
against  hazardous  wastes  by 
adopting  safe  environmental 
instruments and extending the 
same  to  project  beneficiaries 
and stakeholders 
ensure 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
24 | P a g e  
3.6      GAP ANALYSIS OF LEGISLATION 
The following is a gap analysis between the IFAD SECAP and Rwanda Legislation. 
3.6.1    Project Classification 
The Rwanda legislation classifies projects and activities into three categories which are IL1, 
IL2  and  IL3  Categories  as  outlined  in  table  3-5  below.  On  the  other  hand,  IFAD  classifies 
projects into three categories as “high, substantial, moderate and low” Categories. They are 
outlined in table 3-5 below: 
Table 3-5      Comparison of Rwanda and IFAD Classification. 
NO. 
RWANDA CLASSIFICATION 
IFAD CLASSIFICATION 
IL1:  Projects  believed  to  have  minimal  adverse 
impacts,  that  can  easily  be  identified  through  a 
Project  Brief 
further 
and  not 
environmental analysis. IL1 project are exempt.  
requiring 
IL2:  Projects  believed  to  have  adverse,  but  not 
irreversible  environmental  impacts  and  for  which 
mitigation  and  management  measures  can  be 
readily designed and incorporated into the project.  
IL 3: Projects for which it is evident that there will 
be significant and adverse environmental impacts 
whose  mitigation  measures  cannot  readily  be 
prescribed,  and  thus,  must  undergo  through  a 
complete EIA process.  
High Risk Category: A proposed project is classified as 
High-risk  Category,  if  it  is  likely  to  have  sensitive, 
diverse, 
irreversible  or  unprecedented  significant 
adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts.  These 
impacts may affect an area broader than the sites or 
facilities subject to physical works. 
Substantial  Risk  Category:  A  proposed  project  is 
classified  as  Substantial  risk  Category,  if  its  potential 
adverse environmental and social impacts on human 
populations  or  environmentally  important  areas  – 
including  wetlands,  forests,  grasslands  and  other 
natural habitats  – are less adverse than those of  the 
High-Risk category projects. These impacts are  site  – 
specific, temporary, predictable, few if any of them are 
irreversible;  and  in  most  cases  mitigatory  measures 
can  be  designed  more  readily  than  for  High-Risk 
category projects. 
Moderate  Risk  Category:  A  proposed  project 
is 
classified  as  Moderate  risk  Category  if  the  potential 
adverse  risks  and  impacts  on  human  populations  or 
the environment are not likely to be significant. This 
may  be  because  the  project  is  not  complex  or  large, 
does  not  involve  activities  with  high  potential  for 
harming  people  or  the  environment,  and  is  located 
away from environmentally or socially sensitive areas. 
The  potential  risks  and  impacts  are  predictable, 
temporary, reversible, Low in magnitude, Site-specific, 
and can be easily mitigated in a predictable manner. 
Low Risk: A project should be classified as Low Risk if 
it  will  have  negligible  or  no  environmental  or  social 
implications. 
technical 
include 
assistance  grants 
for  agricultural  research  and 
training,  Health,  Nutrition,  Education  and  Capacity- 
and institution building. 
Such  projects 
IFAD  requires  that  all  its  projects  be  screened  for their potential  environmental  and  social 
impacts to determine the appropriate extent and type of environmental work. It then requires 
that the requisite environmental assessment work be carried out based on these screening 
results.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
3.6.2    Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures 
While Rwanda’s EA procedures are generally consistent with the IFAD policies, there are some 
gaps regarding the screening of subprojects where the sites and potential adverse localized 
impacts cannot be identified prior to the appraisal of the project. Therefore, under the RW-
PSAC  the  environmental  and  social  screening  processes  as  described  in  this  report  will  be 
used. Table 3-6 describes the gap analysis and comparison of IFAD and Rwanda environmental 
and social assessment procedures. 
Table 3-6      Comparison between IFAD and Rwanda ESA Procedures. 
GoR Policy 
IFAD SECAP AND OTHER POLICIES 
REQUIREMENT 
OR 
CATEGORY 
EIA process 
EA  is  initiated  as  early  as  possible  in 
project  processing  and  is  integrated 
closely  with  the  economic,  financial, 
institutional, social, & technical analyses 
of all proposed projects. 
implementation 
As provided for in Article 67 of 
the  Organic  Law,  a  project 
cannot  receive  authorization 
for 
unless 
issued with a certificate stating 
that  an  EIA  is  not  required  or, 
basing on an EIA report, REMA 
has approved the project.  
COMMENTS 
EIA  should  be  initiated  as  early 
as possible in project processing 
to  inform  design  of  all  projects 
(Appendix 3) 
Screening Criteria  
a) 
The  IFAD  requires  that  all  its  projects  are  screened  for  their  potential  environmental  and 
social  impacts  to  determine  the  appropriate  extent  and  type  of  environmental  and  social 
work. The screening requirements are compared in table 3-7 below. 
Table 3-7      Comparison of Screening Criteria Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
Use of ESCMF 
Environmental 
and 
Screening 
Social 
High 
Risk 
/ 
Category 
Prescribed list A, 
used 
screening 
ESCMF 
for 
subprojects  where 
potential  adverse 
cannot  be 
appraisal of the project. 
of 
sites  and 
the 
localized 
impacts 
identified  prior  to  the 
The  programme/project  may  have 
significant  environmental  and  social 
implications that are sensitive, adverse, 
irreversible  or  unprecedented  and 
affect an area broader than the sites or 
facilities 
physical 
interventions. 
subject 
to 
Relevant Project Type and Scale: 
Irrigation projects exceeding 100ha 
SECAP’s  Guidance  Statement  #8  on 
Small  Dams  categorises  dams  and 
reservoirs  having  a  dam  wall  >  5m  or 
reservoir  volumes  of  >  50  000  m3  as 
High-Risk Category (requiring full ESIA). 
the 
PSAC-Rwanda  will  use 
environmental 
social 
screening  process  as  described 
in this ESCMF. 
and 
the 
Impact  Level  3  (IL-3)  projects 
Environmental 
require 
Impact  Study  where  potential 
impacts  of  a  project  and  their 
magnitude are identified 
No  Provision  for  screening  of 
subprojects where the sites and 
potential 
localized 
adverse 
impacts  cannot  be  identified 
prior  to  the  appraisal  of  the 
project. 
Rwanda EIA guidelines define 3 
Impact Level (IL) categories that 
are  determined  through  the 
screening process:  
IL  3:  Projects  for  which  it  is 
evident  that  there  will  be 
significant 
adverse 
and 
environmental  impacts  whose 
mitigation  measures  cannot 
readily be prescribed, and thus, 
must  undergo 
a 
complete EIA process.  
through 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
26 | P a g e  
IL2:  Projects  believed  to  have 
adverse,  but  not 
irreversible 
environmental  impacts  and  for 
which 
and 
mitigation 
management  measures  can  be 
readily 
and 
incorporated into the project.  
designed 
EIA is mandatory in this level to 
identify  environmental  impacts 
of 
their 
magnitude.  
. 
the  project  and 
Environmental 
and 
Screening 
Social 
Substantial  Risk 
Category 
/ 
Prescribed list B, 
have 
project  may 
Requirements: 
For  High-Risk  Category  projects  a 
formal  ESIA,  RAP  and/or 
IPMP,  as 
applicable,  are  required  with  ESMP 
elaboration.  
some 
The 
environmental  and  social  impacts  on 
human  populations  or  environmentally 
significant  areas,  but  which  are  site-
specific and less adverse than High Risk 
Category. 
SECAP categorises small scale irrigation 
projects  as  Substantial  Category  but 
does  not  define  “small  scale”  as  being 
below  a  given  area  of  land  to  be 
is 
irrigated.  Professional 
therefore  used 
the 
categorisation which can be influenced 
by  proximity  to  environmentally  or 
ecologically  sensitive  areas,  or  other 
social, 
socio-economic 
considerations 
to  determine 
cultural  or 
judgement 
SECAP’s  Guidance  Statement  #8  on 
Small  Dams  categorises  dams  and 
reservoirs having a dam wall ≤ 5m high 
wall or reservoirs having a volume of ≤ 
50  000  m3  as  Substantial  Category 
(requiring a Preliminary ESIA or ESMP)  
analysis  will 
Requirements: 
is  required, 
While  no  formal  ESIA 
be 
environmental 
undertaken  in  the  course  of  project 
implementation. This can be in the form 
of an ESMP which may be a stand-alone 
document 
from 
an 
environmental analysis 
output 
or 
Environmental 
and 
Screening 
Social 
 “Moderate”  Risk 
Category  /  Non  – 
Prescribed 
The  project  will  have  negligible 
environmental and social implications. 
Requirements: 
No  further  environmental  analysis  is 
specifically required. 
IL1:  Projects  believed  to  have 
minimal  adverse  impacts,  that 
can easily be identified through 
a Project Brief and not requiring 
further environmental analysis. 
IL1 project are exempt;  
In  both  regulations  there  is  no 
demand for ESIA. 
Climate Risk Classification 
b) 
Climate Risk Classification is discussed in table 3-8 below. 
Table 3-8      Climate Risk Classification. 
REQUIREMENT 
OR 
CATEGORY 
IFAD SECAP AND OTHER POLICIES 
GoR Policy 
COMMENTS 
Climate 
Classification 
Risk 
SECAP  provides 
a  Climate  Risk 
Classification  methodology  which 
specifies  that  projects  that  have  high 
The  Rwanda  EIA  guidelines  do 
climate 
not  have  a 
risk 
methodology. 
classification 
Climate  risk  analysis  not  yet  a 
requirement  at  National  level 
but  it  is  essential  to  meet  IFAD 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
27 | P a g e  
requirements,  and 
must be conducted.  
therefore 
analysis 
However,  Rwanda’s  guidelines 
for  Strategic  Environmental 
Assessment  suggests  climate 
the 
risk 
analytical 
of 
qualitative  profile  of  areas 
affected 
policy, 
a 
programme or plan.  
development 
during 
by 
that 
those 
vulnerability  to  climate  risk  are  for 
example: 
promote 
agricultural activity on marginal and/or 
highly  degraded  areas;  projects  that 
establish  infrastructure  in  areas  with  a 
track record of extreme weather events; 
and  projects  in  areas  in  which  rural 
development projects have experienced 
weather-related losses and damages in 
the  past.  IFAD  requires  that  projects 
classified  as  high  risk  undertake  an  in-
depth climate risk analysis. Examples of 
medium  risk  projects  include  projects 
that  make  use  of  climate-sensitive 
resources,  but  do  not  focus  on  these 
resources as a main commodity (such as 
irrigation  projects);  projects  which 
invest 
infrastructure  not  directly 
exposed to extreme weather events but 
have potential to become more resilient 
through 
green 
technologies;  and  projects  which  focus 
on 
institutional  development  and 
capacity building for rural institutions in 
climatically 
areas, 
where opportunities exist to strengthen 
indigenous  climate  risk  management 
capabilities. Low risk projects are those 
that  are  not  likely  to  be  vulnerable  to 
climate  risks  (e.g.,  development  of  a 
micro-finance 
Projects 
under PSAC are therefore considered to 
lie within the high and medium climate 
risk category. 
heterogeneous 
institution). 
adaptation 
of 
in 
Requirement:  
For  High-Risk  projects  an 
analysis of climate risks is required 
in-depth 
Disclosure Requirements,  
c) 
Table 3-9, below gives a comparison of the disclosure requirements: 
Table 3-9      Comparison of disclosure Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
Disclosure 
(2010) 
requires 
IFAD’s  Policy  on  the  Disclosure  of 
Documents 
full 
disclosure  to  the  public  and  includes 
information  notes  on  projects  being 
developed  for  Board  presentation, 
agreements  for  approved  loans  and 
project/programme 
grants, 
design  documents  which 
include 
ESIAs, ESCMFs, RAPs and RAFs. 
and 
REMA,  in  consultation  with 
the lead agency determines 
whether  or  not  a  public 
hearing  is  necessary  based 
on  the  submitted  project 
the  proposed 
brief  of 
development. 
REMA 
arranges  and  facilitates  at 
least  3  public  consultations 
on  the  final  report  from 
justified  objections 
which 
Rwanda  Legislation  will  be  applied 
as  far  as  is  possible.  Where  there 
are  gaps  the  provisions  of  SECAP 
will apply 
Upon  completion  of  ESA  reports, 
these must be:  
• 
circulated 
written 
comments  from  the  various 
agencies  and  government 
agencies. 
for 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
28 | P a g e  
my  result  in  the  refusal  to 
proceed. 
• 
• 
notify the public of the place 
and time for its review; and  
or  written 
solicit 
comments 
those 
affected. 
from 
oral 
The Framework Approach 
d) 
The Rwanda Laws do not provide for the Framework Approach (ESCMF and RPF) but rather 
only, specific instruments (ESIA, ESMP, Environmental Audits). This ESCMF prepared for RW-
PSAC  in  line  with  SECAP  will  guide  the  preparation  of  the  specific  instruments;  Table  3-10 
summarises the comparison of the Framework Approach Requirements. 
Table 3-10    Comparison of the Framework Approach Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
the 
Approach 
Framework 
IFAD  requires  an  ESCMF,  RPF,  etc.  for 
projects whose location and design of 
the Program activities and subprojects, 
and the magnitude of their impacts are 
not  precisely  known  at  project 
appraisal stage  
This  ESCMF  prepared  for  RW-
PSAC  in  line  with  SECAP  will 
guide  the  preparation  of  the 
specific  instruments  for  the 
sub-projects  as  and  when 
deemed necessary. 
affect 
shall 
Legislation, 
Rwanda 
Organic  Law  (Article  67) 
requires 
that  projects, 
programmes  and  policies 
the 
that  may 
be 
environment 
subjected 
to 
impact 
environmental 
before 
assessment 
authorisation 
obtaining 
for 
implementation. 
Article  69  gives  REMA 
legal authority to oversee 
the conduct of EIA 
Specific Instruments 
e) 
Specific instruments include ESIAs ESCMPs, etc. The table 3-11 below gives a comparison of 
the requirements for specific instruments: 
Table 3-11    Comparison of specific Instruments Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
Specific  Instruments: 
e.g.,  Environmental, 
Social  and  Climate 
Management 
Plans 
(ESMPs) 
ESMPs  are  required  for  each  set  of 
activities  (e.g.,  subprojects)  that  may 
require specific mitigation, monitoring 
and institutional measures to be taken 
during implementation 
ESMPs  will  be  prepared  for 
each subproject to be financed 
under  PSAC  and  will  include 
specific mitigation, monitoring 
and  institutional  measures  to 
during 
taken 
be 
implementation 
Rwanda 
Legislation, 
Organic  Law  (Article  67) 
requires 
that  projects, 
programmes  and  policies 
that  may  affect 
the 
shall  be 
environment 
subjected 
to 
impact 
environmental 
before 
assessment 
obtaining 
authorisation 
implementation. 
for 
Article  69  gives  REMA 
legal authority to oversee 
the conduct of EIA 
f) 
Public Consultation Requirement 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
29 | P a g e  
The  table  3-12  below  gives  a  comparison  of  the  requirements  for  public  consultation 
Requirements. 
Table 3-12    Comparison of public consultation Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
Public Consultation 
SECAP  emphasises  the  need 
for 
greater consultation by communities 
(especially  the  marginalized  poor) 
and stakeholders that are likely to be 
affected by IFAD’s Operations during 
the  respective  programme/project 
cycle, in order to provide input to the 
project  design,  receive  feedback  on 
the  draft  ESIA  report,  ensure  broad 
community  support  to  the  project, 
and  to  ensure  that  affected  people 
endorse the proposed mitigation/ risk 
management 
reduction 
measures. 
In  addition  to  public 
consultations,  SECAP  requires  FPIC 
for all projects that are likely to affect 
land or user rights to land, whether or 
not  the  affected  people  belong  to 
indigenous groups or minorities. 
and 
and 
timely 
Affected  persons/communities  are 
relevant 
provided 
information and informed about their 
options and rights. Consultation with 
customary  landowners  and  affected 
persons is  essential and may require 
their  participation 
Social 
Assessment.  
in  a 
any 
from 
principle 
Rwanda’s  National  Land  Policy 
of  2004  in  reference  to  the 
of 
constitutional 
equality  of  all  citizens,  states 
that  all  Rwandans  enjoy  the 
same  rights  of  access  to  land 
without 
discrimination 
whatsoever.  
The  policy  elaborates 
the 
principle  by  stipulating  that 
woman, married or not, should 
not  be  excluded 
the 
process  of  land  access,  land 
acquisition  and 
land  control, 
and female descendants should 
the 
not  be  excluded 
land 
of 
process 
inheritance.  
Moreover  Article  3  of  Organic 
Law  No.  08/2005  of  2005 
determining 
and 
management of land in Rwanda 
stipulates  that  state  also  has 
rights  to  expropriation  due  to 
public  interest,  settlement  and 
land  management 
general 
through procedures provided by 
law  and  prior  to  appropriate 
compensation.  
the  use 
family 
from 
Consultation  Process 
this  ESCMF  will 
in 
the 
guide 
consultations  for  the 
project.  
Identification 
of 
affected persons must 
vulnerable 
consider 
persons 
(disabled, 
women, youth, etc.).  
to 
periods 
Notification 
should allow adequate 
salvage 
time 
being 
property 
the 
removed 
project 
two 
weeks  prior  to  any 
construction activity).  
for 
(i.e., 
Health And Labour Safety Requirements 
g) 
Sections 77 to 79 of Rwandan law of labour 2018 deals with occupational health and safety 
where employers are required to ensure the health, safety, and welfare in the workplace for 
employees. The law includes measures relating to OHS for protecting workers from injuries, 
illness or impacts associated with exposure to hazards encountered in the workplace during 
work. The OHS measures include provision of PPE, awareness raising, trainings and guidance 
on how to prevent accidents at workplace. Related issues are explicitly included in the SECAP, 
as  part  of  the  environmental  and  social  management.  The  table  3-13  below  gives  a 
comparison of health and labour safety requirements. 
Table 3-13    Comparison of health and labour safety requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
health  and 
safety 
labour 
SECAP  provides 
for  Environmental 
Health  and  Safety,  including  all  issues 
related  to  labour  influx  and  sexual 
harassment.  
to  79  of 
Sections  77 
labour 
law  of 
Rwandan 
2018 
with 
deals 
occupational  health  and 
safety  where  employers 
are required to ensure the 
health, safety and welfare 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Solution/mitigation 
Rwanda  Legislation  will  be 
applied  as  far  as  is  possible. 
Where  there  are  gaps  the 
provisions of SECAP will apply. 
30 | P a g e  
The 
the  workplace 
for 
in 
employees. 
law 
includes measures relating 
for  protecting 
to  OHS 
workers 
injuries, 
from 
impacts 
or 
illness 
associated  with  exposure 
to hazards encountered in 
the  work  place  during 
work.  The  OHS  measures 
include  provision  of  PPE, 
awareness 
raising, 
trainings  and  guidance  on 
how  to  prevent  accidents 
at workplace.  
Other articles 82 and 119 
Require 
to 
inform  the  management 
of  the  social  security  and 
Inspectorate  of 
to  the 
labour 
the 
located, 
enterprise 
accident, 
occupational 
in 
disease  or  death 
accordance  with  relevant 
Laws 
where 
is 
employer 
Physical Cultural Resources  
h) 
Although  the  chances  of  affecting  any  Physical  Cultural  Resources  is  small,  the  policy  was 
triggered  as  a  precautionary  measure  for  any  chance  finds  of  antic  relicts.  Thus,  an 
Archaeological Chance Finds Procedure is included in the ESCMF to address that possibility of 
archaeological deposits, finds and features becoming exposed during refurbishments. Table 
3-14 below gives a comparison of the Physical Cultural Resources Requirements 
Solution/mitigation 
Rwanda  Legislation  will  be 
applied  as  far  as  is  possible. 
Where  there  are  gaps  the 
provisions of SECAP will apply  
Table 3-14    Comparison of Physical Cultural Resources Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Physical 
Cultural 
Resources  and  chance 
finds procedures 
development 
In  cases  where  physical  cultural 
resources  are 
IFAD  assists 
found, 
borrowers  in  avoiding,  minimising  or 
mitigating  adverse  impacts  on  PCR  in 
programmes/ 
the 
projects that it finances. Due diligence 
is  carried  out  through  applying  SECAP 
to  ensure  that  PCR  are  properly 
identified  and  adequately  addressed 
and that any measures to protect PCR 
comply  with  the  borrower’s  national 
legislation  as  well  as  with 
its 
obligations 
relevant 
under 
international treaties and agreements.  
SECAP  prescribes  general  steps  for 
programmes/  projects  that  apply  in 
cases 
screening; 
collecting data; assessing impacts; and 
formulating mitigating measures.  
involving 
PCR: 
Parks 
EIA  guidelines 
indicate 
criteria for EIA compliance 
requirements  to 
include 
location  and  potential  to 
environmentally 
affect 
including 
sensitive  areas 
National 
and 
Areas, 
Protected 
productive 
wetlands, 
agricultural 
land, 
important  archaeological, 
historical  and  cultural  site 
and  areas  containing  rare 
or  endangered  flora  or 
fauna. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
31 | P a g e  
Solution/mitigation 
IFAD  has  an  established 
redress 
Grievance 
mechanism  (GRM)  this 
could compliment  
Rwanda Legislation  
Grievance Mechanisms 
i) 
Table 3-15 below gives a comparison of the Grievance Mechanisms. 
Table 3-15    Grievance Mechanisms. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Grievance Mechanisms 
for 
IFAD  has  developed  a  Complaints 
“Alleged  Non-
Procedure 
its  Social  and 
Compliance  with 
and 
Environmental 
Policies 
Its  Social 
Mandatory  Aspects  of 
Environmental 
Climate 
and 
Assessment  Procedures”.  Parties 
adversely  or  potentially  adversely 
affected by IFAD-funded projects and 
programmes  may  bring  issues  to  the 
using 
attention 
Fund’s 
SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
Any  Sexual  Exploitation  and  Abuse 
(SEA)  complaints  received  shall  be 
directed to IFAD's Ethics Office 
Complaints must be put forward by at 
least  two  people  who  are  both 
nationals  of  the  country  concerned 
and/or  living  in  the  project  area. 
Complaints  from  foreign  locations  or 
anonymous  complaints  will  not  be 
taken  into  account.  Complaints  must 
projects/programmes 
concern 
or 
currently 
design 
implementation. 
Complaints 
concerning  closed  projects,  or  those 
that  are  more  than  95  per  cent 
disbursed,  will  not  be  considered. 
IFAD  does  not  provide  monetary 
compensation  to  resolve  complaints. 
The  IFAD  website  provides  a  clear 
summary  of  the  steps  involved  and 
guidance on how to report issues 
under 
a 
provide 
receipt  of 
Article  19  of 
the  national 
Expropriation Law provides for an 
application  to  revoke  a  public 
interest  expropriation  within  15 
days  of  publication  and  that  a 
decision must be provided within 
the 
30  days  of 
application.  Further,  Articles  33 
and  34  provide  for  contestation 
of  valuation  results  for  land  and 
property  by  the  person  to  be 
expropriated  with  7  days  of  the 
approval of a valuation report at 
own cost and that the contestant 
should 
counter 
valuation report within 10 days of 
application.  
in 
It 
is 
that 
development 
projects 
grievance  mechanisms 
are 
formulated during project design 
for  all  stages  of  the  project  in 
order 
that  affected  parties 
present grievances to the project 
authorities without cost and with 
assurance  of  satisfactory  and 
timely solutions. They commonly 
include institution of a grievance 
resolution  committee  and 
its 
working  procedures  as  well  as 
grievance logging and monitoring 
systems. 
common  practice 
Compensation and Resettlement 
j) 
The  Constitution  recognizes  ownership  of  property  and  every  person’s  right  to  private 
property  (Article  34).  Consequently,  private  property,  whether  individually  or  collectively 
owned, is inviolable. Exceptionally, the right to property may be overruled in the case of public 
interest. In these cases, circumstances and procedures are determined by the law and subject 
to fair and prior compensation (Article 34). Article 35 stipulates that private ownership of land 
and other rights related to land are granted by the State. The constitution provides that a law 
should be in place to specify modalities of acquisition, transfer and use of land.  while IFAD 
SECAP policies require the need to provide alternative land, resettling the Project Affected 
Persons  (PAPs)  to  levels  or  standards  of  livelihood  similar  to  or  better  than  before 
compensation. The Rwanda legislation also does not provide for restoration of livelihoods, 
resettlement assistance and compensation at replacement value. Under circumstances like 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
32 | P a g e  
these regarding shortcomings in the Rwanda law on compensation process, the provisions of 
SECAP shall be applied. Table 3-16 below gives a comparison of the Involuntary Resettlement 
Requirements. 
Table 3-16    Comparison of Involuntary Resettlement Requirements. 
Subject/Issue 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
GoR Policy 
Solution/mitigation 
Involuntary 
Resettlement 
Involuntary 
resettlement 
should  be  avoided  wherever 
minimized, 
feasible, 
exploring  all  viable  alternative 
project designs.  
or 
Displaced  persons  should  be 
meaningfully 
consulted  and 
should  have  opportunities  to 
in  planning  and 
participate 
resettlement 
implementing 
programs.  
Affected 
property 
compensated 
replacement cost. 
land  and  non-land 
is  required  to  be 
full 
at 
(“squatters 
WHO IS ELIGIBLE:  IFAD requires 
to 
compensation/  assistance 
informal  land  users  &  illegal 
occupants 
and 
encroachers”) 
IFAD  requires 
VALUATION: 
compensation  equal  or  better 
than 
replacement  value  of 
land/assets 
BEYOND COMPENSATION:  IFAD 
for 
requires 
restoration  of  livelihoods  (not 
worse off as result of project 
TIMING: 
compensation/assistance 
in 
provided 
to 
full  prior 
beginning 
implementation  of 
works 
assistance 
requires 
IFAD 
legislation  make 
Rwandan 
provision 
involuntary 
for 
resettlement  Law  No.  08/2005 
of 2005. while 
Expropriation  is 
under Law No. 32-2015   
implemented 
Rwanda legislation provides for 
public  notification  of 
the 
intention  to  take 
land  and 
allows  for  objections  to  be 
lodged.  
of 
payment 
Rwanda legislation provides for 
terms 
of 
compensation,  Article  35  notes 
that, ‘fair compensation can be 
paid in monetary form, 
Article 39 allows for payment of 
compensation 
as 
opposed to cash. 
in-kind 
Rwanda  Legislation  does  not 
recognize illegal settlers. 
The  project  design  will  seek  to  avoid 
physical  and  economic  displacement. 
Where  such  impacts  cannot  be  avoided, 
best  efforts  will  be  made  to  minimize 
impacts through design review. Acquisition 
of land will only be pursued once all viable 
alternatives have been considered.  
Affected  persons  will  be  meaningfully 
consulted  throughout  the  preparation  of 
implementation of resettlement plans. Any 
severely affected persons will be consulted 
on the development of mitigation measures 
for relocation or livelihood restoration.  
Compensation  will  be  provided  at  full 
replacement  cost.  For  land,  compensation 
will  be  based  on  market  value  plus 
structures, 
transaction 
compensation  will  be  sufficient  to  replace 
the affected structure without depreciation 
plus the cost of any transaction costs such 
as registration fees.  For non-land property 
that can be feasibly moved, assistance will 
be  provided 
the  affected 
to  restore 
property.  
The  provisions  of  SECAP  shall  be  applied 
where  there  are  short  comings  in  the 
Rwanda legislation. 
costs. 
For 
legislation  make  a 
Rwanda 
provision for fair compensation  
The  provisions  of  SECAP  shall  be  applied 
where  there  are  short  comings  in  the 
Rwanda legislation. 
There is no provision for beyond 
compensation  restoration  of 
livelihoods. 
The  provisions  of  SECAP  shall  be  applied 
where  there  are  short  comings  in  the 
Rwanda legislation. 
No 
for 
provision 
compensation/assistance in full 
prior 
implementation  of 
works 
to 
The  provisions  of  SECAP  shall  be  applied 
where  there  are  short  comings  in  the 
Rwanda legislation. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
33 | P a g e  
The  IFAD  procedures  and  the  Rwanda  legislation  are  basically  similar.  However,  while 
Rwanda’s  EA  procedures  are  generally  consistent  with  IFAD’s  policies,  there  exists  a  gap 
regarding  the  screening  of  small-scale  subprojects  where  the  sites  and  potential  adverse 
localized impacts cannot be identified prior to the appraisal of the project. Also, GoR policies 
do not specifically provide for climate risk categorisation, and FPIC and livelihood restoration 
where physical and economic displacement may occur. Therefore, Rwanda- PSAC will use the 
environmental and social screening process as described in this report. 
3.7      IFAD SECAP AND POLICIES 
IFAD  is  one  of  the  largest  sources  of  development  financing  for  agriculture  and  rural 
development in developing countries. In line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and other international relevant agreements IFAD’s core mandate is to support the social and 
economic  empowerment  of  poor  rural  women  and  men.  As  such,  it  is  opposed  to  any 
investment that will have a negative impact on its target groups. In respect to the overall goal 
of  environmental  and  economic  sustainability,  IFAD  is  committed  to  take  a  proactive  and 
innovative  approach  to  promote  projects  and  initiatives  that  are  specifically  designed  to 
deliver significant environmental, social and climate adaptation and mitigation benefits.  
RW - PSAC has been designed and informed by IFAD’s Climate Change Strategy, Environment 
and Natural Resources Management (ENRM) Policy, Indigenous Peoples Policy, Gender and 
Targeting Policy and Land Policy. The Programme has also been designed in compliance with 
IFAD’s guidelines on Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). To 
ensure an integrated approach to environmental and social management, the SECAP presents 
guidance statements. The following is a summary of the relevant pieces of policies. 
3.7.1    IFAD Environment and Natural Resources Management (ENRM) Policy 
Accelerating  environmental  degradation  is  eroding  the  natural  asset  base  of  poor  rural 
people. Environmentally damaging agricultural and other economic activities the drivers of 
these challenges. The knowledge and technology exist to tackle these challenges and IFAD 
has years of experience helping poor rural communities manage their natural resources, but 
it has the potential to do a lot more (IFAD, 2011). 
The goal of the ENRM policy is: “To enable poor rural people to escape from and remain out 
of poverty through more-productive and resilient livelihoods and ecosystems”. 
Its  purpose  is:  “To  integrate  the  sustainable  management  of  natural  assets  across  the 
activities of IFAD and its partners”. 
The  policy  sets  out  10  core  principles  to  guide  IFAD’s  support  for  clients  in  ENRM.  The 
principles include both the core issues to be addressed and suggested approaches (section 
II.A). In summary, IFAD will promote: 
(1) 
Scaled-up  investment  in  multiple-benefit  approaches  for  sustainable  agricultural 
intensification, 
(2)  Recognition  and  greater  awareness  of  the  economic,  social,  and  cultural  value  of 
natural assets, 
‘Climate-smart’ approaches to rural development, 
(3) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
34 | P a g e  
(4)  Greater  attention  to  risk  and  resilience  to  manage  environment  and  natural-
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
resource-related shocks, 
Engagement in value chains to drive green growth, 
Improved governance of natural assets for poor rural people by strengthening land 
tenure and community-led empowerment, 
Livelihood diversification to reduce vulnerability and build resilience for sustainable 
natural resource management. 
Equality and empowerment for women and indigenous peoples in managing natural 
resources. 
Increased access by poor rural communities to environment and climate finance; and 
(9) 
(10)  Environmental commitment through changing its own behaviour. 
3.7.2    IFAD’s Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change 
(2019-2025) 
The speed and intensity of climate change are outpacing the ability of poor rural people and 
societies  to  cope. The natural  environment  and climate  change  influence the  lives  of poor 
rural people in critical ways. Sustained agricultural productivity and economic success depend 
on reliable access to environmental goods and services, as well as the assets and capacities 
to withstand environmental and climate hazards and shocks. 
IFAD has formulated this strategy in order to address environment and climate change issues 
across  all  its  policies,  strategies  and  operations.  The  main  objective  of  the  strategy  is  to 
enhance  the  resilience  of  smallholder  farmers  and  rural  communities  to  environmental 
degradation and climate change impacts. 
Thus,  IFAD  is  enhancing  its  approach  to  rural  development  in  the  context  of  increasing 
environmental  threats,  including  climate  change.  As  IFAD  will  continue  to  target  its 
investments  at  the  poorer  and  often  most  climate-change  affected  people  –  whose 
livelihoods depend largely on agriculture and natural resources  – particularly at women as 
producers  and  indigenous  people  as  stewards  of  natural  resources,  it  has  put  in  place 
measures to address the adversarial climate changes. The Strategy recognises that climate-
related risks, and potential opportunities, can be addressed more systematically within the 
different projects and policy advice. This will be done by being alert to new sources of risk, 
and exploring more opportunities like rewarding emissions reductions (IFAD, 2018) 
3.7.3    IFAD Indigenous Peoples’ Policy 
This  Policy  on  Engagement  with  Indigenous  Peoples  aims  to  enhance  IFAD’s  development 
effectiveness in its engagement with indigenous peoples’ communities in rural areas. It sets 
out the principles of engagement IFAD will adhere to in its work with indigenous peoples, and 
the instruments, procedures and resources IFAD will deploy to implement them. 
Indigenous people account for an estimated 5 per cent of the world’s population, but 15 per 
cent  of  those  people  living  in  poverty.  In  many  countries,  rural  poverty  is  increasingly 
concentrated in indigenous and tribal communities. 
IFAD’s  Strategic  Framework  identifies  indigenous  peoples  as  an  important  target  group 
because they face economic, social, political, and cultural marginalization in the societies in 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
35 | P a g e  
which they live, resulting in extreme poverty and vulnerability for a disproportionate number 
of them. To reach them requires tailored approaches that respect their values and build upon 
their  strengths.  In  its  engagement  with  indigenous  peoples,  IFAD  will  be  guided  by  nine 
fundamental  principles:  (a)  cultural  heritage  and  identity  as  assets;  (b)  free,  prior  and 
informed consent; (c) community-driven development; (d) land, territories and resources; (e) 
indigenous peoples’ knowledge; (f) environmental issues and climate change; (g) access to 
markets; (h) empowerment; and (i) gender equality. 
The  formulation  of  the  ESCMF  document  recognises  these  principles  so  that  they  can  be 
implemented throughout the project cycle. 
3.7.4    IFAD Gender and Targeting Policy 
Poverty  targeting,  gender  equality  and  empowerment  are  cornerstones  of  IFAD’s  work  to 
reduce rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity. This puts people – rural women, men, 
youth,  and  indigenous  peoples  –  at  the  centre  of  IFAD’s  development  projects  and  policy 
engagement. This unique approach aims to support the development of inclusive, equitable, 
sustainable and resilient rural societies and agriculture sectors that are food secure and able 
to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  growing  markets,  thus  providing  a 
springboard to rural transformation. Thus, IFAD has developed a deliberate Policy to address 
this issue. 
3.7.5    IFAD Land Policy 
Secure access to productive land is critical to the millions of poor people living in rural areas 
and depending on agriculture, livestock, or forests for their livelihood. 
It reduces their vulnerability to hunger and poverty; influences their capacity to invest in their 
productive activities and in the sustainable management of their resources; enhances their 
prospects for better livelihoods; and helps them develop more equitable relations with the 
rest of their society, thus contributing to justice, peace and sustainable development (IFAD, 
2008) 
The Fund’s first strategic objective is to help “ensure that, at the national level, poor rural 
men and women have better and sustainable access to natural resources (land and water), 
which  they  are  then  able  to  manage  efficiently  and  sustainably.”  Land  access  and  tenure 
security  issues  are  linked,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  all  the  strategic  areas  of  IFAD’s 
interventions. 
The IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has been formulated to: (a) 
provide a conceptual framework for the relationship between land issues and rural poverty, 
acknowledging the complexity and dynamics of evolving rural realities; (b) identify the major 
implications  of  that  relationship  for  IFAD’s  strategy  and  programme  development  and 
implementation; (c) articulate guiding principles for mainstreaming land issues in the Fund’s 
main  operational  instruments  and  processes;  and  (d)  provide  the  framework  for  the 
subsequent development of operational guidelines and decision tools. 
In the policy, land refers to farmland, wetlands, pastures, and forests. Land tenure refers to 
rules and norms and institutions that govern how, when and where people access land or are 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
36 | P a g e  
excluded from such access. Land tenure security refers to enforceable claims on land, with 
the  level  of  enforcement  ranging  from  national laws  to  local  village  rules,  which  again  are 
supported  by  national  regulatory  frameworks.  It  refers  to  people’s  recognized  ability  to 
control and manage land – using it and disposing of its products as well as engaging in such 
transactions as the transferring or leasing of land. 
3.7.6    IFAD Guidelines on SECAP 
The updated SECAP sets out IFAD’s aspirations regarding environmental, social and climate 
adaptation,  mitigation  and  sustainability,  and  describes 
its  approach  to  addressing 
environmental, social and climate risks and impacts throughout the project cycle. It highlights 
IFAD’s mainstreaming requirements (including for mainstreaming the themes: youth, gender, 
environment and climate change, and nutrition) and includes nine environmental, social and 
climate 
that 
borrowers/recipients/partners must apply to IFAD-supported projects  
standards,  which 
the  mandatory 
requirements 
out 
set 
SECAP provides a stepwise description of the processes to assess risk at each phase of the 
project or programme cycle, namely: Environmental and Social Categorisation and Criteria, 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); Climate Risk Analysis (CRA); ESIA Review 
and  Recommendations;  Loan  Negotiations;  Executive  Board  Approval,  Project  Supervision 
and Implementation, and Project Completion and ex-post ESIA. 
SECAP  REQUIRES  an  environmental  and  social  screening  of  sub-projects  of  each  proposed 
project to determine the appropriate extent and type of Environmental and social Assessment 
to be undertaken and whether or not the project may trigger other policies.  
IFAD’s  environmental  and  social  categorization  of  projects/programmes  comprises  the 
following categories: (See SECAP 2021 version for Details) 
•  High Risk:  
The  programme/project  may  have  most  or  all  of  the  following  significant  adverse 
environmental and/or social characteristics:  
i. 
Result in sensitive, irreversible or unprecedented significant risks and impacts 
(for  example,  resulting  in  loss  of  major  natural  habitat  or  conversion  of 
wetlands), 
Result  in  risks  and  impacts  that  are  significant  in  magnitude  and/or  spatial 
extent (large geographical area or size of the population likely to be affected), 
Have significant risks and impacts that affect an area much broader than the 
sites or facilities subject to physical interventions, 
Result in significant adverse cumulative or transboundary impacts, 
High  probability  of  serious  adverse  effects  to  human  health  and/or  the 
environment (e.g., due to accidents, toxic waste disposal), 
Risks and potential impacts are not readily remedied by preventive actions or 
mitigation measures. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
•  Substantial Risk: 
A project should be classified as Substantial Risk when it is not as complex as a High-
Risk project and its environmental and social scale is not in such a sensitive area but 
may  pose  significant  risks  and  impacts  if  not  adequately  managed.  These  potential 
risks and impacts have most or all of the following characteristics:  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
37 | P a g e  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
They  are  mostly temporary,  predictable  or reversible,  and  the  nature  of the 
project makes it possible to entirely avoid or reverse them, 
There  are  concerns  that  the  project’s  adverse  social  impacts  and  associated 
mitigation measures may give rise to a limited degree of social conflict, harm 
or impacts on human security, 
The  geographical  area  and  size  of  the  population  likely  to  be  affected  are 
medium to large, 
There  is  some  potential  for  cumulative  or  transboundary  impacts,  but  they 
would be less severe and more readily avoided or mitigated than in a High-Risk 
project, 
There is medium to low probability of serious adverse effects to human health 
or the environment (e.g., due to accidents, toxic waste disposal), and there are 
known and reliable mechanisms to prevent or minimize such incidents, 
The project’s effects on areas of high value or sensitivity are expected to be 
lower than for High-Risk projects, 
Mitigation  or  compensation  measures  may  be  designed  more  easily  and  be 
more reliable than those of High-Risk projects. 
While no formal ESIA is required for Substantial Risk programmes/projects, in many cases 
further  environmental  analysis  could  be  undertaken  during  project  preparation  or 
implementation.  
•  Moderate Risk: 
A project should be classified as Moderate Risk when potential adverse risks and impacts 
on human populations or the environment are not likely to be significant. This may be 
because the project is not complex or large, does not involve activities with high potential 
for  harming  people  or  the  environment,  and  is  located  away  from  environmentally  or 
socially sensitive areas. The potential risks and impacts are: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Predictable and expected to be temporary or reversible, 
Low in magnitude, 
Site-specific, without the likelihood of impacts beyond the project life cycle, 
Low probability of serious adverse effects to human health or the environment 
(e.g., they do not involve the use or disposal of toxic materials, or routine safety 
precautions are expected to be sufficient to prevent accidents), 
The project’s risks and impacts can be easily mitigated in a predictable manner. 
v. 
•  Low Risk: 
A project should be classified as Low Risk if it will have negligible or no environmental or 
social implications. Examples include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Technical assistance grants for agricultural research and training, 
Research, 
Extensions, 
Health, 
Nutrition, 
Education and 
Capacity- and institution building. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
38 | P a g e  
In  addition,  the  environmental  and  social  screening  exercise  of  sub-projects  is  used  to 
determine  the  exposure  of  the  programme  objectives  to  climate-related  risks  (High, 
Moderate or Low). SECAP provides guidance statements on biodiversity and protected area 
management;  agrochemicals;  energy;  fisheries  and  aquaculture;  forest  resources;  water; 
small  dams;  physical  cultural  resources;  rural  roads;  development  of  value  chain, 
microenterprises and small enterprises; and physical and economic resettlement – most of 
which are applicable in the context of the PSAC programme. Where resettlement or economic 
displacement is envisaged, SECAP requires that the principles of “do no harm” and “free, prior 
and informed consent” are adhered to at all times and for all beneficiaries for any intervention 
that might affect the land access and user rights of communities. 
Included in SECAP are a series of  standards which focus on nine environmental, social and 
climate issues that should be met through the project life cycle. These standards are aimed 
predominantly at borrowing governments and private sector partners, which are responsible 
for  undertaking  environmental,  social  and  climate  risk  assessments,  and  for  implementing 
projects. The table 3-17, below indicates which ones are most relevant to PSAC: 
Table 3-17    Standards most relevant to PSAC 
STANDARDS 
RELEVANCE TO PSAC 
Less Relevant  More Relevant 
Standard 1: Biodiversity conservation  
Standard 2: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention  
Standard 3: Cultural heritage  
Standard 4: Indigenous peoples  
Standard 5: Labour and working conditions  
Standard 6: Community health and safety  
Standard 7: Physical and economic resettlement  
Standard 8: Financial intermediaries and direct investments  
Standard 9: Climate change 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
3.7.7    Free, Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects (FPIC) 
Free,  prior  and  informed  consent  (FPIC)  is  an  operational  principle  empowering  local 
communities  to  give  or  withhold  their  consent  to  proposed  investment  and  development 
programmes  that  may  affect  their  rights,  access  to  lands,  territories  and  resources,  and 
livelihoods  (IFAD,  2015).  FPIC  is  solicited  through  consultations  in  good  faith  with  the 
representative  institutions  endorsed  by  communities.  It  ensures  that  they  participate  in 
decision-making processes concerning a given development project. 
Consent should be sought in a way that is “free, prior and informed” 5: 
•  Free implies no coercion, intimidation, or manipulation. 
•  Prior  implies  that  consent  has  been  sought  sufficiently  in  advance  of  any  decision 
• 
point or commencement of activities. 
Informed implies that information provided covers all relevant issues to make decision 
maker fully enlightened.  
•  Consent  is  the  expected  outcome  of  the  consultation,  participation,  and  collective 
decision-making process by the local communities. 
5 United Nations Development Group (UNDG), Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, 2009:30 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
39 | P a g e  
3.7.7.1  General guiding principles 
Responsibility and institutional capacity for seeking FPIC  
a) 
The IFAD general policies and procedures, stipulate that the borrower or grant recipient is 
responsible  for  programme  and  project  preparation,  including  social,  environmental  and 
climate assessments and seeking FPIC. In this case the Government of Rwanda through the 
lead Ministry, i.e., MINAGRI will be responsible for seeking the FPIC. 
The first step is for the government of the Government of Rwanda to identify the laws that 
regulate  the  rights  to  land  and  resources.  And  check  if  it  has  demarcated  and  recognizes 
community  lands.  If  Rwanda  has  not  done  so,  this  can  be  rectified  by  conducting  early 
consultations with concerned communities and inclusion in project design of the measures, 
approaches  and  resources  for  ensuring  demarcation  and  recognition  of  territorial  and 
communal and rights. 
Identifying representative institutions 
b) 
To ensure legitimacy, it is crucial that FPIC be obtained from the representative institutions 
of local communities. Understanding how communities make decisions is the first important 
step in the FPIC process. The important criteria are that representation should be determined 
by  the  concerned  peoples  and  communities  themselves  to  avoid  misrepresentation  or 
manipulation.  This  can  be  done  in  line  with  the  community  structure  for  representation, 
figure 3-1 below. 
Figure 3-1      The Local Governance structures in The Kingdom of Rwanda 
(Disclaimer: This structure is aimed at improving understanding on the duality of administration and 
development.) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
In  general,  representative  institutions  must  strive  to  adhere  to  the  principles  of  inclusive 
consultation, participation, and consent in their internal decision-making processes. 
The FPIC process at design and implementation phases is intended to ensure that the project 
does  not  negatively  affect  the  future  beneficiaries.  Solutions  should  be  found  during  the 
consultation on how to maximize benefits expected from local communities.  
Consultation, participation, and consent 
Consultation is an important feature of any project design process. PSAC is expected to follow 
the  IFAD  participatory  approach  to  ensure  that  local  communities  are  included  in  project 
design. It will give appropriate attention to women and young people in these consultations. 
Besides  the  initial  Impact  assessments  of  the  project  at  design  stage,  GoR  will  institute  a 
continuous consultation process during implementation.  
Consent to the project or to a project component or specific activity under a component, will 
be an outcome of the collective decision-making process by the local communities. GoR will 
seek  recorded  consent  agreements  with  the  concerned  communities  through  their  freely 
chosen representative bodies to engage in the FPIC process. 
The consent agreement and record will document the outcome(s) of the process and terms 
and conditions agreed upon. It will also document any dissent to the overall project or project 
activities. The agreement must be independently verified as fair and true by the communities 
and follow the process agreed by them. 
The procedures and rules of the FPIC process will be largely determined by the communities 
affected and those who have the right to give or withhold consent. The FPIC process must be 
in harmony with their own governance and internal collective process for taking decisions.  
Documenting consultation, participation and FPIC 
c) 
Government  of  Rwanda  will  undertake  to  document  all  consultations,  participations,  and 
consents in the following manner: 
•  Keep  record  of  consultations  undertaken:  -  how  participants  were  selected  and 
invited;  what  documentation/information  they  received  beforehand  and  in  which 
language; who participated; what was discussed; and what was agreed.  
•  Keep  record  of  participation:  when  did  representatives  of  indigenous  peoples  and 
local  communities  participate;  how  they  were  selected;  what  institutional  roles  or 
accountability links to constituents do they have; what commitments do they assume; 
and what agreements were made.  
•  Document  specific  instances  that  express  FPIC:  often  FPIC  is  expressed  as  an 
agreement between the borrower (or the duly designated implementing agency) and 
the  concerned  local  communities.  These  agreements  should  clearly  articulate  what 
has been agreed (issues, commitments, time frames, budgets, roles, responsibilities, 
etc.); who entered into the agreement (clearly identifying the individuals involved as 
well  as  their  tile  and  role);  and  what  mechanisms  have  been  set  up  to  maintain 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
41 | P a g e  
dialogue and address disagreements. 
d)  Where to seek FPIC? 
FPIC  is  not  so  much  a  safeguard  principle,  rather  a  proactive  approach  to  identify 
development pathways with local communities and it is applied in two scenarios (IFAD, 2015): 
Investment projects that may have an impact on the land access and use rights of 
rural communities, 
• 
•  Projects targeting indigenous peoples or rural areas that are home to indigenous and 
tribal peoples and ethnic minorities. 
The  first  scenario  refers  to  the  type  of  investment  project  and  the  second  to  the  type  of 
project area and target groups. Table 3-18 outlines the FPIC requirement according to these 
two criteria. 
Table 3-18    FPIC requirements  
No 
•  Location 
based on project type and areas of intervention (IFAD, 2015) 
•  Agricultural 
•  Project 
likely 
to 
affect  land  access 
and/or  use  rights 
of communities 
and 
rural 
development  projects  unlikely 
to affect land rights (agricultural 
technologies  and  production, 
value  chain  development,  social 
infrastructure) 
•  Project 
supporting 
demand-driven services to 
individuals  (rural  finance, 
small  and  medium-sized 
enterprise development) 
1. 
•  Rural 
areas 
without 
or 
peoples 
indigenous 
minorities. 
2. 
3. 
•  Rural  areas  with  some 
indigenous  peoples  and 
minorities’ communities. 
Indigenous 
territories or tribal areas 
people’s 
• 
•  YES 
•  YES 
•  YES 
•  NO 
•  NO 
•  On a case-by-case basis 
•  NO 
•  YES 
•  YES 
In  projects  that  affect  land  access  and  use  rights  of  communities,  the  principle  of  FPIC  is 
applied to local communities in a broad sense, i.e., the local communities that will potentially 
be affected, are identified during project design and in application of SECAP. 
However, there is a general requirement for FPIC6. in areas that are home to indigenous and 
tribal peoples and ethnic minorities,  
3.7.7.3  Soliciting FPIC at implementation stage 
FPIC of investments is sought during the implementation phase when: 
•  The project, or some of its component, is likely to affect land access and use rights of 
local communities, and/or 
•  The project area is home to indigenous and tribal peoples and ethnic minorities. 
•  Communities are not identifiable at project design stage. 
6  Consistent with international practice, the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples states that  they are characterized by: 
“Priority in time, with respect to occupation and use of a specific territory; the voluntary perpetuation of cultural distinctiveness, which 
may include the aspects of language, social organization, religion and spiritual values, modes of production, laws and institutions; self-
identification, as well as recognition by other groups, or by state authorities, as a distinct collectivity; and an experience of subjugation, 
marginalization, dispossession, exclusion or discrimination.” 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
42 | P a g e  
•  Specific investments in specific communities are not predefined during project design 
phase, but open to communities’ demand during the project implementation period. 
If at design stage the specific locations and communities to be affected were not identifiable, 
the  project  documents  will  include  the  FPIC  implementation  plan  describing  how  the 
participatory  and  consultation  process  for  seeking  communities’  consent  would  be 
conducted.  The  FPIC  would  then  be  sought  during  implementation  before  a  specific 
investment is decided in each community. 
Since  investments  in  specific  communities  and  territories  were  not  identifiable  during  the 
project design stage, FPIC will further be solicited during the implementation phase.  
3.7.8    FPIC Implementation Plan 
The  purpose  of  the  present  FPIC  Implementation  Plan  is,  among  others,  to  provide 
information on how the FPIC Process will be conducted throughout the course of the project 
and which methods will be used as part of the process; as well as to outline the responsibilities 
of MINAGRI AND NAEB. 
3.7.8.1  Decision-Making Institutions And Representatives 
The key institutional actors involved with issues of resettlement, property and land rights, 
access to resources, etc, are the local government departments both at National level and 
District level. The implementing agency will be the MINAGRI through the NAEB.  
NAEB’s  Environmental  and  Social  Specialists  will  work  very  closely  with  the  Rwanda 
Environmental  Management  Authority  (REMA),  Local  Government  officials  and  District 
Council  Officials  to  facilitate  consultations  leading  to  FPIC  with  concerned  communities 
/project affected persons (PAPs).  
3.7.8.2  Consultations Leading To FPIC 
Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of key 
decision-making institutions, consultations will be held with the sub-project communities and 
plantations Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations during programme implementation  – 
when site specific ESMPs and designs are being updated or prepared, as the case may be. 
Consultations will be conducted by the  PSAC Environmental and Social Specialist, or by an 
independent facilitator/advisor hired by NAEB. 
The use of participatory mapping will be instrumental for the consultation process leading to 
FPIC.  This  is  because  of  the  advantages  of  participatory  mapping  and  accompanying 
participatory enquiry techniques which allow the assessment of ownership, occupation and 
use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (e.g., movements and relationships 
among the different social groups) and right holders.  
Given that the sub-projects are initiated by the communities and proposed to the NAEB the 
consultations will:  
• 
Confirm that the sub-project is a community-driven initiative. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
43 | P a g e  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
inform 
Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  the  proposed  sub-project  with  the 
communities/Cooperatives  /Cooperatives  /Associations  directly  or  through  their 
representatives (existing or elected by the communities in the process). 
the  Cooperatives  /Cooperatives  /Associations/communities' 
Clearly 
representatives  on  the  actors  financing  and  implementing  the  project  and  their 
respective responsibilities. 
Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project. 
Share the findings of the socio-cultural, land tenure and environmental assessment 
and reality check/confirmation of findings. 
Engage  selected  Association/community  members  or  their  representatives  in  the 
resources and social mapping activities, in order to assess ownership, occupation and 
use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (relationships among the 
different social groups). 
Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  the  mapping  exercise  with  the  Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives /Associations/communities. 
inclusive  participation  -  men,  women,  young  people,  the  elderly, 
Ensure 
representatives  of  different  communities  present  on  the  same 
land  and 
neighbouring villages - and provide for multiple maps by the different Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives /Associations/communities. 
Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and, 
Formalise ownership of the land use maps by the communities that have developed 
them. 
3.7.8.3  Formalising The Consent Agreement 
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPIC agreement are identified, this will be 
formalised  in  a  written  form  in  English  as  well  as  in  Kinyarwanda.  The  effective  time  the 
consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed upon during the consultation process 
and needs to be formalised before any investment is made. 
The consent agreement will be prepared by the PSAC District Teams. The format for a consent 
agreement would, among others, include: 
•  Project activities on which consent is provided, 
•  Respective expectations, 
•  Proposed project duration, expected results and activities, 
•  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures, 
• 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms, 
•  Terms of withdrawal of consent, 
•  Record  of process  through  means  and  languages  accessible  to  all  stakeholders  and 
parties involved. 
The  FPIC  agreement  and  record  of  process  will  be  made  available  through  means  and 
languages that are accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
44 | P a g e  
3.7.8.4  Disclosure 
The FPIC Implementation Plan will be disclosed together with the Programme Design Report 
(PDR),  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management  Framework  (ESCMF),  and  other 
documents to be submitted to the Executive Board (and Evaluation Committee). 
3.7.8.5  Documenting The FPIC Process 
FPIC  process  will  be  documented  through  minutes  of  consultations,  mapping  documents 
prepared  by  the  Cooperatives /Associations/communities,  videos  where  feasible,  and  FPIC 
agreements/formalisation documents. 
3.7.8.1  The FPIC Implementation Plan 
The following is a summary of the PSAC FPIC implementation Plan: 
Table 3-19      Summarised PSAC FPIC Implementation Plan  
No. 
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY 
RESPONSIBLE 
TIMEFRAME 
1.0 
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment: 
Identify:  
• 
Customary laws, informal rules and organizing practices 
on land ownership. 
Institutions and governance systems. 
Types of livelihoods. 
• 
• 
•  Mutual support and solidarity mechanisms. 
• 
Cooperatives  /Associations/Community  stakeholders, 
land  users  and  assess  who  has  the  right  to  give  or 
withhold the consent. 
Assess:  
•  Consequences from the proposed project that may result 
in the change of the status of the lands, and resources 
2.0 
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
preliminary 
consultations  with 
Conduct 
the 
Cooperatives /Associations/community and explain the 
nature of the proposed project. 
Allow time for Cooperatives/Associations/communities 
to  discuss  and  decide  on  their  representatives  for  the 
consultation process leading to FPIC 
Clarify responsibilities of representatives  
Agree on the process leading to FPIC 
Identify signatory parties for the consent agreement. 
3.0 
Capacitate the implementors and the stakeholders 
Conduct  various  capacity  building  workshops  for  both  the 
implementing partners and the stakeholders so that they are 
all on the same page and will make informed decisions (See 
Section 5 for Details): 
•  Training  of  implementing  partners  on  background  of 
project:  Environmental  and  Social  Risks  and  Impacts  of 
PSAC. 
•  Training  of  Extension  staff  on  background  of  project: 
Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  of  the 
Projects: 
District  offices  of  the  NAEB 
(who  may  hire  consultants 
to carry out the sub-project 
specific  socio-cultural/land 
tenure assessments. 
the  beginning  of 
At 
programme 
implementation phase.  
This could be part of the 
participatory  mapping 
exercise. 
through 
District offices of the NAEB, 
possibly 
an 
facilitator, 
independent 
supported by IFAD as part of 
project 
implementation 
support, as required. 
the  beginning  of 
At 
programme 
implementation  phase 
(this  could  be  done  in 
tandem  with  the  socio-
cultural and land tenure 
and 
assessment 
mapping exercise)  
•  MINAGRI 
•  National  Aids  Council 
(NAC) 
•  Ministry 
Environment 
•  Private Consultant 
of 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
before  individual  sub-
projects  start  begins 
the 
throughout 
and 
project cycle 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
45 | P a g e  
No. 
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY 
RESPONSIBLE 
TIMEFRAME 
• 
•  Cascading  training  to  lower  levels  on  background  of 
project: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of 
the Projects: 
Training  of  Stakeholder  on  Gender,  HIV/AIDS 
awareness:  
Training of Stakeholder on land issues: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Land Tenure and rights 
Land rights 
Use of land 
Pollution and degradation. 
• 
4.0 
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific component/activities 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Share  objective  and  scope  of  the  project  with  the 
representatives  identified  by  the  communities  and 
identify project component(s) requiring FPIC. 
Inform them on the actors financing and implementing 
the project and their respective responsibilities. 
Provide  clear  and  transparent  information  on  the 
benefits and risks of the project. 
Share the findings of the sociocultural, land tenure and 
environmental assessment 
Formalize consent agreement. 
5.0 
Formalize the consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement (written or in other form if 
so, requested by the community) 
The format for a consent agreement would include: 
• 
• 
Respective expectations  
Proposed  project  duration,  expected  results  and 
activities 
Participatory  monitoring  and  verification  plan  and 
procedures  
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms  
Terms of withdrawal of consent  
• 
• 
• 
Record the process through means and languages accessible 
to all stakeholders and parties involved 
Annex  the  FPIC agreement and documented process  to  the 
PDR. 
6.0 
FPIC implementation 
Implement the FPIC agreements throughout the project life.  
7.0  Monitoring the FPIC implementation 
through 
District  offices  of  the  NAEB 
an 
possibly 
independent 
facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part of 
implementation 
project 
support, as required. 
the  beginning  of 
At 
programme 
implementation  phase 
and  before 
individual 
sub-projects start. 
through 
District  offices  of  the  NAEB 
an 
possibly 
independent 
facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part of 
implementation 
project 
support, as required. 
Programme 
implementation  phase. 
Timing  agreed  upon 
during  the  consultation 
and  before 
process 
individual  sub-projects 
starts. 
MINAGRI,  NAEB, 
implementation 
and 
missions 
joint 
IFAD 
support 
supervision 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
individual  sub-
before 
projects  start  begins 
and 
the 
throughout 
project cycle 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
46 | P a g e  
No. 
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY 
RESPONSIBLE 
TIMEFRAME 
Assess  FPIC  implementation  as  part  of  the  M&E  exercise 
during the project life.  
Appropriate  indicators  for  measuring  progress  towards 
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked 
with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement 
MINAGRI,  NAEB, 
implementation 
and 
missions 
joint 
IFAD 
support 
supervision 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
before  individual  sub-
projects  start  begins 
and 
the 
throughout 
project cycle 
3.7.9    Timeframes for Seeking FPIC.  
When the precise nature and specific location of an investment is known and well defined, 
FPIC must be solicited at design stage. In the case of PSAC the precise nature and specific 
locations of the potential investment were not known, thus the Government of Rwanda was 
not expected to directly seek FPIC at this stage.  
FPIC will be sought at Implementation stage before any of the sub-projects is implemented 
and  the  FPIC  process  will  be  implemented  throughout  the  project  life  cycle  with  constant 
monitoring and evaluation. 
3.7.10   FPIC Implementation Arrangements 
The  following  is  a  description of  arrangement  responsibilities  and  mechanisms for  seeking 
FPIC, as well as the role of independent, impartial entities to monitor the FPIC implementation 
process.  
The lead implementing agency for the project is MINAGRI with the assistance of NAEB. NAEB 
will be tasked with the day-to-day coordination, planning and management of select project 
activities.  
Due to the multifaced nature of PSAC, a project steering committee (PSC) will be established 
and will contribute to the project oversight. 
The  NAEB  will  spearhead  the  implementation  of  the  FPIC  process  and  will  be  assisted  by 
several key implementation ministries who have staff down to district level. The structure of 
the implementation is outlined in figure 7-1 below. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
47 | P a g e  
Figure 3-2      Implementation Arrangements for FPIC. 
NAEB  staff  with  their  District  teams  comprised  of  the  staff  from  the  key  implementing 
partners will be capacitated by undergoing training as explained in section 5 of this  report. 
The  target  beneficiaries  will  similarly  be  capacitated.  All  the  training  will  be  conducted  by 
designated  Ministries  or  private  consultants.  Once  capacitated  the  teams  will  start  the 
consultation  processes  leading  to  FPIC.  This  process  will  also  be  assisted  with  private 
consultants. 
3.7.11   Assess FPIC Implementation. 
To assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards 
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the FPIC 
agreement.  Subsequent  workshops  and  stakeholders’  reviews  of  the  FPIC  plan  may  also 
amend  the  various  indicators  to  be  established  in  the  FPIC  agreement.  Joint  supervision 
missions assessing project progress will also assess the implementation of FPIC agreements 
on  a  regular  basis.  Whenever  possible,  supervision  and  evaluation  missions  would  include 
experts of relevance. 
3.7.12   Budget and Financing 
The following is an itemized budget for undertaking the FPIC activities described in this report. 
Table 3-20      Estimated Budget for ESMF Implementation (US$) 
No
. 
1 
2 
ACTIVITY 
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment 
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives 
ESTIMATE 
(US $) 
50,000.00 
- 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
48 | P a g e  
3 
4 
5 
6 
implementors  and  the  stakeholders  - 
Capacitate  the 
Environmental and Social Training  
Conduct  consultation  leading  to  FPIC  on  the  proposed 
project/specific component/activities 
Formalize the consent agreement 
Assess  FPIC  implementation:  -  Monitoring  and  evaluation 
purposes (R&D, M&E, Field Visits) 
7 
TOTAL (US $) 
113,000.00 
50,000.00 
5,000.00 
40,000.00 
258,000.00 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
49 | P a g e  
4. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND BIOPHYSICAL/CLIMATE/SOCIAL BASELINE 
4.1      INTRODUCTION 
Rwanda  is  a  landlocked  country  situated  in  central  Africa.  It  is  known  as  ’The  Land  of  a 
Thousand Hills’. Rwanda has five volcanoes, 23 lakes and numerous rivers, some forming the 
source of the river Nile. The Main lakes include Kivu, Muhazi, Ihema, Bulera, Ruhondo, and 
Mugesera. Rwanda's Vegetation ranges from dense equatorial forest in the north-west of 
the country to tropical savannah in the east. Rwanda has two rainy seasons, with an average 
rainfall of 110-200 mm per month. 
The  average  Temperature  ranges  from  24.6  to  27.6º  C,  with  the  Hottest  months  being 
August, and September. The country lies literally in the heart of Africa. The Altitude ranges 
from 950m to 4500m above the sea level. The main National Parks are Akagera, Volcanoes 
and Gishwati-Mukura National Parks. The Volcanoes National Park in the Virunga volcanic 
mountains with high altitude forests is the home for the world-famous mountain gorillas. 
The Park is teeming with wildlife both large and small, while Lake Kivu to the west offers 
beautiful 
islands. 
https://www.gov.rw/about#section_Overview.  
archipelago 
peninsulas 
beaches, 
jutting 
and 
an 
of 
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network 
is composed of nine catchments. The topography is characterized by hills and mountains and 
widely varying altitudes. The lowest altitude in the country is 950 m above the sea level. The 
country  is  divided  into  12  agro-ecological  zones  that  can  be  clustered  into  three  natural 
regions:  highlands,  midlands,  and  lowlands.  Agriculture  is  the  main  economic  activity  in 
Rwanda with 70% of the population engaged in the sector, and around 72% of the working 
population employed in agriculture. It accounts for 33% of the national GDP (FAO, 2022). it 
is estimated that 90% of domestic cropland is on slopes ranging from 5% to 55%. Tea and 
coffee are the major exports followed by exports of dry beans, potatoes, maize, rice, cassava 
flour, maize flour, poultry, and live animals within Eastern Africa. (GoR 2015). 
4.2      CONTEXT 
The agriculture sector accounts for one-third of the GDP and employs over two-thirds of the 
Rwandan population (67%). Despite its importance, the sector continues to be predominantly 
subsistence  and  low-income  agriculture.  Most  farmers  possess  small  plots  of  less  than  0.4 
hectares  (ha)  on  average7,  which  negatively  affects  productivity  and  competitiveness. 
Agriculture  is  also  affected  by  climate  change,  which  leads  to  soil  degradation  and 
vulnerabilities of the majority of farmers’ dependent on rain-fed agriculture. Development of 
agriculture value chains and transition into high-value export markets remains a big challenge. 
Yet, strong opportunities exist in the coffee, tea and horticulture sectors that enjoy favourable 
agro-climatic conditions and an investment-friendly environment that led to classify them as 
priority export value Chains. To support this transition, the Government of Rwanda has been 
proactively creating an enabling environment through strengthening of agricultural extension 
7  As  per  Agricultural  household  Survey  2020  report,  the  national  average  land  size  per  household  is  0.4  ha  ;  and  77.2%  of 
agricultural households operate on a farm size of less than 0.5 ha. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
services,  promoting  export  through  the  National  Agricultural  Export  Development  Board 
(NAEB), creation of guarantee funds for small enterprises development, and emphasizing the 
role  of  private  sector  and  smallholder  farmer  cooperatives  in  the  development  of  these 
export-oriented value chains. Therefore, PSAC project compliments GoR efforts to increase 
incomes  of the  rural  poor,  by  supporting inclusive  agro  exports’  value  chains by increasing 
their climate resilient productive capacity and market access. The proposed project will focus 
on key activities that are priorities for the MINAGRI within the context of economic, social, 
and governance transformation towards the aspirations of Vision 2050.  
4.3      BIOPHYSICAL BASELINE 
The  following  paragraphs  review  some  of  the  key  country’s  background  information  on 
environmental, social and climate issues with regards to the agriculture system. 
4.3.1    Topographical Features & Agro-Ecological Zones 
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network is 
composed of nine catchments. The topography is characterized by hills and mountains and 
therefore widely varying altitudes (900 m in south-west, 1500-2000 m in the south and the 
centre of the country, 1800-3000 m in the highlands of the north and the west and 3000-4507 
m in the regions of Congo-Nile Crest and the chain of volcanoes). The country is divided into 
12 agro-ecological zones that can be clustered into three natural regions: highlands, midlands, 
and lowlands. 
The topography, results in 60% of the total land area being under cultivation. The climatic 
conditions  and  the  generally  fertile  soils  favour  cultivation  of  both  cash  crops  the  most 
important  being  coffee,  tea,  sugar  cane  and  pyrethrum  and  food  crops  such  as  roots  and 
tubers, bananas, fruits, vegetables, cereals and pulses (beans and peas). Most crop land (90%) 
is located on slopes with a gradient ranging from 5% to 50%. occupied mostly by terraced 
agriculture. The gradients exacerbate vulnerability to the impacts of climate change such as 
intense rainfall that leads to soil erosion and soil fertility loss (GoR 2015). 
The  topography  in  the  target  districts  includes  slopes  and  this  leads  to  soil  erosion  with 
reduced  water holding  capacity and  soil  fertility when  cultivating in  slopes.  Improved  land 
resources management would therefore be of benefit to the productivity of the small holders 
targeted  under  PSAC.  Soil  and  water  conservation  measures  and  environmentally  friendly 
practices  such  as  mulching,  composting  of  organic  wastes  from  all  VCs,  erosion  control 
measures and intercropping with other crops and shade trees, which can have the additional 
benefit of improving soil fertility, will be included under the PSAC activities.  
The map below illustrates Rwanda’s topography.   
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
51 | P a g e  
Figure 4-1      Topography of Rwanda 
         (REMA (2011). Atlas of Rwanda’s Changing Environment) 
4.3.2    Biodiversity inventories 
The  savannah  vegetation  in  the  Project  area  comprises  a  mosaic  of  grassland, 
broadleaved and/or deciduous shrubland and forest. The grass savannah is dominated by 
Themeda  triandra,  Hyparrhenia  sp.,  with  Sporobolus  pyramidalis  and  Botriochloa 
insculpta. Acacia species are the most common trees found in the forest savannah; these 
include Acacia senegal, A. Sieberiana, A. polyacantha campylacantha, A.gerardii and A. 
brevispica. Combretum sp are also found. 8  
Fischer  (2011)  prepared  a  biodiversity  inventory  for  various  important  wetlands  in 
Rwanda.9    He  notes  that  within  the  Akagera  wetland  complex  south  of  the  Akagera 
National Park, there are a total of 77 vascular plants of which two are endangered orchid 
species  (Eulophia  angolensis  and  Eulophia  guineensis).  The  wetland  vegetation  is 
dominated by Papyrus reed (Cyperus papyrus) and Phragmites (Phragmites Mauritianus), 
and reeds such as Echinochloetum pyramidalis and Cyperetum latifolii.    Shrubs along the 
swamp edges are characterised by Syzygium cordatum and Myrica kandtiana, while along 
the  lake  and  river  edges,  Sesbania  sesban  and  Phoenix  reclinata,  Aeschyomene 
elaphroxylon and Mimosa pigra  are dominant. Aquatic plants occurring in the open water 
surfaces  are  Nymphaea  sp,  Ceratophylletum  Demersi,  Azolla  nilotica  and  Eichhornia 
crassipes (Water Hyacinth).  
One the major threats to the water bodies in the Project area is the invasion of lakes by 
Water Hyacinth including Lakes Ihema and Nasho, and other water bodies, especially in 
the NyabarongoAkagera river system and the Akagera wetland complex10.  
8 REMA (2009). State of the Environment Report 2009.  
9 Fischer, E (2011). Biodiversity Inventory of Key Wetlands in Rwanda. Final Report. REMA.  
10 https://www.cbd.int/countries/profile/default.shtml?country=rw  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
52 | P a g e  
4.3.2.1  Forests. 
Rwanda is endowed with Nyungwe forest which holds national park status and is situated in 
the south-west and is contiguous with the Kibira Forest National Park in Burundi. Covering an 
area of slightly over 1,000 km2 the forest was described in the UNEP Africa Atlas of 2008 as 
the largest block of forest in East Africa. The tropical Afromontane Forest lies between the 
altitudes of 1,500 and 2,300m and is home to hundreds of species of birds, butterflies, orchids 
as well as dozens of mammal species including primates.  
Other significant tropical forests in the country are the Gishwati forest that has recently been 
promoted  to  national  park  protection  status  and  the  forests  of  the  iBirunga  (Virunga) 
volcanoes that mark the northern frontier with Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC). The chain of volcanoes within Rwanda’s borders are Muhabura and Gahinga shared 
with Uganda and Sabyinyo, Bisoke and Karisimbi, (the highest peak 4,507 m.a.s.l) shared with 
the DRC. These volcanic mountain landscapes form the Volcanoes National Park, a part of the 
Greater Virunga Trans-boundary Collaboration (GVTC), established in 2015 between Rwanda, 
DRC and Uganda for effective collabouration in conservation. The savanna woodlands of the 
Akagera National Parks also provide habitat critical for the biodiversity preservation of the 
many endemic endangered species. Important tropical forests outside the protected areas of 
Rwanda include the remnant forest of Busaga (150ha) in Muhanga district, the relic forest of 
Buhanga (31ha) in Musanze district and the gallery forests in the eastern region. 
4.3.2.2  Fauna  
Rwanda  shelters  151  different  types  of  mammal  species,  eleven  of  which  are  currently 
threatened and none of which are endemic. Among them are the primates (14 to 16), with 
half  of  the  remaining  world  population  of  mountain  gorillas  (Gorilla  gorilla  berengei).  The 
gorillas  are  found  in  the  Volcanoes  National  Park.  Others  includes  the  owl-faced  monkey 
(Cercopithecus  hamlyni),  the  mountain  monkey  (Cercopithecus  hoesti)  in  Nyungwe,  the 
Chimpanzee  (Pan  troglodytes) 
in  Nyungwe  and  Gishwati,  and  the  Golden  monkey 
(Cercopithecus mitis kandti) found in Volcanoes National Park. There are also 15 species of 
antelope, and a wide diversity of species such as buffalo, zebra, warthog, baboon, elephant, 
hippopotamus,  crocodile,  tortoise  and  rare  species  such  as  the  giant  pangolin  (Chemonics 
International Inc. 2003, MINITERE 2005). 
Rwanda is one of the top birding countries with 670 different birds having been recorded. Four 
of species of birds in Rwanda are threatened with extinction: the shoebill (Balaeniceps rex) 
found in Akagera; Grauers rush warbler (Bradyptrus graueri) found in Volcanoes National Park 
in  Nyungwe  and  in  the  swamps  of  Rugezi;  the  Kungwe  apalis  (Apalis  argentea)  found  in 
Nyungwe;  and  the  African  or  Congo  barn  owl  (Phodilus  prigoginei)  found  along  Lake  Kivu 
(Chemonics International Inc. 2003). 
Animal races bred in Rwanda are mixed with native and non-native races. These include cattle 
(Ankole,  Sahiwal,  Frison,  Alps  brown  and  the  Australian  Milk  Zebu),  goat  (Alpine  and 
Anglonubian), sheep (Karakul, Merinos and Dorper), pig (Large white and Landrace, Pitrain), 
poultry  (Leghorn,  Rhodes  Island  Red,  Derco,  Sykes  and  Anak),  fish  (Tilapia  and  Clarias) 
(MINITERE 2003 a). 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
53 | P a g e  
Fish species found in aquatic ecosystems comprise Haplohcromis, Synodontis, Barbus, Labeo, 
Tilapiines, and Clarias species. Raimas moorei and Limnothrissa miodon were introduced into 
Lake Kivu at the end of the 1950s (MINITERE 2003a). 
4.3.2.3  Existing threats to biodiversity. 
Rwanda’s National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) (2016) describes threats to 
biodiversity  in  protected  areas  and  forest  reserves  that  include  poaching;  boundary 
encroachment; alien invasive species; uncontrolled fires; tree cutting and vegetation clearing; 
illegal mining; human-wildlife conflict; wildlife poisoning; illegal fishing and illegal grazing. The 
NBSAP (2016) also describes threats to biodiversity outside protected areas that include legal 
mining and agricultural intensification as well as the cross-cutting climate and climate change 
related  threats  that  include  fluctuating  levels  of  lakes,  species  migration  to  new  habitats 
where survival of the species is not guaranteed. Agricultural intensification is highlighted as a 
threat to biodiversity in Rwanda’s NBSAP (2016) and in the country study on environmental 
threats and opportunities (USAID, 2014) as well as by key informants, mainly because of the 
associated  loss  of  habitat.  Conversion  of  natural  forests  to  settlements  and  subsistence 
agriculture  for  livelihoods  as  well  as  commercial  agriculture  such  as  pyrethrum  and  dairy 
production in the previously Afromontane forests of Gishwati and Volcanoes National led to 
habitat loss. 
4.3.3    Hydrology and Water Resources  
4.3.3.1  Hydrology  
In Rwanda the abundance of water resources is reflected by the existence of a network of 
wetlands  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  Wetlands  and  aquatic  lands  are  generally 
represented by lakes, rivers and marshes associated with these lakes and rivers (MINITERE 
2005).  The  water  resources  are  mainly  influenced  by  rainfall  and  evaporation  and  hence 
climate information and preparedness are essential in the management of water resources 
(NBI 2005) 
Rwanda is divided into two major drainage basins: the Nile to the east covering 67 per cent 
and delivering 90 per cent of the national waters and the Congo to the west which covers 33 
per cent and handles all national waters (Chemonics International Inc. 2003, MINITERE 2005, 
NBI 2005).  
The  country’s  hydrological  network  includes  numerous  lakes  and  rivers  and  its  associated 
wetlands. A recent inventory of marshlands in Rwanda conducted in 2008 identified shows 
860 marshlands, covering a total surface of 278 536 ha, which corresponds to 10.6 per cent 
of  the  country  surface,  101  lakes  covering  149487  ha,  and  861  rivers  totalling  6462  km  in 
length (REMA 2008).  
4.3.3.2  Major catchments  
The  major  lakes  include  Kivu,Bulera,  Ruhondo,  Muhazi,  Cyohoha,  Sake,  Kilimbi,  Mirayi, 
Rumira, Kidogo, Mugesera, Nasho, Mpanga, Ihema, Mihindi, Rwampanga and Bisoke.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
54 | P a g e  
The  major  rivers  include  the  Akagera,  Akanyaru,  Base,  Kagitumba,  Mukungwa,  Muvumba, 
Nyabarongo, and Ruvubu in the Nile Basin and Koko, Rubyiro, Ruhwa, Rusizi, Sebeya in the 
Congo Basin (Chemonics International Inc. 2003, Kabalisa 2006, NBI 2005).  
4.3.3.3  Ground water 
Ground  water  Data  on  ground  water  and  aquifers  in  Rwanda  is  incomplete.  However, 
information available estimates that the discharge for the available resource is 66m3 /second 
and there are about 22,000 recognized sources which have a discharge of 9.0 m3 /second 
(NBI 2005, Kabalisa 2006). Figure 3 shows the ground water potential in the country. 
4.3.3.4  Wetlands  
The  marshlands  are  the  most  physically  and  chemically  heterogeneous  of  all  aquatic 
ecosystems in Rwanda. They are in effect seasonal wetlands. The water table is near or above 
the  lowest  ground  surface  during  the  wet  season  and  they  do  not  have  large  flood  plains 
(generally less than 200m wide) or great length (Chemonics International Inc. 2003). The most 
recent  inventory  of  wetlands  was  conducted  in  2008  by  REMA  through  the  Integrated 
Management of Critical Ecosystems (IMCE) project funded by GEF and World Bank.  
This inventory showed that Rwanda has 860 marshlands and 101 lakes covering a total surface 
of 278,536 ha (10.6 per cent of the country surface area), and 149,487 ha, respectively (REMA 
2008). This inventory also found 861 rivers totalling 6,462 km in length. 41 per cent of the 
inventoried marshlands are covered by natural vegetation, 53 per cent are under  cropping, 
(which  represents  about  148  344  ha)  and  about  6  per  cent  are  fallow  fields.  The  biggest 
marshlands are associated with and clustered around the rivers. Rugezi and Kamiranzovu are 
high altitude wetlands, most of the others are low altitude. 
4.3.4    Soils 
The soils in the Project area are mainly oxisols particularly around the lakes and water bodies, 
vertisols  where  the  wetlands  are  found,  inceptisols  in  the  lowland  areas  between  the 
wetlands  and  the  Akagera  National  Park,  and  small  occurrences  of  entisols.    Most  of  the 
Project sites lies in relatively flat or gently undulating terrain, and soil loss is considered to 
be low.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
55 | P a g e  
Figure 4-2      Geological Map of Eastern Province  
         MININFRA, 2010 
4.3.5    Geology  
The  geology  of  Rwanda  generally  comprises  metamorphic  rocks  and  granitic  rocks  of  the 
Precambrian  Period.  Metamorphic  rocks  are  mostly  schists  produced  by  low  to  medium 
pressure  metamorphic  actions  of  sandy  to  muddy  sediments,  while  the  granitic  rocks  are 
intrusive rocks originating from metamorphic actions.  Metamorphic rocks of quartzite and 
schist  and  sedimentary  rocks  of  mudstone  and  sandstone  run  in  a  north-south  direction 
through the middle of Kayonza District (see Map 4-2). The lakes and marshes have sedimented 
alluviums, and alluvial layers composed of clay, sand and gravel layers are distributed along 
rivers and valley floors.11  
11 MININFRA (2010).  The Study of Improvement of Rural Water Supply in Eastern Province. Prepared by Japan 
Techno Co Ltd And Nippon Koei Co Ltd with support from JICA.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
56 | P a g e  
4.3.6    Climatic Conditions 
The  climate  of  Rwanda  is  dominated  by the  Inter  Tropical  Convergence  Zone  (ITCZ)  which 
passes  over  the  country  twice  a  year  and  is  further  modified  by  a  widely  varying  altitude 
across the country and by the presence of large adjacent water bodies of the great lakes. Most 
parts of the country benefit from two agriculture rainy seasons (February - May; September 
–  December).  The  duration  of  the  two  rainy  seasons  is  increasingly  variable,  ranging  from 
seven to nine months, with an annual rainfall amount of up to 1,500 mm.  
 Average temperature has increased by 0.29°C per decade from 1985 to 2015, with increased 
interannual variability over the last few decades (USAID, 2019). Analyses illustrate regional 
changes, such as in the Northern and Western provinces, where the rainy season is becoming 
shorter and more intense (Warner et al, 2015; Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2018). 
Overall, the total annual precipitation will be reduced in all provinces until Mid-century. Total 
rainfall  during  the  months  of  September  to  December  the  first  and  long  rainy  season  is 
predicted to be reduced by ~22 mm (from ~465 to 443 mm) while the shorter second rainy 
season March to May is predicted to be reduced by ~40 mm (from ~400 to 360 mm)). The 
average  annual  temperature,  TMean  will  increase  by  at  least  1.7⁰C  by  mid-century.  The 
hottest months of August and September are predicted to increase by 2.1 ⁰C, relative to a 
Historical average of ~21⁰C. The overall effect of these increases in TMean is likely to result in 
complex impacts on the agricultural sector, particularly when considered in combination with 
the predicted decreases in precipitation.  
4.3.6.1    Climate change and Variability impacts 
The productivity of smallholders in the tea, coffee and horticulture VCs is adversely affected 
by climate change and variability. Increasing temperatures, rainfall variability and events such 
as droughts reduce yields and have negative effects on volumes, costs and quality of produce. 
Specifically  for  the  tea  value  chain,  high  temperatures  may  lead  to  decreased  yields  and 
quality, reduced water content in the tea, dry weather pests and aggressive weed growth. On 
the other hand, excessive rain can lead to spread of fungal diseases, wet weather pests, poor 
drainage in low-lying areas, heavy soil erosion that results in reduced water holding capacity, 
poor soil nutrients, and poor bud break and shoot development. Rainfall variability affects the 
flowering  of  the  coffee  plants,  which  at  different  stages  of  maturity  poses  a  challenge  in 
disease management, insect management and harvesting. Models indicate that the impact of 
climate  change  will  be  highly  negative  for  arabica  coffees,  effectively  reducing  the  areas 
suitable for production by 20–50% by 2050. Impacts are highest in low latitudes and at low 
altitudes12.  The  changing  climate  also  poses  challenges  to  patterns  of  cherry  ripening  and 
drying  of  parchment  because  of  unpredictable  rainfall  patterns  as  well  as  uncertainty 
regarding the  timing of fertilizer  application  and  drying.  Climate  change may  also result  in 
shifts in production areas due to the risk of increasing temperature and increasing pests and 
diseases13. The adverse on productivity are also expected for the horticulture value chains 
included under PSAC.  
12 Value Chain Analysis for the Coffee Sector in Rwanda, AgriLogic Report for the CBI (2018) 
13 Adaptation of Small-Scale Tea and Coffee Farmers in Kenya to Climate Change African Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation 
(2021). 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
57 | P a g e  
4.3.6.2    Projected Changes to Temperature in Rwanda by 2050 
The predicted trends in Mean Monthly Temperature (TMean) for the period from ‘Historical’ 
to ‘Future 2050’ timepoints indicate that climate change will result in consistent increases in 
Mean Temperature across spatial and temporal dimensions in Rwanda. A common prediction 
across each of the country’s five provinces is that TMean will increase in all provinces during 
the period from ‘Historical’ to ‘Mid-Century’ timepoints by at least 1.7°C. The hottest months 
of August and September are predicted to increase by 2.1°C, relative to a Historical average 
of 21°C. Similar increases of 1.7–2.2°C are predicted for all other months of the year. 
The overall effect of these increases in TMean and TMin is likely to result in complex impacts 
on the agricultural sector, particularly when considered in combination with the predicted 
decreases in precipitation. The large increases in temperature (1.7–2.1°C) in the months of 
October–December will increase crop water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water 
from agricultural soils, coinciding with the reduced rainfall predicted for the same months. 
This  effect  is  likely  to  increase  the  risks  of  crop failure  as  a  result of  inadequate  or  erratic 
rainfall during the establishment of rainfed crops, particularly for climate sensitive or marginal 
crops such as horticultural/vegetable crops such as tomatoes and peppers. Furthermore, the 
increased average temperatures are likely to include increased frequency or severity of heat 
waves and unusually hot days, further contributing to evapotranspirative losses of water and 
crop stress.14 Table 4-1 shows the projected influence of climate change on mean monthly 
temperature (°C) in Rwanda at historical and mid-century periods, and monthly anomalies 
between the two time periods. 
Table 4-1      Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly temperature (°C). 
The changing climate conditions are creating grater uncertainty for the Rwanda tea industry. 
The planning for new plantations must take care of climate uncertainty. Existing plantations 
need to be managed to be more resilient to rising temperatures, and the increased risk of 
flooding and landslides. 
Lower-lying plantations are already “marginal” in terms of producing quality tea. The rising 
temperatures will further reduce the quality of tea and coffee as current growing areas will 
become too hot for growing the current varieties.  
The climate-resilient innovation is to plan future plantations in locations that take account of 
the warmer climate such as higher, cooler regions.  
14  Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future Crop Suitability in Rwanda Funded by ‘Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme’ (ASAP) Phase 2. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Produced by the University of Cape Town 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
58 | P a g e  
Tea producers need to take into consideration longer-term climate changes since it takes five 
years for new bushes to mature and more than ten years before producers see a return on 
investment. - Thus, new plantations mean that the producers are locked into their investment 
decisions for decades, up to 50 years or more. 
New plantations need to be planned with this future climate in mind and be located on higher 
altitude  areas  where  they  will  be  more  likely  to  produce  good  quality  leaves  for  several 
decades. The tea industry must expand into areas that are suited to the kind of climate the 
region will experience in the coming decades. This means including a number of stakeholders 
from across the value chain: 
•  The large international companies which operate the factories that process and 
sell the tea. 
•  The small holder farmers which dominate tea production in Rwanda and are 
more vulnerable to climate change. 
4.3.6.3    Projected Changes to Rainfall in Rwanda by 2050 
The predicted changes in mean monthly precipitation from the historical baseline to the mid-
century (2050) future indicate that climate change will result in complex changes in rainfall 
across provinces and months (see Table 2). A common prediction across each of the country’s 
five  provinces  is  that  total  annual  precipitation  will  be  reduced  in  all  provinces  during  the 
period from baseline to Mid Century timepoints. The total rainfall received during the months 
of  September  to  December  at  the  onset  of  the  first,  long  rainy  season  is  predicted  to  be 
reduced from 465 to 443 mm (total reduction of rainfall of 22 mm). Similarly, total rainfall at 
the  onset  of  the  shorter  second  rainy  season  in  the  months  of  March,  April  and  May  is 
predicted to be reduced from 400 to 360mm (total reduction of rainfall of 40mm).  
An additional effect of climate change predicted by these analyses is the increase in monthly 
rainfall  during  the  months  of  December  and  January.  These  results  may  be  indicative  of  a 
delay in the onset of the traditional rainy seasons, or alternatively may indicate that rainy 
seasons (particularly season A, September-December) may effectively be extended for one to 
two months. It should be noted that these effects are likely to vary on an interannual basis as 
well  as  spatially  within  each  season,  and  the  consequent  impacts  on  agricultural  activities 
cannot be predicted with certainty. In some cases, the average reduction in monthly rainfall, 
notably during the months of September-October may result in inadequate rainfall to support 
effective establishment of crops during the period which is traditionally associated with the 
start of each growing season. Alternatively, the positive anomalies (i.e., predicted increases) 
in monthly rainfall in the months of December  – January may indicate an extension in the 
duration of the rainy season A, thereby providing farmers with the option to extend or stagger 
the timing of crop establishment.  
These analyses indicate that climate change may delay the onset of rainfall relative to the 
traditional  agricultural  calendar,  in  turn  resulting  in  changes  to  the  timing  of  various 
agricultural  activities  such  as  field  preparation  and  sowing  of  seed.  Both  of  the  rainfed 
agricultural growing seasons are characterised by monthly rainfall deficits which may result 
in  fundamental  changes  to  local  crop  choices  and  agricultural  practices  by  the  year  2050. 
Drought sensitive crops such as tomatoes are likely to be increasingly unreliable or poor in 
yield, which will be further exacerbated by predicted increases in temperature. Table 3. shows 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
59 | P a g e  
the  projected  influence  of  climate  change  on  mean  monthly  precipitation  (mm/month)  in 
Rwanda at historical and mid-century periods, and monthly anomalies between the two time 
periods. 
Table 4-2      Projected influence of climate change on mean monthly precipitation. 
(MM/MONTH). 
The  changing  climate  conditions  are  creating  grater  uncertainty  for  the  Rwanda  tea 
industry. The planning for new plantations must take care of climate uncertainty. Existing 
plantations  need  to  be  managed  be  more  resilient  to  rising  temperatures,  and  the 
increased risk of flooding and landslides. Lower-lying plantations are already “marginal” 
in terms of producing quality tea. The rising temperatures will further reduce the quality 
of tea and coffee as current growing areas will become too hot for growing the current 
varieties. The climate-resilient innovation is to plan future plantations in locations that 
take account of the warmer climate such as higher, cooler regions.  
Tea producers need to take into consideration longer-term climate changes since it takes 
five  years  for  new  bushes  to  mature  and  more  than  ten  years  before  producers  see  a 
return on investment. - Thus, new plantations mean that the producers are locked into 
their investment decisions for decades, up to 50 years or more. 
New plantations need to be planned with this future climate in mind and be located on 
higher altitude areas where they will be more likely to produce good quality leaves for 
several decades. The tea industry must expand into areas that are suited to the kind of 
climate the region will experience in the coming decades. This means including a number 
of stakeholders from across the value chain: 
• 
• 
The large international companies which operate the factories that process and 
sell the tea. 
The small holder farmers which dominate tea production in Rwanda and are 
more vulnerable to climate change. 
4.3.6.4    Occurrence of Floods and Droughts 
In 2015, the Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs (MIDIMAR) published the 
National Risk Atlas. This report encompasses a comprehensive assessment of existing risks at 
national and local levels. It highlights that over the last decade, the frequency and severity of 
natural disasters, such as floods and droughts, have significantly increased. The National Risk 
Atlas highlights the most known disasters as the droughts that occurred in 1989, 2000, 2005-
2006 and 2014 and the devastating landslides that occurred in 1988, 2006, 2010, 2011 mainly 
in the Northern and Western provinces. The extreme weather events have recently destroyed 
crops, caused serious environmental degradation and led to food insecurity, malnutrition and 
famine in affected areas, with water shortages affecting livestock and pasture productions. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
60 | P a g e  
Below  is  a  table  summarizing  main  climate  change  projections  and  potential  impacts  on 
agriculture and livestock production. 
Table 4-3      Scenarios analysis of potential climate change impacts on agriculture sector. 
 (2018)  
No. 
CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS 
POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON AGRICULTURE 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Increasing trend in mean temperature 
(projected annual mean temperature 
increases between 0.10oC and 0.30oC  
Decreasing trend in mean rainfall and 
a number of rainy days coupled with 
more  days  with  extreme  rainfall 
intensities  particularly  in  the  eastern 
and parts of southern region  
in  rainfall 
Increase 
in 
north-west  highlands  and  south-
western regions  
intensities 
More frequent violent storms (strong 
thunders, 
winds, 
torrential rains) 
hailstorms, 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Decrease in tea and coffee production. 
Leads to significant reduction of crop yields of 
Horticulture. 
Shift in pest ecologies, and thus resulting in pest and 
diseases outbreaks in new areas. 
Heat stress affects physiological processes, health and 
mortality of plants. 
Late harvests, delay of sowing in the next season, 
seasonal crop failures and low yield. 
Famines and food insecurity. 
Increased use of swamps for agricultural purposes will 
soon or later also have implications for overall water 
balance in the country and its availability for agriculture 
Increase soil loss and nutrient leaching from soil, thus 
challenging agricultural productivity growth. 
Increased runoff during heavy storms destroys existing soil 
conservation facilities, increase sedimentation of lakes and 
ponds thus altering fish habitats  
Crop damage or total crop destruction and thus yield 
reduction. 
Increased flooding and landslides destroying crops 
cultivated on vulnerable/fragile areas such as valleys and 
steep slopes 
4.4      SOCIO-ECONOMIC BASELINE 
4.4.1    Political and Civil Administration 
The Rwandan State is an independent, sovereign, democratic, social and secular Republic. The 
principle  governing  the  Republic  is  "government  of  the  people,  by the  people  and  for  the 
people". 
Rwanda  recognises  a  multi-party  system  of  government.  Without  prejudice  to  the 
independence  of  each  political  organization  and  their  collaboration,  political  organizations 
officially recognized in Rwanda organize themselves in a consultative forum. 
The President of the Republic and the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies shall belong to 
different political organizations.  Judges, prosecutors as well as members of the armed forces, 
police  and  National  Security  Service  are  not  permitted  to  be  members  of  political 
organizations. 
The branches of government are: i) the legislature; ii) the executive; and iii) the judiciary. The 
three branches are separate and independent from one another but are all complementary.  
The country counts the highest women representation in parliament globally (61%), with the 
cabinet and local governance institutions also counting about 50 percent of women. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
61 | P a g e  
The  territory  of  Rwanda  is  divided  into  Provinces,  Districts,  Cities,  Municipalities,  Towns, 
Sectors  and  Cells.  Districts,  Municipalities,  Towns  and  the  City  of  Kigali  are  decentralized 
entities with legal status and administrative and financial autonomy and are the foundation 
of  community  development.  Currently,  there  are  4  provinces  led by appointed  Governors, 
and the city of Kigali, 30 districts led with elected mayors from the district advisory council, 
416 sectors. 
4.4.2    Population and Demographic Conditions 
4.4.2.1    Demography. 
Rwanda is home to approximately 1.3 million people, 76 percent of whom live in the rural. 
The  current  population of  Rwanda  is  13,674,901.  Rwanda 2020 population  is  estimated at 
12,952,218  people  at  mid-year  according  to  UN  data.  Rwanda  population  is  equivalent  to 
0.17%  of  the  total  world  population.  It  ranks  number  76  in  the  list  of  countries  (and 
dependencies) by population. The population density in Rwanda is 525 per Km2 (1,360 people 
per mi2). The total land area is 24,670 Km2 (9,525 sq. miles). 17.6 % of the population is urban 
(2,281,330 people in 2020). The median age in Rwanda is 20.0 years. (Worldometer, 2022) 
4.4.2.2    Human development. 
Rwanda’s HDI value for 2019 is 0.543— which put the country in the low human development 
category— positioning it at 160 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 1990 and 2019, 
Rwanda’s HDI value increased from 0.248 to 0.543, an increase of 119.0 percent. Between 
1990  and  2019,  Rwanda’s  life  expectancy  at  birth  increased  by  35.6  years,  mean  years  of 
schooling  increased  by  2.7  years  and  expected  years  of  schooling  increased  by  5.5  years. 
Rwanda’s GNI per capita increased by about 130.9 percent between 1990 and 2019.15 
4.4.3    Land Tenure and Land use. 
4.4.3.1    Land Tenure 
The 2004 National Land Policy provides general guidance on a rational and planned use of 
land while ensuring sound land management and efficient land administration. The policy was 
developed to address land-related challenges, including a land tenure that was dominated by 
customary  law,  resulting  in  land  fragmentation, a  practice that  reduces further  the  size  of 
family farms below the threshold of the average surface area that is economically viable.  
Law  no  43/2013  of  16/06/2013  governing  land  in  Rwanda  determines  land  allocation 
modalities, acquisition, transfer, use and management. The law clearly stipulates private 
or individual land ownership in Article 10, the certificate of land allocation in Article 18 
and the transfer of land rights upon prior consent by all registered rights holders on the 
land title in Articles 21 and 22. The law maintains the supreme powers of the State to 
manage  all  national  land  in  the  interest  of  Rwandans,  for  sustainable  economic 
development and to ensure social welfare. The law substantiates how land will remain a 
domain  of  the  past,  present  and  the  future.  Furthermore,  the  2015  expropriation  law 
determines the procedures for land expropriation in the public interest.  
15 UNDP, Human Development Report 2020 - https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/RWA.pdf 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
62 | P a g e  
Law  No  43/2013,  currently  governing  land  in  Rwanda,  provides  equal  access  to  land 
without discrimination based on sex or origin. It is mandatory to register land property to 
both spouses married in a community and spousal consent is now required for transfer of 
the  property.  The  law  provides  further  guidance  on  land  access  through  emphyteutic 
leases.  Owners  of  agricultural  land  in  rural  areas  may  be  granted  99-year  renewable 
leasehold and shorter leases of up to 49 years for foreigners.  
4.4.3.2    Land Use 
The 4th phase of Rwanda’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA 4) 
for  2018202416  indicates  that  96%  of  rural  households  rely  directly  or  indirectly  on 
agriculture for their livelihoods. PSTA 4 observes that 30% of the households cultivate less 
than  0.2  ha  (accounting  for  about  five  per  cent  of  total  arable  land),  while  about  25% 
cultivate more than 0.7 ha (accounting for 65 per cent of the national farmland). It further 
states that the remaining 15% of rural household farm less than 0.1ha many of whom are 
female-headed households, cultivating only 1.32% of national cultivable land. 
The Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV 3) of 201317 reported that the 
proportion  of  households  cultivating  the  smallest  areas,  with  under  0.3  ha  of  land 
represent 46.4% in Kayonza District: slightly higher than the national level average (46%). 
Figure 4 displays a proposed land use map of Kayonza District featuring land use socio-
economic,  infrastructure  and  environment  land  use  classes.  Socio-economic  classes  of 
land use include urban areas, built up areas, imidugudu (villages), educational facilities, 
health facilities, markets and trading centres, milk collection stations, industrial plants, 
mineral deposits and mining concessions and areas of national interest for tourism. The 
infrastructure land use class features national roads with 22m road reserves, district roads 
with 16m road reserves, power lines with 200m buffer areas around them.  
The  National  Land  Use  and  Development Master  Plan  (NLUDMP)  of 201318  establishes 
environment land use buffer zones as follows:  
•  Hydrological lines - 10m   
Lakes -  50m   
• 
•  Wetlands - 20m,   
•  Valuable  agriculture  land,  forest,  Akagera  National  Park,  economic  zones  of 
Akagera  National  Park,  slopes  of  more  than  30  degrees  proposed  for 
reforestation and drought risk area - 1km.  
However, the enforcement of the 1 km buffer zone remains a challenge, as people are 
already inhabiting and cultivating within the buffer zones, and moreover, the GoR has also 
given concessions for development within 1km of the parks, for example for the Bramin 
and Buffet schemes. REMA has recently commissioned a revision of the National Land Use 
16 http://www.minagri.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/AJSR/PSTA_4_Approved_by_the_ 
Cabinet.pdf  
17 http://www.statistics.gov.rw/survey-period/integrated-household-living-conditions-survey-3-
eicv-3  
18 http://www.minirena.gov.rw/index.php?id=61&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=182&cHash= 
83e58f1a5f0daba584733e8d69be3182  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
63 | P a g e  
and Development Master Plan specifically to review the 50m buffer zone and land use 
within the buffers by the lakes, as well as for steep slopes. 
4.4.4    Socio-Economic Conditions 
4.4.4.1    Poverty.  
While in the past 20 years, poverty in Rwanda has declined, 38.2 percent of the population 
continue  to  live  below  the  poverty line  and  around 57%  of the  population  are  either food 
insecure  or  close  to  being  food  insecure.  Rwanda’s  increased  food  insecurity  in  spite  of 
monetary poverty reduction, is linked to a set of inter-related underlying causes: small plot 
sizes,  limited  land  availability,  low  productivity  in  subsistence  agriculture  and  low  farmers’ 
purchasing power. These factors are accentuated by erratic weather patterns including intense 
rains  in  some  locations  and  recurrent  droughts  in  others19.  Poverty  is  highest  among 
households that depend on income from seasonal labour and own little or no land. Resource 
poor rural households who cultivate small plots are the most food insecure20. 
4.4.4.2    Gender 
The latest Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based inequalities in health, 
empowerment and economic dimensions, ranks Rwanda 92nd out of 162 countries. According 
to  the  national  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  Study  from  2020,  the  largest 
contributor  to  women’s  disempowerment  in  Rwanda  is  workloads21.  Access  to  credit, 
decisions  on  credit,  and  difficulty  speaking  publicly  also  are  important  contributors  to 
disempowerment. Among the three PSAC target provinces (Southern, Western and Eastern), 
additional  constraints  to  empowerment  for  women  include  also  the  purchase,  sale  and 
transfer of assets.  
In  terms  of  economic  opportunities,  both  men  and  women  in  Rwanda  face  constraints  in 
accessing markets and finance. However, men have more access and control over agriculture 
resources at household level compared with women22. The Revised National Gender Policy 
from 202123, notes that women remain present at the subsistence level of agricultural value 
chain-production  due  to  inadequate  access  to  agricultural  inputs  and  extension  services 
among others 
is 
internationally  recognized  for 
in  gender-equal 
While  Rwanda 
parliamentary representation, health, and education24, persisting discriminatory social norms 
which  negatively  affect  women’s  decision-making  power  and  opportunities  for  economic 
participation, remain in place. The 2020 UN gender social norms index25, which looks at four 
dimensions (political, educational, economic and physical integrity) and captures how social 
beliefs can obstruct gender equality notes that in Rwanda almost 90% of people hold some 
kind of bias against women. These biases are especially related to physical integrity including 
its  achievements 
19 EICV4,2014 
20 Almost 60% of food insecure households are vulnerable and 30% are extremely vulnerable CFSVA (2018). 
21 Women’s Empowerment Agriculture Index Study (WEAI), 2020, Baseline report, DFID 
22 NpM, 2020, Financial services for women. Case studies on women’s participation in the maize and bean value chains in Rwanda. 
23MIGEPROF,  Revised  National  Gender  Policy,  Accelerating  the  Effectiveness  of  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  Accountability  for 
National Transformation 2021 
24WEF. 2019. Global gender gap report 2020. Cologny/Geneva: World Economic Forum 
25  UNDP  (2020)  Tackling  Social  Norms  -  A  Game  Changer  for  Gender  Inequalities:  2020  Human  Development  Perspectives 
https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hd_perspectives_gsni.pdf  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
64 | P a g e  
intimate partner violence and reproductive rights. This is particularly significant given that in 
Rwanda, among women aged 15-49, 37% have experienced physical violence since age 15 and 
23% have ever experienced sexual violence. The corresponding proportions among men are 
30% and 6% 26. 
4.4.4.3    Youth 
Rwanda is a young country, where working age youth (16 to 30 years old) represent 77 percent 
of the rural population. Yet, the involvement of youth in agriculture is low, only a quarter of 
farmers (26.6%) are between 16 and 30 years old27. Young people are also amongst the most 
vulnerable sectors of the population: in Rwanda, almost 30 per cent of young people live in 
households that are below the poverty line. Gender disparities also exist, with more young 
women extremely poor (12 per cent) compared to men (10.4 per cent) in 2016/201728. 
Young rural people in rural areas are mostly literate (83 per cent, with no significant difference 
between males and females); however, the level of education is low and the percentage of 
young people  attending tertiary  education and  technical  or  vocational  is  extremely  limited 
(only 2.8 per cent of the rural youth population)29 which challenges their involvement in the 
formal labour market. Indeed, precarious forms of employment with low level of earning is 
the main employment problem for the youth.  
Root causes of rural youth unemployment in agriculture are mostly related to lack of access 
to  productive  assets  and  natural  resources,  goods  and  services;  lack  of  knowledge  and 
technical and business skills; a negative perception of agriculture among youth and a non-
conducive environment for youth employment30. These constraints limit rural youth’s ability 
to develop successful agri-businesses schools. 
4.4.4.4    Nutrition 
Nationally, 38 % of children under 5 years are stunted. Stunting increases with the age of the 
child up until 23 months, rising from 18 % among children 6–8 months to a peak of 49% among 
children 18–23 months.31 Forty-one percent of rural children are stunted, as compared with 
24 % of urban children. Both a mother’s level of education and wealth quintile have a clear 
inverse relationship with prevalence of stunting. Underweight (low weight for age) affects 9% 
of  children  under  5  while  wasting,  (acute  malnutrition  or  low  weight  for  height)  which  is 
associated  with a  high death  rate,  affects  2.2%  of  children under  5  (wasting  rates  <5%  are 
considered  within  an  acceptable  range).  In  addition  to  chronic  and  acute  malnutrition, 
anaemia levels in children under 5 are high and the pace of reduction is slow while steadily 
increasing in prevalence among women. Currently, anaemia affects 37% of Rwandan children 
under 5 and 19% of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) (RDHS 2015). 
26 Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20  
27 Agricultural households survey, 2020 
28  EICV5, 2016/2017, Thematic Report, Youth.  
29   In the Eastern Province of Rwanda, 83% of the rural youth population is literate and more than 90% have attained schools, 
even from the poorest quintiles; however, only 1.7% attained tertiary education and 2.8 % has attained technical and vocational 
schools. Source: NISR, EICV5, 2016/2017. Education Thematic Report 
30   Source: IFAD, 2019, Creating Employment Opportunities for Rural Youth in Africa: Support to integrated agribusiness hubs, 
Grant Design Report.  
31 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) [Rwanda], Ministry of Health (MOH) [Rwanda], and ICF International. 2015. 
Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-15. Rockville, Maryland, USA: NISR, MOH, and ICF International. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
65 | P a g e  
4.4.4.5    Marginalised groups 
Apart from the Twa, socially vulnerable groups include households with older people aged 
above 65 years and persons with disabilities (PWD). Households with older people aged above 
65 years, have a poverty rate 5.7 percent higher than the national average with 79.1 percent 
regarded as poor or vulnerable to falling into poverty. There are 511,738 older persons (60 
and above) living in Rwanda out of a total population of 10,515,973 inhabitants. The older 
Persons are composed of 207,239 older men and 304,499 older women. Thus, older Persons 
represent  4.9%  of  the  total  resident  population.  7.4%  of  the  older  persons  receive  formal 
pension from the Social Security Fund for Rwanda (SSFR), since in the context of high levels of 
poverty  and  the  lack  of  formal  employment,  only  a  fraction  of  older  people  will  have 
contributed to a pension32. The households with older people are particularly vulnerable in 
the absence of assistance from Government 
4.4.4.6    Impacts of the covid-19 pandemic. 
COVID-19 pandemic had a major impact on unemployment in the first half of 2020 with 53.4 
percent of the rural population reported out of work, 22.6 percent were self-employed, 9,6 
percent  casual  employment,  and  14.2  percent  were  engaged  in  formal  employment. 
Lubombo, the poorest region in the country, recorded the highest rates of unemployment, 
which were almost 20 points higher than the national average. 
The  development  of  more  profitable  agricultural  livelihoods  for  smallholders  requires 
investments  to  address  production,  productivity,  post-harvest  losses,  value  addition  and 
market  access.  Investments  at  different  levels  of  the  agricultural  value  chain  have  the 
potential to generate rural employment. 
4.4.5    Livelihood Conditions 
Eighty  percent  of  all  households  are  food  secure,  which  corresponds  to  about  1,963,975 
households.  However,  979,045  (40%)  of  these  households  are  considered  marginally  food 
secure,  meaning  they  are  at  high  risk  of  becoming  food  insecure.  Of  the  473,847  (17%) 
households considered food insecure, 63,696 (3%) are severely food insecure. The level of 
food insecurity is particularly high in the western and northern parts of the country, especially 
in the livelihood zones of Western Congo Nile Crest Tea Zone (49%), Lake Kivu Coffee Zone 
(37%), and the Northern Highland Beans and Wheat Zone (32%). At the provincial level, the 
Western  Province  is  most  concerning,  with  over  35%  of  its  households  considered  food 
insecure. Although the Western Province holds 22% of the country’s households, 42% of all 
severely food insecure households in Rwanda are found there. At the district level, Rutsiro 
(57%), Nyamagabe (42%), Nyabihu (39%), Nyaruguru (37%), Rusizi (36%), Karongi (35%), and 
Nyamasheke (35%) have the highest percentages of households classified as food insecure33. 
Figure 2 depicts the food security situation in Rwanda.  
The poorest and most food insecure households are more likely to have women with low level 
of  education,  children  suffering  from  undernutrition  and  stunting  and  persons  with 
disabilities. To tackle the multiple barriers that traditionally prevent very poor and vulnerable 
households  from  improving  livelihoods  (access  to  land  and  assets,  lack  of  capacities,  poor 
culture  of  saving,  lower  position  and  decision-making  power  in  representing  organization, 
32 Republic of Rwanda, NISR, Fourth Population and Housing Census 2012, Thematic Report, Socio-Economic Status of Older people, January 2014   
33  WFP, MINAGRI and NISR (2015). Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis Report (CFSVA). Kigali, Rwanda. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
66 | P a g e  
etc.) and enable them to gradually improve their livelihoods, a social inclusion strategy will be 
required, directly targeting the poorest households with services and activities 
4.4.6    Agriculture 
The Rwandan economy is, and will remain for the foreseeable future, heavily dependent on 
the agricultural sector, with over 80 percent of its population depend directly or indirectly on 
the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector represents 30.9 percent, and the industry sector 
represents 15.8 percent of GDP (WB, 2017). The sector employs around 90 percent of the 
population, provides 91 percent of the food consumed in the country, and accounts for 70 
percent  of  revenue  from  exports.  Agriculture  is  also  important  for  national  food  self-
sufficiency,  accounting  for  well  over  90  percent  of  all  food  consumed  in  the  country. 
Interestingly,  66% of  the  total  food  crops  are  meant  for domestic  consumption  while only 
34% find their way to the market. 
Although marketable surpluses have begun to increase, the relatively poor performance of 
the agricultural sector has been a major impediment to economic development, and it now 
faces further challenges due to climate change as a consequence of global warming. Further, 
harvest and post-harvest losses are still relatively high, at 20 percent for key commodities, 
thus the full production potential is not being realised. Improving post-harvest management 
and provision of infrastructures in this regard is important. 
4.4.7    Labour and Migration 
4.4.7.1    Labour 
Total labour force comprises people ages 15 and older who meet the International Labour 
Organization definition of the economically active population: all people who supply labour 
for  the  production  of  goods  and  services  during  a  specified  period.  It  includes  both  the 
employed and the unemployed. While national practices vary in the treatment of such groups 
as the armed forces and seasonal or part-time workers, in general the labour force includes 
the armed forces, the unemployed, and first-time jobseekers, but excludes homemakers and 
other  unpaid  caregivers  and  workers  in  the  informal  sector.  The  agriculture  sector 
establishments  in  Rwanda  had  a  total  of  30,044  labour  units  employed  as  managers, 
professionals (engineers), liberal professionals, technicians and artisans. In terms of gender, 
men constitute 56.6% and women 43.4% of the total labour units. 85.2% of the employees 
were  agricultural  artisans,  10.8%  technicians  and  2.4%  managers.  Scientists,  professionals, 
and liberal professionals constituted 0.7% and 0.9% respectively. 
4.4.7.2    Migration. 
Analysis for  Rwanda  shows  that urbanisation has  accounted for  37%  of national  structural 
change (GDP growth through labour reallocation across employment sectors). Urban areas 
have accounted for 48% of national labour productivity growth over the past 15 years34.  Age 
is not a significant predictor of underemployment (i.e., working less than 35 hours per week), 
but gender and migration status are Research from Kigali shows a strong link between where 
34 (Diao et al., 2017; World Bank, 2018b) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
67 | P a g e  
people live and the sector of activity in which they work35. Over 70% of household heads live 
within 2km from their workplace (straight-line distance), with an estimated 44% of employed 
heads-of-household working in the administrative sector in which they live. This data suggests 
that  different  parts  of  the  city  specialise  in  different  types  of  economic  activities.  This  is 
particularly true for traders, who are more likely to live and work close to the city centre. 
4.4.7.3    Child labour. 
In 2021, Rwanda made moderate advancement in efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child 
labour.  Rwanda  finalized  a  new  national  action  plan  to  combat  human  trafficking  and 
launched a new hotline for the public to report child abuse, including child labour. They are 
subjected to the worst forms of child labour, including in forced domestic work. Children also 
perform  dangerous  tasks  in  mining,  including  carrying  heavy  loads.  Reports  indicate  that 
government officials have detained children subjected to commercial sexual exploitation and 
forced  street  begging  in  transit  centres  intended  for  individuals  demonstrating  so-called 
deviant behaviours, in which children often experience physical abuse. 
 National data show that approximately 3.6 percent of all children in Rwanda are engaged in 
child labour, primarily in the agriculture and services sectors. In a survey of working children 
between ages 5 and 17 from 11 districts in the country, Rwanda's National Commission for 
Human Rights reported in 2020 that more than half of the respondents indicated that they 
performed  some  type  of  hazardous  labour,  including  carrying  heavy  loads,  working  in 
construction and brick kilns, and mining. Officials have indicated that children in mining often 
drop  out  of  school  and  work  in  abandoned  artisanal  mines  with  their  parents.  During  the 
reporting period, police in the Musanze district of Northern Province indicated that hundreds 
of children had dropped out of school, and many had begun working in the sugarcane and 
brick-making industries. Poverty was identified as the key factor contributing to child labour, 
which in turn led to an increased incidence of children dropping out of school36. 
35 Hitayezu et al., 2018. 
36  Bureau  of  international  affairs  2021  available  https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-
labor/rwanda 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
68 | P a g e  
5. 
CONSULTATION AND PUBLIC DISCLOSURE 
5.1      CONSULTATIONS 
Consultation is an essential part of the project cycle. Understanding the views from various 
stakeholders is critical for confirming relevance of proposed interventions, for effectiveness 
and  efficiency  of  proposed  approaches  and  for  impact  and  sustainability  of  the  intended 
positive changes.  
PSAC has been designed in close consultation with a wide group of stakeholders, the details 
of which can be found in the PDR. The PSAC design furthermore includes strong participatory 
design principles and processes, which go beyond consultation. 
5.2      PUBLIC CONSULTATION PLAN 
The  implementing  agency  of  the  PSAC  project  has  the  responsibility  to  effectively  engage 
stakeholders in achieving the project objectives for the benefit of all. This public consultation 
plan (PCP) forms part of the ESCMF and is the same for all categories of sub-projects. It is for 
use during public consultation in the screening processes for every PSAC funded project and 
sub-projects. 
5.3      OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN 
The  PCP  provides  a  framework  for  achieving  effective  stakeholder  involvement  and 
promoting greater awareness and understanding of issues so that the project is carried out 
effectively  within  budget  and  on-time  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  concerned.  To  ensure  the 
effective  implementation  of  this  plan,  Rwanda-  PSAC  shall  be  committed  to  the  following 
principles:  
• 
• 
• 
Promoting openness and communication, 
Ensuring effective stakeholder involvement, 
Evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  the  engagement  plan  in  accordance  with  the 
expected outcomes. 
The key elements of a Public Consultation Plan are: 
Stakeholder identification and analysis 
Information disclosure 
Stakeholder consultation 
Grievance management 
Stakeholder involvement in project monitoring 
Reporting to stakeholders 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Management functions. 
5.4      KEY STAKEHOLDERS 
Stakeholders of this project shall be defined as all those people and institutions that have an 
interest in the successful planning and execution of the project. This includes those likely to 
be positively and negatively affected by the project.: 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
The key stakeholders to be continuously engaged could include: 
1.  Rwanda Government Departments: 
•  MINALOC, Ministry of Local Government 
•  RAB, Rwanda Agriculture Board 
•  MINAFFET, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation 
•  MIGEPROF,  
•  BDF, Business Development Fund 
•  Rwanda Standards Board (RSB),  
•  Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), and  
•  HCoE.  
2.  Other Stakeholders 
•  Rural Entrepreneurs Tea and coffee 
•  Farmers associations  
•  Service Providers  
•  BRD, Rwanda Development Bank  
•  Farmers/farmers groups or associations, 
•  Women and Youth Councils /Associations  
The list above is not exhaustive. As the Programme gets underway, the NAEB will develop a 
detailed  PCP  identifying all  possible  stakeholders,  their  specific  information needs  and the 
appropriate modes of consultation as well as feedback mechanisms. 
5.5      CURRENT CONSULTATIONS 
5.5.1    Stakeholder Engagement 
A  variety  of  engagement  techniques  were  used  to  build  relationships  with  stakeholders, 
gather  information  from  stakeholders,  consult  with  stakeholders,  and  disseminate  project 
information to stakeholders. This engagement process will provide a framework for achieving 
effective stakeholder involvement and promoting greater awareness and understanding of 
issues so that the project is carried out effectively. 
For the proposed PSAC, the public consultations with the local communities, and all other 
interested/affected parties were conducted as part of the PDR development process. These 
consultations  were  aimed  at  briefing  the  communities  and  other  stakeholders  about  the 
project activities, how the activities will be carried out and what sectors of the environment 
are likely to be impacted. The public consultations were done in a participatory manner to 
encourage the communities to contribute to the screening process. 
Throughout  the  project  life,  the  engagement  techniques  that  will  be  used  will  take  into 
consideration  the  cultural  appropriateness  and  the  purpose  for  engaging  with  the 
stakeholders. Thus prior to any engagement event the following actions will occur: 
• 
Selection of individual stakeholders with whom engagement will occur, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
70 | P a g e  
• 
• 
Selection of methods for disclosure of information (including such topics as format, 
language, and timing), 
Selection of location and timing for engagement event(s) (avoiding busy work times, 
which may be seasonal, and days/times when special events may be occurring), 
•  Agreeing on mechanisms for ensuring stakeholder attendance at engagement 
event(s) (if required), 
Identification and implementation of feedback mechanisms to be employed. 
• 
The stakeholder engagement process for the preparation of this ESCMF was complicated by 
the  subsiding  COVID-19  pandemic  which  limited  the  study  team’s  movements  and 
consultations; thus, full scale site visits could not be conducted. For this reason, the approach 
that was used is presented below. 
5.5.2    The Engagement Process 
The engagement process for this project involves the following:  
Face to face interviews with Keys stakeholders,  
Focus group meetings, 
•  Visits to potential project sites, 
• 
• 
•  Virtual Meetings (Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Skype, etc), 
• 
•  Physical administration of Questionnaires, 
•  Direct observation and discussion in the field, 
•  General data Collection from all stakeholders. 
Electronic administration of Questionnaires. 
The general consultation techniques that will be used for the continuous engagement of the 
stakeholders throughout the project implementation phases are as listed below: 
Table 5-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques 
No. 
1. 
ENGAGEMENT 
TECHNIQUE 
Correspondences (Phone, 
Emails) 
2. 
One-on-one meetings 
3. 
Formal meetings 
4. 
Public meetings 
5. 
Focus group meetings 
APPROPRIATE APPLICATION OF THE TECHNIQUE 
•  Distribute information to Government officials, NGOs, Local Government, and 
organisations/agencies in the project area. 
Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up 
• 
•  Seeking views and opinions 
•  Enable stakeholder to speak freely about sensitive issues 
•  Build personal relationships 
•  Record meetings 
•  Present the Project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow group to comment – opinions and views 
•  Build impersonal relation with high level stakeholders 
•  Disseminate technical information 
•  Record discussions 
•  Present Project information to a large group of stakeholders, especially 
communities 
•  Allow the group to provide their views and opinions 
•  Build relationship with the communities, especially those impacted 
•  Distribute non-technical information 
•  Facilitate meetings with presentations, PowerPoint, posters etc. 
•  Record discussions, comments, questions. 
•  Present Project information to a group of stakeholders (8-15 people groups) 
•  Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline information 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
71 | P a g e  
No. 
ENGAGEMENT 
TECHNIQUE 
6. 
Project website 
7. 
Project leaflet 
8. 
Surveys 
9.  Workshops 
APPROPRIATE APPLICATION OF THE TECHNIQUE 
•  Build relationships with communities 
•  Record responses 
•  Present project information and progress updates  
•  Present GRM and another relevant project documentation 
•  Brief project information to provide regular update 
•  Site specific project information. 
•  Gathering opinions and views from individual stakeholders 
•  Gather baseline data 
•  Record data 
•  Develop a baseline database for monitoring impacts 
•  Present project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow a group of stakeholders to provide their views and opinions 
•  Use participatory exercises to facilitate group discussions, brainstorm issues, 
analyse information, and develop recommendations and strategies 
•  Record responses 
The engagement process will be a continuous issue throughout the life of the project and will 
be used as a means of checks and balances for the proper implementation of the project. The 
process  will  employ  a  technically  and  culturally  appropriate  approach,  which  involves 
identifying  the  concerned/affected  stakeholders,  soliciting  their  views,  and  continuously 
checking if their views are being taken care of as the project implementation progresses.  
5.5.3    Public Consultations 
Figure 5-1      Stakeholder Consultation Meeting at Abahuzamugambi Co-op. 
         (Abahuzamugambi Cooperative – Huye District.) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
72 | P a g e  
In  the  process  of  developing  the  current  ESCMF  the  local  stakeholders  were  consulted  to 
solicit  their  views  and  concerns  as  regards  the  proposed  intensification  of  agricultural 
activities resulting from the roll out of the tea, coffee and horticulture value chains. The list 
of the consulted stakeholders is included in appendix 4. 
5.5.3.1    Objectives of Consultations 
The Consultations involved gathering feedback on the information that had been given to the 
stakeholders about the project, as well as getting more information about local contexts that 
may not have been obvious, to raise issues and concerns, and to help shape the objectives 
and outcomes of the project. The objectives of consulting all these stakeholders were: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
To inform them of the proposed project and its likely impacts on their activities and 
general surroundings. 
To establish the Environmental, Economic, Social and Cultural aspects implications of 
the project on the different stakeholders. 
To gather the views of the stakeholders on the proposed project. 
To accommodate the stakeholders' suggestions and perceptions during the project 
implementation. 
5.5.3.2    Consultations with the major organizations. 
The consultations with the designated implementing or major organizations involved mainly 
meetings and one on one interviews. 
In  general,  the  aims  of  the  consultations  included  (i)  introducing  the  project  to  the 
Stakeholders; (ii) identifying together the potential environmental and social challenges the 
project  may  face;  (iii)  identifying  any  other  possible  challenges  and  how  they  should  be 
addressed or mitigated; and (iv) bringing on board the major stakeholders to garner project 
ownership from inception. 
5.5.3.3    Consultations with the public. 
The public consultations were done to raise awareness of the project by informing the public 
in  the  concerned  areas  through  their  local  leaders  and  some  public  gatherings  about  the 
upcoming programme in their areas. The public was also interviewed to gather their opinions 
regarding the programme and the environmental and social consequences that may result 
from its implementation. The stakeholders who were consulted are listed in appendix 4. 
5.5.3.4    Stakeholders Consulted  
The stakeholders consulted during this survey were: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Government ministries, 
District and village administration offices/ local leadership, 
Direct beneficiaries of the project (Members of Associations), 
potential beneficiary communities, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
73 | P a g e  
5.6      INFORMATION DISCLOSURE  
5.6.1    Information Disclosure to Consulted Stakeholders  
The type of information to be disclosed to the various stakeholders depends on their interests 
and how they will be affected by the Programme – or how PSAC activities may be affected by 
them. Thereafter various communication tools can be utilized for the engagement process, 
such as: 
•  Project notices published in local newspapers. 
•  Radio advertisements. 
•  Direct mailings to communities. 
•  Presentations with or without focus group sessions). 
•  Targeted e-mails. 
•  One-on-one  meetings,  presentations,  seminars,  workshops,  e-mails,  and  phone 
conversations with stakeholders. 
•  Site tours; and  
•  The use of social media. 
Table  5-5  below  gives  a  general  overview  of  the  types  of  information  needs  for  various 
stakeholder groups. 
Table 5-2      Summary Overview of a Public Consultation Plan for PSAC 
Stakeholders 
Information to be disclosed 
Consultation means 
No. 
1.0 
PSAC 
community, 
neighbouring  communities, 
general public 
Current  and  new  activities  and  how 
these  relate  to  them  in  terms  of 
opportunities and threats 
2.0 
Staff  /  workers  at  target 
Districts  
3.0 
Farmers Groups/Clusters 
Agricultural NGOs 
Farmer Union 
Agrochemical companies 
4.0 
get 
and 
Forum to express community / health 
e.g., 
fears 
feedback 
accidental 
release/escape, 
contamination. 
emergencies (fire) 
How  project  work  will  affect  their 
work 
including 
environments 
Occupational Health & Safety rules 
Consultation  on  agricultural  needs  / 
food security issues.  
Strengthen  management  capacity  of 
farm enterprises,  
Support  farmer  clusters  and  group 
development.  
Ensuring farmers groups/associations 
participate 
in  the  formulation  of 
agricultural policies and legislation 
Promoting 
of 
information  (climate,  prices,  pests 
and diseases, and markets) access to 
farmer groups 
Setting 
sustainable  development 
agenda for participating communities 
dissemination 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Local  leaders  i.e.,  Chief’s  or  Local 
community 
Churches, 
offices, 
social  media, 
national  media, 
Agriculture website etc. 
Public  consultations, 
discussions, social media. 
Training  specific  members  of  the 
communities, awareness, education 
focal  group 
Staff  newsletters,  bulletin  boards, 
email,  website,  meetings  with 
management,  staff  sensitization  & 
inhouse training programs. 
services, 
Agricultural 
Baseline surveys/subsequent surveys 
to monitor impacts, emails, bulletins 
Extension 
Intergovernmental  meetings  and 
consultations  
No. 
Stakeholders 
Information to be disclosed 
Consultation means 
Intergovernmental 
Institutions; 
WFP, etc 
University Graduates 
IFAD, 
5.0 
6.0 
Youths 
Capacity  building  for  participating 
communities.  
Build partnerships through meetings, 
seminars, workshops 
FAO, 
Website,  public  media,  bulletin 
boards 
Agricultural 
consultations 
Offices, 
public 
Internship opportunities 
Opportunities for employment during 
other 
implementation, 
project 
agro-processing 
opportunities 
value-addition 
which 
initiatives 
agro-processing, 
packaging,  and  promotion  of  value 
chains 
in 
involves 
in 
5.6.2    Disclosure of ESCMF Documents 
IFAD policies require that the Government of Rwanda, and IFAD disclose the ESCMF report as 
a separate and stand-alone document. The disclosure should be done by Rwanda, and IFAD 
where  it  can  be  accessed  by  the  public,  including  affected  groups  and  NGOs,  and  at  their 
respective websites.  
The  NAEB  will  make  copies  of  the  ESCMF  available  in  selected  public  places  possibly  at 
National relevant government offices for information and comments. The Proposed project 
activities will be announced through different forms of media. The announcement will include 
a brief description of the program, references to where and when the ESCMF can be viewed, 
duration of the display period, and contact information for comments.  
For meaningful consultations between the project client and possible project affected groups, 
beneficiaries and local NGOs on all “Moderate” Risk Category projects, the project client in 
this  particular  project  case  shall  provide  relevant  material  in  a  timely  manner  prior  to 
consultation and in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to the groups 
being consulted.  
5.6.3    Public Disclosure Plan 
Following the public consultation, all comments and briefs will be analysed. The report will be 
published and made available to the concerned community groups and to interested bodies 
upon request. 
In line with this, the ESCMF will be available at the relevant institutions at all levels and be 
publicly disclosed  both  in  country and  at  the  IFAD’s  websites.  The project  client  will  make 
copies  of the ESCMF available in selected public places in English and working language of 
the  country  in  compliance  with  the  IFAD’s  Public  Consultation  and  Disclosure  Policy.  It  is 
proposed  that  the  locations  of  copies  are  announced  through  public  relation  sections  of 
relevant  sector  line  Ministries,  radio  announcement  in  addition  to  press  releases,  as 
applicable.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
75 | P a g e  
Any ESCMPs and other safeguards instruments that will be prepared for the proposed project 
activities  under  the  program  will  also  needed  to  be  disclosed  to  the  public.  Copies  of  the 
ESCMPs  should  be  made  available  to  communities  and  interested  parties  in  accessible 
locations  through  local  government  authorities.  Copies  of  the  ESCMPs  should  also  be 
provided  to  the  implementing  agencies.  This  will  ensure  record  keeping  of  all  activities 
implemented under the ESCMF and ensure that third party audits, if required, have adequate 
information when undertaking annual environmental and social audits. 
5.6.4    Disclosure of documentation related to the SECAP process  
The IFAD policy on the disclosure of documents, approved in 2010, adopted the principle of 
“presumption  of  full  disclosure”  The  sharing  of  draft  and  final  ESCMFS  and  other  relevant 
documents with program and project stakeholders and interested parties will be subject to 
the above-mentioned principle. As such, the documents will be disclosed, when available, in 
a timely manner prior to project appraisal at the quality assurance stage on IFAD’s Website 
and in an accessible place in the program or project-affected area, in a form and language 
understandable  to  project-affected  parties  and  other  stakeholders,  for  the  purposes  of 
keeping  them  informed  and  obtaining  their  meaningful  feedback.  Comments  on  SECAP-
related  disclosed  documents  can  be  submitted  through  the  SECAP  Help  Desk  email  using: 
ecd_secap@ifad.org.  
5.7      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
A grievance redress mechanism is a process for receiving, evaluating and addressing project-
related  concerns  of,  and  complaints  by,  project  affected  communities  or  persons.  IFAD’s 
Grievance Redress Mechanism allows affected complainants to have their concerns resolved 
in a fair and timely manner through an independent process.  
IFAD’s  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  requires:  (i)  working  proactively  with  the  affected 
parties to resolve complaints; (ii) ensuring that the complaints procedure is responsive and 
operates effectively; and (iii) maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions. The 
Grievance Redress Mechanism is detailed in Appendix 8. The purpose of the grievance redress 
mechanism will be: 
•  To  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  beneficiaries  and  to  address  and  resolve  their 
grievances. 
•  To  serve  as  a  conduit  for  soliciting  inquiries,  inviting  suggestions,  and  increasing 
community participation. 
•  To collect information that can be used to improve operational performance. 
•  To enhance the project’s legitimacy among stakeholders. 
•  To promote transparency and accountability. 
•  To deter fraud and corruption and mitigate project risks. 
The principles of a good grievance redress mechanism are: 
•  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities, 
•  Designed  to  take  into  account  culturally  appropriate  ways  of  handling  community 
concerns, 
•  A  clear  and  understandable  mechanism  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
affected communities at no cost, 
•  Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
76 | P a g e  
•  A  mechanism  that  prevents  retribution  and  does  not  impede  access  to  other 
remedies, 
The key steps for grievance management are 
•  Publicizing grievance management procedures so that the mechanism is accessible to 
everyone, 
•  Receiving (i.e., collecting, recording and registering) and keeping track of grievances, 
•  Reviewing  and  investigating  grievances  to  assess  the  nature  of  the  grievance,  its 
severity and legitimacy, 
•  Developing  resolution  options  commensurate  with  the  nature  of  grievances  and 
preparing  and  communicating  a  clear  response,  and  closing  out  cases  when 
agreement with the complainants is reached, 
•  Monitoring  grievances  through  tracking  to  ascertain  effectiveness,  adapting  the 
mechanism to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and 
lessons learned. 
The NAEB will establish a grievance redress mechanism in line with the above requirements, 
at project start. Beyond the project-level grievance mechanism, project stakeholders may use 
IFAD’s Complaint Procedures that can be found at https://www.ifad.org/en/accountability-
and-complaints-procedures  
5.8      FEEDBACK AND MONITORING 
As  part  of  the  Public  Consultation  Plan  (PCP)  a  mechanism  for  providing  feedback  to  the 
stakeholders on  their particular  information needs  will be  set  up.  In  addition,  the  PCP  will 
include  means  for  monitoring  the  effectiveness  of  the  public  consultation  processes  and 
outcomes from consultations, and for determining where further action may be necessary in 
regard to engagement.  
The environmental and social safeguards specialists in NAEB will be responsible to ensure that 
the PCP is implemented throughout the life of the Program. They will also be responsible for 
communicating and reporting on all stakeholder matters to NAEB Manager.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
77 | P a g e  
6. 
SCREEENING, APPROVAL AND IMPLEMENTATION OF SUBPROJECTS 
6.1      INTRODUCTION 
This chapter covers the process  of determining the  sub-projects’ significant environmental 
and social consequences, deciding on the level of EA work to be done and then implementing 
the  developed  mitigation  measures.  The  PSAC  project  has  been  rated  environmental  and 
social assessment “Substantial” Risk Category and thus most of the subprojects will fall within 
this category. There will not be a “High” Risk Category subproject funded by PSAC. However, 
it  is  recommended  that  PSAC  should  avoid  sensitive  areas  and  take  steps  to  ensure  that 
subprojects stay within “Substantial” Risk Category.  
Thus, every subproject that will be funded under PSAC will require environmental and social 
screening. The screening will be done using the Environmental and Social Screening Form (see 
Appendix 1) together with information on typical subproject impacts and mitigation measures 
in the environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) (Tables 7-1, to 7-5). 
In  some  cases,  special  planning  reports  (e.g.,  IPMP,  etc.)  may  have  to  be  developed  and 
implemented.  These  will  require  extra  resources  to  prepare,  and  this  may  require 
amendments to the subproject design.  
The  sections  below  (6.3 –  6.7) detail  the  stages of the  environmental  and  social  screening 
process  (the  screening  process)  leading  towards  the  review  and  environmental  and  social 
approval of any subproject that will be undertaken in the PSAC. Each sub-project that will be 
funded through PSAC will have to undergo the Environmental and Social Screening Process, 
as outlined in Figure 6-2 below. 
6.2      SECAP SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 
SECAP  requires  that  each  project  that  is  funded  by  IFAD  be  screened  first,  in  order  to 
determine  its  significant  environmental  and  social  consequences.  The  screening  process 
enables  the  project  to  be  placed  under  one  of  four  categories,  i.e.,  High,  Substantial, 
Moderate,  and  low.  Figure  6-1  below  shows  SECAP’s  processes  for  screening.  (See  legal 
section for Categories) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
78 | P a g e  
Figure 6-1      IFAD's Screening Procedure for Projects   
Source: SECAP, 2017  
6.3      EXCLUSION LIST 
Table 6-1 below provides criteria based on which subprojects and activities which will not be 
eligible for financing under PSAC: 
Table 6-1      Subproject and Activity Exclusion List 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
The proposed PSAC project will automatically exclude subprojects that:  
Require acquisition of land and physical or economic displacement of people. 
Negative sub project list 
Block the access to or use of land, water points and other livelihood resources used by others 
Impact  on  physical  cultural  resources  of  national  or  international  importance  and  conservation 
value 
In addition to the above, any subprojects that would be categorised as  High-Risk Category 
subprojects will not be eligible for financing under PSAC.  
6.4      STAGES OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
79 | P a g e  
6.4.1    Desk Appraisal of the planned activities 
Each  selected  sub-project  site  will  be  subjected  to  a  rigorous  environmental  and  social 
screening  process.  The  initial  stage  is  a  desk  appraisal  of  the  planned  activities,  including 
designs. The desk appraisal will be carried out at the District Offices level by a technical team 
comprising experts from the MINAGRI, Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 
and  Ministry  of  Local  Government,  to  ensure  that  all  pertinent  environmental  and  social 
issues are identified. 
This  initial  screening  will  be  carried  out  through  the  use  of  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Screening Form (Appendix 1). This form will be completed by NAEB Environment Officers with 
assistance from the District Technical team. 
Completion of this screening form will facilitate the identification of potential environmental 
and  social  impacts,  determination  of  their  significance,  assignment  of  the  appropriate 
environmental  and  social  category,  proposal  of  appropriate  environmental  and  social 
mitigation measures, and conduct any further environmental and social work, if necessary. 
6.4.2    Assigning the Environmental and Social Categories 
The  assignment  of  the  appropriate  environmental  and  social  category  to  a  particular  sub-
project will be based on the information provided in The Environmental and Social Screening 
Form (Appendix 1). The same technical team of experts, will be responsible for categorizing 
the sub-project activity either as High, Substantial, Moderate or Low. 
The assignment of the appropriate environmental and social category will be based on the 
SECAP provisions on Environmental Assessment. Most of the subprojects and activities of the 
current project are likely to be categorized as Moderate, meaning that their potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas 
will  be  site-specific,  few  if  any  of  the  impacts  are  irreversible,  and  they  can  be  mitigated 
readily.  
Some  activities  might  be  categorized  as  “Low”  if  the  environmental  and  social  screening 
results indicate that such activities will have no significant environmental and social impacts 
and therefore will not require additional environmental and social work. Thus, if the screening 
form has only “No” entries, the proposed activity will not require further environmental and 
social work, and the technical team of experts will recommend approval of this proposal and 
implementation  can  proceed  immediately  in  line  with  category  1  of  the  Government  of 
Rwanda EIA guidelines. 
The  environmental  and  social  High-Risk  category  (significant,  irreversible  impacts)  will  not 
apply to the PSAC subprojects and activities. High Risk Category subprojects and activities will 
be  eliminated  at  the  first  stage  of  screening,  where  the  eligibility  of  the  subprojects  is 
determined. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
80 | P a g e  
ACTIVITY 
PARTICIPATING SUB-
PROJECT 
STAGE OF PROJECT 
CYCLE AND 
RESPONSIBILITY 
Selection of Participating 
sub-project  
DESK APPRAISAL. 
Screening of Project activities for the participating sub-project. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
Determine eligibility based on exclusion list 
appraisal of the agricultural activities (Tech. Team) 
Identification of Environmental and social impacts  
Determination of Significance of impacts 
Assignment of appropriate environmental category,  
Determination of the need for EIA 
IF “HIGH” RISK CATEGORY  
REJECT 
IF “SUBSTATIAL” &- 
“MODERATE” RISK 
CATEGORY 
No “HIGH” RISK 
Category subprojects 
will be funded under 
PSAC 
No Adverse 
Impacts 
Adopt EMP in 
ESCMF 
Adverse Impacts 
Present 
THEN 
UNDERTAKE FURTHER APPRAISAL 
• Determine any further EA work 
• Prepare Site Specific ESCMP (Appendix 
3) and/or IPMP as situation requires. 
Review all 
documentation. 
Environmental and social 
screening process of the 
participating sub-project. 
Subproject approval  
Subproject Approval 
Subproject 
implementation 
MONITORING: 
•  Implementation of Sub-project Activities 
•  Inclusion of environmental design features. 
•  Periodic Reviews  
•  Annual Report 
Subproject 
Implementation 
Figure 6-2      Subproject Screening Process 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
6.4.3    Review of Recommendations  
The completed screening form along with any additional planning reports, will be forwarded 
to the  Review Committee,  under the  MINAGRI  represented by the  NAEB  Head  Office.  The 
Review  Committee  will  review  the  recommendations  in  the  screening  form,  review  the 
proposed  mitigation  measures,  and  conduct public  consultations.  It  will  further determine 
whether (a) the application of simple mitigation measures outlined in the Environmental and 
Social Screening Form (Appendix 1) will suffice; or whether further Environmental and social 
work needs to be done. 
The  Sub-projects  which  did  not  require  the  preparation  of  additional  EA  work  will 
automatically be approved on the basis of the screening form and will be required to go ahead 
and use the screening form together with the requirements of the ESCMF as its Safeguards 
instruments. 
If the desk appraisal indicates that the proposed subproject may have environmental or social 
concerns  that  are  not  adequately  addressed  in  the  current  documentation,  the  Review 
Committee may require the preparation of additional mitigation plans as the situation may 
require. The additional EA work may include site specific ESCMPs, IPMPs, site specific ESIAS 
etc.  Once  all  documentation  is  in  place  these  will  then  be  submitted  to  the  Environment 
Department for Synchronization with the main ESCMF and/or approval. Generally, most of 
the sub-projects that will be financed by PSAC will not need any further EA work beyond just 
the site specific ESCMPs to guide the implementation of the ESCMF.  
6.4.4    Public Consultation and Disclosure for Sub-projects. 
Public  consultations  are  critical  in  preparing  an  effective  proposal  for  the  agricultural 
activities. The first step is to hold public consultations with the communities surrounding the 
proposed  sub-project  sites  and  all  other  interested/affected  parties  during  the  screening 
process and in the course of any further environmental and social work. These consultations 
should identify key issues and determine how the concerns of all parties will be addressed. 
include  press  conferences, 
information  notices, 
The  public  consultation  methods 
brochures/fliers,  interviews,  questionnaires  and  polls,  open  houses,  community  meetings, 
advisory  committees,  and  public  hearings.  The  guidelines  for  public  consultation  include, 
among  others,  a  requirement  that  major  elements  of  the  consultation  program  should  be 
timed to coincide with significant planning and decision-making activities in the project cycle. 
In  terms  of  Rwanda’s  EA  process,  public  consultation  should  be  undertaken  during  (i)  the 
preparation of the EA terms of reference; (ii) the carrying out of an EA; (iii) government review 
of an EA report; and (iv) the preparation of environmental and social terms and conditions of 
approval. 
6.4.5    Annual Monitoring and Reviews 
Environmental and social monitoring needs to be carried out during the implementation of 
the  subprojects.  Monitoring  of  the  compliance  of  subproject  implementation  with  the 
mitigation  measures  set  out  in  the  ESCMF  and  IPMP  will  be  carried  out  jointly  by  the 
beneficiary farmers, extension teams and PSAC staff. PSAC field officers should supervise the 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
82 | P a g e  
monitoring activities and are required to report annually on subproject activities during the 
preceding year. An annual monitoring report must be submitted to IFAD by the PSAC. 
Compliance  monitoring  comprises  on-site  inspection  of  activities  to  verify  that  measures 
identified in the ESCMF and IPMP are being implemented. This type of monitoring is similar 
to the normal tasks of a supervising engineer whose task is to ensure that the Contractor is 
achieving the  required  standards  and quality of work.  The  NAEB  Environment  Officers  will 
have  the  responsibility  of  conducting  the  environmental  and  social  inspections.  An  annual 
inspection report must be submitted (together with the monitoring report) to IFAD. 
Annual reviews may be carried out by an independent local consultant, NGO or other service 
provider  that  are  not  otherwise  involved  with  PSAC.  Annual  reviews  should  evaluate  the 
annual  monitoring  report  from  PSAC  field  officers  and  the  annual  inspection  report  from 
PSAC. The purpose of the reviews is three-fold: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
To  assess  compliance  with  ESCMF  procedures,  learn  lessons,  and  improve  future 
ESCMFs, 
To assess performance in terms of environmental and social risk management, 
To  assess  the  occurrence  of,  and  potential  for,  cumulative  impacts  due  to  PSAC  -
funded and other development activities. 
The  annual  reviews  will  be  a  principal  source  of  information  to  the  PSAC  for  improving 
performance, and to IFAD supervision missions. Thus, they should be undertaken after the 
annual report on monitoring has been prepared and before IFAD supervision of the project. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
83 | P a g e  
7. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE IMPACTS ANALYSIS 
7.1      INTRODUCTION 
The following chapter outlines the description of the potential Environmental impacts that 
will be caused by the implementation of the project, including their significance. The requisite 
mitigation measures for the identified impacts are then outlined in Chapter 7 and 8. 
The Rwanda PSAC is envisaged to result in more positive than negative environmental and 
social  impacts.  With  appropriate  design,  adequate  management  and  monitoring,  negative 
impacts can be kept to a minimum.  
On the other hand, if that is not done, the project may have negative impacts some of which 
can  have  ripple  effects  making  it  difficult  to  apply  remedial  actions.  Early  identification  of 
potential  risks  is  of  extreme  importance  taking  cognisance  of  the  three  stages  within  the 
project cycle: a) the project’s overall design and planning, b) construction/setting up and c) 
operational stage. Construction operations will be short/medium term, while operation will 
be long term. Weak or inadequate capacity for designing, planning, execution and monitoring 
the  project  and  its  components  can  lead  to  low  environmental  and  social  performance, 
exacerbating adverse impacts and limited enhancement of the positive impacts. 
Potential  environmental  and  social  impacts  were  identified  through  a  comprehensive  site 
investigation and stakeholder consultation process, including a review of relevant literature 
and  other  preliminary  studies  for  similar  investments.  Appendix  4  lists  the  consulted 
stakeholders. The impacts indicated in this section will be reduced and mitigated as described 
in the ESCMP in Chapter 8 of this ESCMF. 
7.2      ACTIVITIES AND SOURCES OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS. 
The  critical  components  for  environmental  related  negative  impacts  are  derived  from  the 
PSAC activities that will require development, construction, and operation of infrastructure 
such as:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
rehabilitation and or establishment of tea, coffee and horticulture plantations, 
irrigation schemes infrastructure installations, 
agro-processing and storage facilities construction and operations, 
operations of washing stations, 
rural roads’ rehabilitation, and  
use of agrochemicals; fertilisers, herbicides, pesticides, etc 
The  potential  environmental,  social  and  climatic  risks  emanating  from  these  activities  will 
include  deforestation;  land  degradation;  inappropriate  use  of  agrochemicals  leading  to 
pollution; conflicts; gender-based violence; child labour and social unrests.  
These activities may cause pollution of environmental media such as water, soil, etc, and pose 
occupational health hazard, water use conflicts, conversion and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources during construction of infrastructures etc. Most of the impacts will be localized to 
the project site, short term and most importantly can be avoided/reduced or mitigated by 
properly applying mitigation measures.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
84 | P a g e  
7.3      SIGNIFICANCE RATING METHOD 
The significance of adverse impacts from project activities will be rated on the basis of their 
magnitude, duration and probability as shown below in  Table APP 2-1 in Appendix 2. The 
scales of rating are 1 to 5 with 1 being low and 5 being high. Where an aspect is affected by 
more than one impact, the highest rating is taken as the applicable significance of the impact.  
7.4      ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The potential  environmental  impacts  that  will be  generated by the  implementation  of the 
PSAC activities have been grouped as follows:  
7.4.1    Environmental Impact Analysis - Planning Phase  
7.4.1.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
a) 
Vegetation Clearing for cutlines. 
Vegetation will be cleared during the topographical surveys of project site and pegging 
of pipeline routes for cut lines and visibility. This impact will be a direct impact to the 
environment. 
Assessment of the impact 
The impact will be minimal and temporary as only vegetation disturbing visibility in the 
cutlines will be affected. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
• 
Cutline clearance is to be minimized as far as possible to reduce the potential for 
any environmental impacts. 
Table 7-1      Vegetation Clearing for Cutlines. 
Impact of Vegetation Clearing for Cutlines. 
Planning Phase  
Project Phase 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Site Specific 
Low 
low 
Definite 
Low 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of vegetation clearing for cutlines (i.e. 
potential dust generation, soil erosion) on local environment will be reduced to one of 
No significance for whole project area. 
7.4.1.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
a) 
None Identified 
7.4.2    Environmental Impact Analysis – Construction/Establishment Phase  
7.4.2.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Construction Phase. 
a) 
Vegetation Clearing. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
85 | P a g e  
There will be limited clearing of Vegetation that will occur at all construction sites to 
include,  excavations  for  pipelines  and  foundations  and  construction  of  irrigation 
systems,  Construction  of  agro-processing  and  storage  facilities,  preparations  of 
plantations/farmlands.  All  will  involve  localized  land  clearing,  removal  of  trees  and 
shrubs.  This  will  result  in  habitat  fragmentation  and  small  wildlife  disturbance 
(migration  included)  especially  for  plantations  and  irrigation  facilities.  Loss  of  plant 
cover  leads  to  compaction  of  soil,  exposure  of  topsoil  and  possibility  for  erosion, 
weakening  and  degradation  of  soils,  disturbance  of  the  natural  landscape  and 
disfiguring of the natural morphology. 
The vegetation clearing will lead to dust, noise and ultimately soil erosion and will have 
a regional effect as it will not only be a problem to the footprint area, but also to some 
households that are nearest to the proposed Project sites.  
Assessment of the impact 
The impacts of vegetation clearing will be short to medium term in nature and will occur 
for the duration of construction. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not 
only be a problem to the footprint area, but it will also reach all the nearby residences. 
It is expected that the intensity of these impact will be medium-high. 
The  disturbances  from  the  construction  Vegetation  clearance  will  be  negative  and 
direct  in  nature.  The  consequence  of  the  impact  is  anticipated  to  be  moderate 
detrimental  because  of  the  short  to  medium  duration  that  the  impact  will  be 
experienced. For the people residing nearest to the project site it is considered to be of 
Low  significance.  The  moderate  detrimental  and  definite  probability  result  of  this 
impact being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include the following: 
•  Dust suppression 
o  Dust  suppression  measures  are  to  be  implemented,  which  shall  include 
covering soil mounds, spraying water, etc. 
o  Site clearance is to be minimized as far as possible to reduce the potential 
for dust and other impacts 
o  Water sprinklers to be used, especially on the road leading to the project 
side 
Sensitive habitats should be avoided. (Wetlands and stream banks) 
• 
•  Removal of old tea trees should be done in phases to make sure the bare ground 
is limited at any one time. 
•  Clearing should be limited to working areas only, and these include areas for 
foundations for agricultural infrastructure etc. 
•  Revegetation and reforestation must be prioritized. (e.g., Planting grass, and 
trees as appropriate) 
•  Over abstraction of construction materials like sand and gravel should be 
avoided. 
•  Habitat restoration must be done where effects have been caused i.e., refilling 
burrows pits and re-grassing bare areas. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
86 | P a g e  
• 
Farmers must practice intercropping of tea trees with other plants like bananas 
and fruit trees for shade. 
Table 7-2      Vegetation Clearing. 
Impact of Disturbance from Nuisance Factors  
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Construction, Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of Vegetation clearance (i.e., dust, noise, 
and  traffic)  on  local  communities  could  be  reduced  to  one  of  No  significance  for  all 
people. 
b) 
Temporary Visual Intrusion (Marred landscape). 
Establishment of plantations (trenching etc) Construction of micro dams and irrigation 
scheme systems, agricultural infrastructure, and other possible facilities will change the 
aesthetics of the project areas and has potential to leave marred landscapes impacting 
on the appearance of the surrounding areas.  
It is expected that there will be some extraction of building materials, and bricks will be 
moulded and burnt for warehouses and sheds construction. Pits will be dug, and trees 
will  be  cut  for  firewood.  Efforts  must  be  made  to  minimise  the  damage, 
cover/rehabilitate the pits, and intensify reforestation. 
Assessment of the impact 
This  will  result  in  potential  changes  in  the  landscape,  leaving  a  defaced  and  scarred 
landscape  from  borrow  pits  and  other  excavations,  negatively  impacting  small  game 
and natural habitats, sediment loads, etc. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The  borrow  pits  and  scarred  landscapes  should  be  rehabilitated  by  backfilling  and 
revegetation. 
Table 7-3      Temporary Visual Intrusion (Marred landscape). 
Impact of Marred Landscapes  
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
87 | P a g e  
Significance 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of Temporary Visual Intrusion (Marred 
landscape) on local landscapes could be reduced to one of No significance. 
c) 
Soil Erosion 
Although  construction  work  will  be  limited  to  local  areas,  the  establishment  of 
plantations, including the rehabilitation of existing ones will expose the soils to erosion 
and also compact it and break down the soil structure which will potentially decrease 
the  drainage  of  the  areas.  This  will  generally  result  in  soil  erosion,  defacing  of  the 
countryside and generation of dust. 
Assessment of the impact 
During  the  construction  phase,  all  soil  forms  will  be  susceptible  to  erosion  to  some 
extent because the vegetation cover will be cleared before construction or replanting 
of plantations takes place. 
The main direct potential consequences of soil erosion are the reduction in soil quality, 
the gully formation and the reduced water-holding capacity of many eroded soils. The 
indirect  consequences  of  soil  erosion  include  disruption  of  riparian  ecosystems  and 
sedimentation leading to reduced water quality. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures for soil erosion include the following: 
•  Revegetation, re-grassing of all bare surfaces 
•  Establishment of soil erosion control structures like swells, gabions, check dams, 
contour ridges, etc 
•  Minimisation of vegetation clearing to working areas only 
•  Use  existing  roads  to  access  the  fields  and  farm  sites  and  employ  drainage 
control measures and culverts to control natural runoff and overland flow.  
Table 7-4      Soil Erosion 
Impact of Soil Erosion 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of soil erosion on the local landscapes 
could be reduced to one of little significance. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
88 | P a g e  
(e) 
Solid waste nuisance  
Huge  quantities  of  solid  wastes  are  normally  generated  from  construction  activities. 
Such wastes include stones, wood, broken glasses, containers, rods of metal, pieces of 
iron  sheets  etc.  The  sub-project  proponents  will  be  expected  to  design  and  institute 
appropriate measures for the collection and disposal of the various wastes produced by 
their  operations.  Animals  may  suffocate  from  using  the  solid  waste  materials.  Solid 
waste can also be dangerous to aquatic animals if washed into water courses. 
Assessment of the impact 
The disturbances from Solid Waste will be medium – long term in nature and will occur 
for the duration of construction. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not 
only be a problem to the footprint area but can be transported downstream and pollute 
water courses. It is expected that the intensity of this impact will be medium-high. 
The disturbances from the solid waste will be negative and direct in nature. This impact 
will definitely occur during the construction phase and will be medium – long term in 
nature.  The  consequence  of  the  impact  is  anticipated  to  be  moderate  detrimental 
because of the medium duration that the impact will be experienced. For the people 
surrounding  environment  nearest  to  the  project  site  it  is  considered  to  be  of  Low 
significance.  The  moderate  detrimental  and  definite  probability  result  in  this  impact 
being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
• 
Seek guidance of local environmental officers to identify acceptable disposal 
sites. 
•  Collection of all construction debris for proper disposal at designated landfills. 
•  Waste from agricultural activities can be further processed into other uses, 
e.g., organic manure.  
•  Reuse and recycling must be preferred over disposal of the waste. 
Table 7-5      Solid waste nuisance 
Impact of Solid waste nuisance 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
medium to long term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  solid  waste  management  could  be 
reduced to one of No significance as the system gets underway. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
89 | P a g e  
(f) 
Loss of natural and cultural heritage. 
The construction works at the project site may affect some natural features, antics, and 
relics  in  the  project  area.  The  excavations  for  the  works  will  potentially  cause 
destruction  of  the  natural  features,  antics,  and  relics.  This  is  anticipated  during 
trenching  for  the  erosion  control  structures  on  mountain  sides,  erection  irrigation 
pipeline and digging of foundations for buildings.  
Assessment of the impact 
Any  encountered  antics  or  relics  are  in  danger  of  being  destroyed  in  the  process  of 
trenching and construction works. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
•  Development of a chance finds procedure. 
• 
If any natural features, antics, and relics are encountered the trenching should 
stop immediately and the chance finds procedure be followed. 
Table 7-6      Loss of natural and cultural heritage 
Impact of Loss of natural and cultural heritage 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of Loss of natural and cultural heritage 
could be reduced to one of No significance for all people. 
(g)  Habitat loss and Biodiversity disturbances. 
Noise and vibrations from the development activities may disturb the normal roaming 
patterns of the small game in the area, especially birds as most of them forage during 
the day and cause them to migrate away from the area and/or be in conflict with human 
beings. 
Assessment of the impact 
The Bio-diversity disturbances will be short to medium term in nature and will occur for 
the duration of construction. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not only 
be  a  problem  to  the  footprint  area  but  will  cause  the  migration  of  small  game  to 
neighbouring areas. It is expected that the intensity of these impact will be medium-
high, and excavations of the erosion control structures and pipelines may involve the 
use of heavy-duty machinery. 
There will also be increased road traffic during the pre-construction and construction 
phases, and this will be negative and indirect, introducing noise and vibrations in the 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
90 | P a g e  
area. The impact will be experienced at the site level. The consequences of this impact 
can be described as slight detrimental as it will only be effective during the cycle of the 
project, and it can be mitigated. 
Some indirect impacts could be experienced because of the presence of jobseekers in 
the area resulting in increased presence of human being and a resultant migration effect 
on small game and birds. This impact will definitely occur during the pre-construction 
and construction phases and will be short to medium term in nature. The consequence 
of the impact is anticipated to be moderate detrimental because of the short to medium 
duration that the impact will be experienced. The moderate detrimental and definite 
probability result in this impact being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Noisy operations should be conducted at certain times of the day. 
Always use well serviced equipment that will be less noisy. 
Employ labour intensive methods to avoid using machinery that may be noisy. 
Noise  management  measures  are  to  be  implemented  and  shall  include 
maintenance  of  vehicles  and  equipment  to  run  quietly,  and  avoidance  of 
leaving engines running unnecessarily. 
Traffic  management  measures  are  to  be  implemented  and  travel  speed  of 
contractors and suppliers’ vehicles will be restricted  
Table 7-7      Bio-diversity disturbances 
Impact of Bio-diversity disturbances 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Construction, Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of Bio-diversity disturbances be reduced 
to one of No significance for the whole project area and the small game and birds will 
be able to migrate back as the area will now be revegetated and rehabilitated. 
(h)  Ambient air pollution 
Air  quality  will  be  impacted  by  dust  emissions  mainly  from  the  construction  of 
infrastructure which includes the Erosion control structures, irrigation pipelines, sheds 
and processing plants, micro dams etc. Increased dust emissions may affect habitats for 
various  species  if  not  controlled.  These  dust  emissions  will  require  dust  control 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
91 | P a g e  
measures to bring air quality within the national environmental standards and  World 
Health Organization (WHO) recommended guideline levels. 
The  dust  generation  result  in  the  pollution  of  air,  increases  in  bronchial  disorders, 
impaired visibility on the roads, and disturb normal developments of vegetation. 
Assessment of the impact 
The air pollution disturbances will be short to medium term in nature and will occur for 
the duration of construction. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not only 
be a problem to the footprint area, but it will also reach all the nearby residences. It is 
expected that the intensity of this impact for most people will be medium-high. 
There will also be increased road traffic during the pre-construction and construction 
phases which may exacerbate the raising of dust, and this will be negative and indirect 
in nature. The disturbances will be  negative and direct in nature. The impact will be 
experienced  at  the  regional  level.  This  impact  will  definitely  occur  during  the 
construction phases and will be short to medium term in nature. The consequence of 
the impact is anticipated to be moderate detrimental because of the short to medium 
duration  that  the  impact  will  be  experienced.  For  the people  residing  nearest to  the 
project sites it is considered to be of Low significance. The moderate detrimental and 
definite probability result in this impact being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures will include: 
•  Dust suppression measures must be instituted at all sites which shall include 
covering soil mounds and spraying bare areas with water. 
•  Site clearance is to be minimized as far as possible to reduce the potential for 
dust and other impacts. 
•  Replacement of old trees has to be done in phases to avoid clearing large areas 
at any one time. 
•  Water sprinklers to be used, especially on the road leading to the project side 
Table 7-8      Ambient air pollution 
Impact of Ambient air pollution  
Project Phase 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Residual Impact 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
92 | P a g e  
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  construction  nuisances  (i.e.,  dust, 
noise, and traffic) on local communities could be reduced to one of No significance for 
all people. 
(i)  Ambient Water pollution  
Quality  of  water  especially  rivers  and  groundwater  may  be  affected  negatively  by 
discharges  of  debris  from  civil  works,  oil  spills,  and  other  pollutants  generated  from 
construction  works.  Groundwater  contamination  occurs  from  percolation  of  oil  and 
lubricants  spills  into  the  soil.  Surface  water  pollution  may  result  from  uncontrolled 
discharges  into  freshwaters.  There  are  still  many  people  relying  on  river  water  as  a 
source for drinking water. 
Assessment of the impact 
The Ambient Water pollution disturbances will be short to medium term in nature and 
will occur for the duration of construction. These impacts have a regional effect as they 
will be carried downstream and will not only be a problem to the footprint area, but it 
will also reach all the downstream residences where some people use the river water 
for drinking and for their animals. It is expected that the intensity of these impact for 
most people will be medium-high. 
The  disturbances  from  the  Ambient  Water  pollution  will  be  negative  and  direct  in 
nature. The impact will be experienced at the regional level. This impact will definitely 
occur during the construction phases and will be short to medium term in nature. The 
consequence of the impact is anticipated to be moderate detrimental because of the 
short  to  medium  duration  that  the  impact  will  be  experienced.  The  moderate 
detrimental and definite probability result in this impact being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include the following: 
•  Contractors to erect proper sanitary facilities. - Toilets at convenient locations 
throughout the project area. 
•  Pollution from lubricants and other wastes to be avoided. Contain all oil leaks 
at workshops and surfaces by collecting in oil separators. 
•  Controlled disposal of wastes and effluent by use of appropriate disposal 
facilities, use of appropriate drainage structures, use of cleaner technologies, 
proper storage of materials, awareness campaigns. 
•  Waste must be recycled and reused to avoid dumping in waterways. 
•  Polluted water shall be treated prior to disposal to watercourse 
•  Maintain all vehicles and equipment to avoid oil and grease leaks 
• 
Install  oil  and  grease  separators  to  collect  rain  runoff  around  workshops  and 
parking areas. 
Table 7-9      Ambient Water pollution 
Impact of Ambient Water pollution 
Project Phase 
Pre-Construction, Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
93 | P a g e  
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  Ambient  Water  pollution  could  be 
reduced to one of No significance for all people once oil and grease separators have 
been installed. 
7.4.2.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Construction Phase. 
a) 
Revegetation 
In  the  process  of  establishing  new  plantations,  rehabilitating  old  ones  and  installing 
irrigation equipment the vegetation will need to be restored and enhanced. There will 
be a deliberate exercise to revegetate the project area. This will protect and conserve 
the environment in the process.  
Assessment of Impact 
The revegetation of the project area will be of a long-term nature occurring throughout 
the operation phase. The impact will be site specific as it will affect the footprint of the 
rehabilitated project area only. 
The benefits will be experienced as a positive impact, at the local level, will be long-term 
to permanent, of medium intensity and most likely to happen. The impacts will most 
likely  be  high  beneficial  –  the  community  regard  this  as  a  major  long-term  positive 
change  as  it  will  improve  their  livelihoods.  The  impacts  are  therefore  of  medium 
significance.  
Table 7-10    revegetation 
Impact on revegetation 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Operation 
Positive, direct 
Long-term to permanent 
Local 
Medium 
High beneficial 
Most likely 
Medium 
b) 
Rehabilitation of fragile ecosystems 
The  steep  mountain  slopes  in  some  localities  are  badly  degraded  resulting  in  deeply 
incised gullies. These areas will need some rehabilitation and conservation works. The 
badly degraded lands will then be rehabilitated by erecting gabions were necessary and 
revegetation. 
Assessment of Impact 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
94 | P a g e  
The  Rehabilitation  of  fragile  ecosystems  of  the  project  area  will  be  of  a  long-term 
nature occurring throughout the operation phase. The impact will be site specific as it 
will affect the footprint of the rehabilitated project areas only. 
The benefits will be experienced as a positive impact, at the local level, will be long-term 
to permanent, of medium intensity and most likely to happen. The impacts will most 
likely  be  high  beneficial  –  the  community  regard  this  as  a  major  long-term  positive 
change  as  it  will  improve  their  livelihoods.  The  impacts  are  therefore  of  medium 
significance.  
Table 7-11    Rehabilitation of fragile ecosystems 
Impact on Rehabilitation of fragile ecosystems 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Operation 
Positive, direct 
Long-term to permanent 
Local 
Medium 
High beneficial 
Most likely 
Medium 
7.4.3    Environmental Impact Analysis – Operation Phase  
7.4.3.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Operation Phase. 
a)  Soil Erosion 
During the operation phase, the potential for soil erosion will be much less. However 
loose soil at the sides of the erosion control structures, levelled irrigation pipelines as 
well as roads on steep slopes will still be susceptible to erosion. 
The main potential consequences of soil erosion are the reduction in soil quality and 
the reduced water-holding capacity of many eroded soils. The indirect consequences of 
soil  erosion  include  disruption  of  riparian  ecosystems  and  sedimentation  leading  to 
reduced water quality. 
Assessment of the impact 
During the operation phase, all soil forms will be susceptible to erosion to some extent 
because  the  vegetation  cover  will  be  cleared  before  construction  takes  place  at 
plantation sites, irrigation schemes and infrastructure areas.  
The main direct potential consequences of soil erosion are the reduction in soil quality 
and  the  reduced  water-holding  capacity  of  many  eroded  soils.  The 
indirect 
consequences  of  soil  erosion 
include  disruption  of  riparian  ecosystems  and 
sedimentation leading to reduced water quality. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures for soil erosion include the following: 
•  Revegetation, re-grassing of all bare surfaces 
•  Minimisation of vegetation clearing to working areas only 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
95 | P a g e  
• 
Installing soil erosion control structures like, gabions, contour ridges, swells and 
check dams. 
•  Establishment of grassed drainage systems to prevent erosion. 
Table 7-12    Soil Erosion 
Impact of Soil Erosion 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation, it is expected that the impact of soil erosion on the local landscapes 
could be reduced to one of little significance. 
b) 
Solid waste 
Less quantities of solid wastes are normally generated during the operation phase. Such 
wastes  include  domestic  wastes,  plastics,  etc.  The  sub-project  proponents  will  be 
expected to design and institute appropriate measures for the collection and disposal 
of  the  various  wastes  produced  by  their  operations.  Animals  may  suffocate  from 
ingesting  the  solid  waste  materials.  Solid  waste  can  also  be  dangerous  to  aquatic 
animals if washed into water courses. 
Assessment of the impact. 
This  impact  is  medium  to  long  term  in  nature  and  will  occur  for  the duration  of  the 
operation phase. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not only be a problem 
to the footprint area but can affect the wider surrounding community if not managed. 
It is expected that the intensity of this impact for most people will be low to medium. 
The solid waste disposal impact will be negative and direct in nature. The impact will 
be  experienced  at  the  regional  level.  Some  indirect  impacts  could  be  experienced 
because of the presence of higher volumes of people, including jobseekers in the area 
resulting in pressure on social services and infrastructure.  
The  consequence  of  the  impact  is  anticipated  to  be  moderate  detrimental.  For  the 
people residing nearest to the project site it is considered to be of Low significance. The 
moderate  detrimental  and  definite  probability  result  in  this  impact  being  of  Low 
significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures will include: 
•  Collection of all solid waste in a systematic manner for disposal at designated 
landfills. 
•  Solid waste should never be burnt on site. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
96 | P a g e  
•  Develop a solid waste management plan and implement it 
Table 7-13    solid wastes 
Impact of solid wastes 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Operation Phase  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
medium – long term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  solid  waste  pollution  on  local 
communities could be reduced to one of  No significance for all people if solid waste 
management protocols are followed. 
c)  Effluent Discharges 
Most agricultural, agro-processing, packaging, and marketing operations produce liquid 
effluent besides the solid waste. Places like the Coffee washing stations, Tea processing 
plants,  generate  substantial  amounts  of  liquid  effluent. The  effluent  has potential  to 
pollute soil and water resources.  
Assessment of the impact 
Effluent Discharges during the operation phase will be long term in nature and will occur 
for the duration of the operations. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not 
only be a problem to the footprint area, but it will flow downstream and pollute the 
water resources in the process. It is expected that the intensity of these impact for the 
environment  will  be  medium-high,  necessitating  the  installation  of  some  form  of 
treatment before effluent discharges. 
The disturbances from the effluent discharges will be negative and direct in nature. The 
impact  will  be  experienced  at  the  regional  level.  The  consequence  of  the  impact  is 
anticipated to be moderate detrimental. For the people residing nearest to the project 
site it is considered to be of Low significance. The moderate detrimental and definite 
probability result in this impact being of Low significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
• 
Installation of appropriate effluent treatment facilities next to any processes 
that generate effluent. 
•  Monitoring  the  quality  of  the  effluent  that  is  ultimately  discharged  to  the 
environment so that it meets the national effluent discharge standards. 
Table 7-14    effluent discharge 
Impact of effluent discharge  
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Operations Phase  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
long term 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
97 | P a g e  
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  effluent  discharge  on  local 
communities  could  be  reduced  to  one  of  No  significance  for  all  people  once  proper 
effluent treatment plants are installed and are running properly. 
d) 
Agro-Chemical Pollution  
Up-scaling  of  agricultural  activities  may  result  in  the  use  of  more  agro-chemicals  to 
realise better yields and control pests and diseases. The farmers must be made aware 
of  the  poisonous  nature  of  the  chemicals,  should  employ  recommended  disposal 
methods, and apply the agro chemicals correctly. Poor handling of the agro chemicals, 
exacerbated  by  potential  accidental  spillages,  can  expose  the  farmers  to  these  toxic 
chemicals resulting in the poisoning of farmers, aquatic animals, and soils. 
During the operation phase, agricultural soils can be contaminated from inputs such as 
application of pesticides and fertilizers. Polluted soils can become secondary emission 
source of contaminants to surrounding surface water, groundwater and subsequently 
to rivers. Pesticides reach the soil by deposition after being sprayed on foliage when the 
pesticide is washed off treated foliage by rainfall or overhead irrigation, by release from 
the  surface  of  treated  seeds  or  by  direct  application  of  granules  or  spray  to  soil.  The 
inappropriate disposal of unwanted or out of date pesticides, pesticide packaging and the 
cleaning of application equipment can also cause pollution. Pesticides and some of their 
degradation  products  may  accumulate  in  soils,  leach  to  groundwater  and  can  be 
transported by runoff to surface water bodies. 
The  overuse  of  fertilizers  can  result  in  saturation  of  nutrients  in  soils  and  the  loss  of 
fertilizer via leaching to groundwater and via runoff to surface water leading to pollution 
of nearby springs and eutrophication of river water.  
Pesticides  may  have  acute  and/or  chronic  effects  on  non-target  organisms  including 
humans. They can have deleterious consequences for ecosystems by virtually eradicating 
some  of  the  primary  food  chain,  which  in  turn  could  have  major  consequences  for 
predator or consumer species. Overuse of fertilizers (e.g., nitrogen fertilizers), poses a risk 
to human health and environment especially if leached into the groundwater. Overuse of 
fertilizers also contributes to soil acidification which is an environmental condition that 
can reduce the availability of many plant nutrients for plant growth and causes direct toxic 
effects from soil elements such as aluminium.  
Assessment of the impact 
Agro-Chemical Pollution can be medium to long term in nature and will occur for the 
duration of the operation phase. These impacts have a regional effect as they will not 
only be a problem to the footprint area but can be washed into the streams and affect 
water resources. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
98 | P a g e  
This disturbance will be negative and indirect in nature. The impact will be experienced 
at the regional level. For the people residing nearest to the project site the impact is 
considered  to  be  of  medium  significance.  The  moderate  detrimental  and  definite 
probability result in this impact being of medium significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
•  Encourage organic farming and limit the use of Agro chemicals like inorganic 
fertilizers.  
•  Use integrated Pest Management approaches to minimize pesticide use. 
•  Conduct awareness training & workshops on safe handling of chemicals. 
•  Erect separate storerooms for all agro chemicals so that they are always under lock 
and key away from food staffs. 
•  Split application of fertiliser to avoid excess being washed away. 
•  No application before major storms 
•  Don’t store fertilisers and agrochemicals and food in the same sore room 
•  All workers to use appropriate PPE every time 
•  Use the least potent variants of pesticides to minimise poisoning. 
Table 7-15    Agro-chemical pollution 
Impact of Agro-chemical pollution 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Operation phase  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Long term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
medium 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  Agro-chemical  pollution  on  local 
communities could be reduced to one of No significance for all people. 
e)  Ambient Water pollution  
Oil and grease leaks and spills are noted to be prevalent in most work areas like the 
farm sheds. If not well contained these leaks can be washed into water ways and end 
up polluting the water resources. Such products contain detrimental elements to the 
environment  since  they  contain  traces  of  heavy  metals,  and  they  pollute  water 
resources. Chemicals in oils are detrimental to the biodiversity if not managed. 
Groundwater contamination occurs from percolation of oil and lubricants spills into the 
soil 
Assessment of the impact 
The Ambient Water pollution disturbances will be short to medium term in nature and 
will occur for the duration of the operations phase. These impacts have a regional effect 
as they will be carried downstream and will not only be a problem to the footprint area, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
99 | P a g e  
but it will also reach all the downstream residences. It is expected that the intensity of 
these impact for most people will be medium-high. 
The  disturbances  from  the  Ambient  Water  pollution  will  be  negative  and  direct  in 
nature. The impact will be experienced at the regional level. This impact will definitely 
occur  during  the  operations  phase  and  will  be  short  to  medium  term  in  nature.  The 
consequence of the impact is anticipated to be moderate detrimental because of the 
short  to  medium  duration  that  the  impact  will  be  experienced.  The  moderate 
detrimental and definite probability result in this impact being of medium significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include the following: 
•  Contain all oil leaks at workshops and surfaces. 
•  Maintain all vehicles and equipment to avoid oil and grease leaks. 
• 
Install  oil  and  grease  separators  to  collect  rain  runoff  around  workshops  and 
parking areas. 
Table 7-16    Ambient Water pollution 
Impact of Ambient Water pollution 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Construction, Construction  
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short-medium term 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
medium 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  Ambient  Water  pollution  could  be 
reduced to one of No significance for all people once oil and grease separators have 
been installed. 
7.4.3.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Operation Phase. 
a) 
Revegetation 
During the operations phase, this will be the order of the day. This will greatly enhance 
the revegetation process and will protect and conserve the environment in the process. 
Assessment of Impact 
The revegetation of the project sites will be of a long-term nature occurring throughout 
the operation phase. The impact will be site specific as it will affect the footprint of the 
rehabilitated project areas only. 
The benefits will be experienced as a positive impact, at the local level, will be long-term 
to permanent, of medium intensity and most likely to happen. The impacts will most 
100 | P a g e  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
likely  be  high  beneficial  –  the  community  regard  this  as  a  major  long-term  positive 
change  as  it  will  improve  their  livelihoods.  The  impacts  are  therefore  of  medium 
significance.  
Table 7-17    revegetation 
Impact on revegetation 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Operation 
Positive, direct 
Long-term to permanent 
Local 
Medium 
High beneficial 
Most likely 
Medium 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
101 | P a g e  
7.4.4    Summary of the Magnitude of Potential Environmental Impacts 
Tables 6-18 below presents an analysis of the probability of the identified impacts occurring, and thus giving an indication of the magnitude of the 
risk. The magnitudes are determined using the Impact Magnitude Scoring Table in Appendix 2. 
Table 7-18    Magnitude of Potential Environmental Impacts 
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
5.4.1 
PLANNING PHASE 
5.3.1.1 
Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(i) 
Vegetation 
clearing for Site 
Surveying  and 
Pegging 
• 
Clearing vegetation for 
visibility 
•  Opening Cut-lines for survey 
purposes 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Removal of vegetation 
cover. 
Exposure of topsoil and 
possibility for erosion. 
Loss of biodiversity and 
habitat changes. 
Disturbances of small 
wildlife  
•  Compaction of soil. 
5.3.1.2 
Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(a) 
None Identified 
6.4.2 
CONSTRUCTION PHASE 
6.4.2.1 
Potential Negative Impacts During Construction Phase. 
(a) 
Limited 
clearing 
vegetation 
infrastructure 
development  
of 
for 
•  Preparation of land for 
• 
Agriculture 
excavations for pipelines and 
foundations, 
•  Construction of Erosion 
Control Structures. 
•  Removal of vegetation cover. 
• 
Exposure of topsoil and 
possibility for erosion. 
Loss of biodiversity and 
habitat changes. 
• 
•  Disturbances of small wildlife  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Negative 
2 
2 
2 
2 
8 
6 
Low 
Negligible 
Negative 
3 
2 
1 
5 
11 
Moderate 
9 
Low 
102 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
(b) 
Temporary 
Visual 
Intrusions 
(Marred 
landscape) 
(c) 
Soil Erosion. 
• 
construction of irrigation 
systems,  
•  Construction of agro-
processing and storage 
facilities,  
•  Construction of access roads. 
Extraction of building materials 
like sand, gravel and brick 
moulding resulting in borrow pits 
and scurred landscapes. 
•  All Construction Activities, 
• 
Erection of soil erosion 
structures…trenching 
Intensive farming techniques, 
inappropriate Irrigation and 
drainage management, 
Inappropriate use of farm 
machinery, 
• 
• 
• 
•  Accidental discharge of 
hazardous substances, 
Sand and quarry stone for 
construction, 
• 
•  Gravel for road construction, 
• 
Extraction of building 
materials and brick Moulding. 
•  Compaction of soil. 
•  Pollution of soil and water 
from oil leakage. 
•  Dust and noise generation. 
Construction of agricultural 
facilities like irrigation 
systems, Warehouses, and 
other possible facilities will 
change the characteristics of 
the area and leave a marred 
landscape. 
Soil and water pollution. 
Soil erosion 
Soil salinization 
Loss in soil fertility 
Loss of crop productivity 
Scarring of the landscape 
due to sand mining and 
borrow pits. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Negative 
4 
4 
1 
4 
13 
Moderate 
8 
Low 
Negative 
4 
4 
1 
4 
13 
Moderate 
8 
Low 
(d) 
Solid 
nuisance. 
waste 
▪ 
Agricultural processes 
generating waste, e.g., from 
tea processing plant. 
▪ 
▪ 
Pollution of soil and water 
resources 
Littering and indiscriminate 
dumping. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Negative 
4 
3 
1 
2 
10 
9 
Moderate 
Low 
103 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
▪ 
Spoils from access road and 
infrastructure construction 
▪  wastes generated from 
construction activities, such 
as stones, wood, broken 
glasses, containers, rods of 
metal, pieces of iron sheets 
etc.. 
•  Digging of trenches for 
pipelines, and erosion control 
structures 
•  Digging of foundations for 
agricultural infrastructures, 
sheds and pens. 
•  Digging of trenches will be by 
heavy duty machinery 
Excavations will temporarily 
disrupt the natural habitats 
• 
• 
(e) 
(f) 
Loss  of  natural 
cultural 
and 
heritage 
loss 
Habitat 
and 
biodiversity 
disturbances 
(g) 
Ambient 
Quality 
Air 
•  Dust generated from 
▪ 
construction activities. 
Pesticides used in pests and 
diseases control 
▪ 
Deterioration of the 
aesthetics of the areas. 
•  Natural features, antics and 
relics destroyed in the 
project area e.g., during 
excavations. 
Negative 
5 
Negative 
5 
•  Noise  and  vibrations  cause 
wild animals to migrate  
•  contamination  of  the  rivers 
may  cause 
fish  kills  and 
destruction  of  other  aquatic 
life 
riverine ecosystems 
modifications due to over-
abstraction for irrigation 
purposes 
•  Pollution of air 
• 
• 
Increases in bronchial 
disorders 
Impaired Visibility on the 
roads 
• 
4 
4 
4 
3 
16 
10 
High 
Moderate 
4 
3 
16 
10 
High 
Moderate 
2 
2 
3 
3 
10 
8 
Moderate 
Low 
•  Disturbs normal 
developments of vegetation 
Causes acid rain 
▪ 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
104 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
5 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
2 
(ground
water) 
4 
(surface 
water) 
4 
(groundw
ater) 
3 (surface 
water) 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
14 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
10 
high 
Moderate 
3 
(groundwat
er) 
4  
(Surface 
water) 
REF: 
(h) 
Ambient  Water 
Quality (surface 
and 
ground 
water) 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪  Waste generated from 
agricultural activities. 
Effluents from Washing 
stations and tea processing 
plants. 
Effluents (drainage water) 
from agriculture land 
Agro-chemicals run-off from 
the fields if not properly 
applied. 
Accidental discharge of 
hazardous substances, 
Erosion processes introduce 
pollutants and particulates 
into the water. 
▪ 
▪ 
6.4.2.2 
Potential Positive Impacts During Construction Phase.  
(a) 
Revegetation 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
(b) 
Rehabilitation 
of 
Ecosystems 
Fragile 
Proper Catchment 
management will encourage 
restoration and 
enhancement of the 
vegetation. 
Rehabilitation of degraded 
lands 
afforestation.  
Fencing off the project sites 
will induce environmental 
protection of the area. 
rehabilitation and 
conservation work. 
Levelling and closing up of 
gullies and dongas. 
Limited protection using 
Gabions.  
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
• 
• 
• 
Effluent pollutes soil and 
water resources 
Littering and indiscriminate 
dumping of solid waste 
pollutes land and water 
resources 
Poisoning of aquatic and 
inland ecosystems. 
Ecosystem’s imbalance and 
destruction of flora and 
fauna 
environment protected and 
conserved 
revegetation by planting 
required species 
In the process of 
establishing proper 
Catchment management 
the vegetation will be 
restored and enhanced 
•  Degradation of wetlands. 
•  Arrest the Erosion of 
mountain sides and steep 
slopes. 
•  Prevent the Loss of natural 
ecosystems 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Positive 
4 
3 
4 
4 
15 
19  
High 
Very High 
Positive 
4 
4 
4 
4 
16 
18 
High 
Moderate 
105 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
6.4.3 
OPERATION PHASE  
6.4.3.1 
Potential Negative Impacts During Operation Phase. 
•  Rehabilitate and protect the 
Catchments. 
(a) 
Soil Erosion 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Solid 
pollution. 
waste 
Effluent 
Discharges 
Agro-chemicals 
Pollution 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Bare ground around the 
pipelines and erosion control 
structures. 
Bare ground along the access 
roads. 
Any vegetation clearing 
during operations 
Less quantities of solid 
wastes generated include 
domestic wastes, and 
plastics. 
•  Most agricultural, agro-
processing, packaging, and 
marketing operations 
produce liquid effluent. 
Limited knowledge of the 
poisonous nature of the 
chemicals. 
Accidental spillages. 
Poor disposal methods being 
employed. 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪  Washing of equipment in 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
rivers. 
Poor application methods 
being used. 
Poor handling of the 
chemicals. 
Accidental discharge of 
hazardous substances. 
•  Much less potential for soil 
Negative 
5 
4 
4 
3 
16 
10 
• 
erosion 
loose soil at the sides of 
levelled irrigation pipelines 
as well as roads on steep 
slopes will still be susceptible 
to erosion 
•  Pollution of the water ways. 
• 
Littering the neighbourhood 
Negative 
•  Pollution of water resources 
•  Destruction of habitats 
Negative 
Negative 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
Poisoning of farmers by 
chemicals. 
Poisoning of aquatic and 
inland ecosystems by the 
chemicals. 
Poisoning of the soil by the 
chemicals. 
Poisoning of farm products 
consumers by chemicals. 
3 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
3 
4 
4 
High 
Moderate 
3 
3 
3 
13 
Moderate 
16 
High 
16 
9 
low 
9 
low 
10 
High 
Moderate 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
106 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILITY 
SEVERITY / 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATION 
MAGNITUD
E OF 
IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
(e) 
Ambient  Water 
pollution 
• 
•  Oil and grease leak and spills 
prevalent in most work areas 
like the farm sheds. 
Leaks can be washed into 
water ways and end up 
polluting the water 
resources. 
Accidental discharge of 
hazardous substances. 
• 
•  Pollution of water resources 
•  Destruction of habitats 
Negative 
5 
4 
4 
3 
16 
10 
High 
Moderate 
6.4.3.2 
Potential Positive Impacts During Operation Phase. 
(a) 
Revegetation 
• 
planting of grass and 
continuous rehabilitation of 
the catchments. 
• 
• 
• 
Habitat restoration. 
Erosion stopped 
Positive 
4 
4 
4 
4 
16 
18 
High 
Moderate 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
107 | P a g e  
8. 
SOCIAL AND HEALTH IMPACT ANALYSIS 
8.1      INTRODUCTION 
The following is a social and health impacts analysis of the project. The list of the consulted 
stakeholders  is  in  Appendix  4.  The  chapter  assesses  the  construction  and  operation phase 
impacts identified for the proposed  PSAC Project, including both the positive and negative 
impacts. It should be noted that while the number of negative impacts exceed the number of 
positive impacts, this is not a reflection of the project having a greater overall negative impact. 
It is expected that the Project could bring a range of positive impacts for those people who 
can embrace the opportunities that arise. 
8.2      SOCIAL AND HEALTH IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The  potential  social  impacts  that  will  be  generated  by  the  implementation  of  the  PSAC 
activities have been grouped as follows:  
8.2.1    Social and Health Impact Analysis - Planning Phase  
8.2.1.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
a) 
Limited Stakeholder Participation 
The  level  of  participation  of  all  relevant  stakeholders  during  project  planning  and 
designing  is  of  paramount  importance  as  a  buy  in  process.  Unclear  roles  and 
responsibilities and inadequate information may lead to limited participation of critical 
Stakeholders. 
The beneficiary Communities are not in favour of top-down approaches being imposed 
on them. Such poor stakeholder participation will result in the lack of ownership of the 
project by the locals, poor participation in project implementation and low chances of 
sustainability of the project. 
Assessment of Impact 
The Limited Stakeholder Participation may occur at project inception The intensity of 
this  impact  on  project  stakeholders  is  rated  as  moderate,  as  the  households  will  be 
affected by not being consulted properly. 
Mitigation Measures 
The relevant project beneficiaries will be identified and continuously conferred with. 
The NAEB will ensure the following:  
•  Consultation and information disclosure becomes a continuous process 
in the project. 
•  Stakeholders are continuously appraised of the project progress. 
• 
If  any  people  are  affected,  assistance  will  be  provided  to  the  project 
affected persons (PAP) to improve, or at least restore incomes and living 
standards 
to  project 
the  equivalent 
to  at 
implementation, if not better. 
level  prior 
least 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
108 | P a g e  
•  Affected  persons  should  be  consulted  on  decisions  that  affect  their 
livelihoods and well-being and shall be fully informed of their options and 
the compensation rates. 
•  Grievance redress mechanisms are developed and accessible. 
Table 8-1      Impact of Limited Stakeholder Participation 
Impact of Limited Stakeholder Participation 
Pre-Construction 
Project Phase 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Short term 
Surrounding villages 
High 
Detrimental 
Definite 
Medium to High 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Residual Impact 
Implementation of the above mitigation measures is expected to reduce the impact of 
Limited Stakeholder Participation to one of low significance post-mitigation, due to the 
over-riding positive expectations. 
b)  Poor Project Inception, Anxiety and Anticipation 
The planning stage brings a lot of anxiety and anticipation. Lack of proper plans of action 
with timelines and full disclosure create anxiety among stakeholders. They then hold 
the whole process with suspicion and do not want the planning phase to drag for too 
long.  
Assessment of Impact 
Poor Project inception mostly results in the locals not fully cooperating with the project 
preparation team and not disclosing all the relevant information during consultations. 
The intensity of the Poor Project inception impact on households is rated as moderate.  
Mitigation Measures 
The  project  beneficiaries  and  persons  directly  or  indirectly  affected  by  the  proposed 
project  will  be  assessed  in  terms  of  extent  of  loss  of  livelihood  opportunities  and 
compensation if any is required.  
The NAEB will ensure the following:  
•  There should be transparency and full disclosure of key elements of the project 
•  Production of proper plan of action with timelines. 
•  Presenting  full  disclosure  of  project  decisions  and  actions  to  all 
concerned stakeholders. 
•  The planning phase should not drag for far too long as people tend to 
despair. 
•  Efforts must be made to stick to agreed timelines 
Table 8-2      Impact of Poor Project inception 
Impact of Poor Project inception 
Project Phase 
Pre-Construction 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
109 | P a g e  
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
Long term 
Footprint 
High 
Detrimental 
Definite 
Medium to High 
Residual Impact 
Implementation of the above mitigation measures is expected to reduce the impact of 
Poor Project inception to one of low significance post-mitigation, due to the over-riding 
positive expectations. 
8.2.1.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
a) 
Community-Based Approaches. 
The  stakeholders  fully  support  this  community-based  project  as  they  are  used  to 
working together as associations. Their major concern is the possibility of the project 
not delivering its promises and transparency when it comes to benefits that the project 
will bring to the community. 
Assessment of Impact 
The  project  is  bringing  people  to  work  together  as  communities  for  the  benefit  of 
everyone. The impact is rated as High, as the households are highly in favour of it. 
Mitigation Measures 
The enhancement measures will include:  
•  Continuous  Consultation  and 
information  dissemination  for  the 
stakeholders to keep abreast with the project. 
•  Availing  the  grievance  redress  mechanisms  for  everyone  to  have  a 
channel to air their views and grievances. 
Table 8-3      Impact of Project as uniting centre 
Impact of Project as uniting centre 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Construction 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Positive, direct 
Long term 
Footprint and surrounding villages 
High 
Detrimental 
Definite 
Medium to High 
Residual Impact 
Implementation  of  the  above  enhancement  measures  is  expected  to  enhance  the 
impact of Project as uniting centre to one of High significance post-mitigation, due to 
the over-riding positive expectations. 
8.2.2    Social and Health Impact Analysis – Construction/Operations Phase. 
8.2.2.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Constructions/Operations Phase. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
110 | P a g e  
a) 
Conflicts between local people and external work force  
Expectation for employment against hiring of expert external workers may result in a 
conflict that is likely to disturb smooth project progress. Local skills audit and integrating 
both local and outside workers but giving first preference to locals whenever is possible 
could  reduce  sources  of  conflict.  Transparency  in  hiring  is  also  important.  As  part  of 
giving  back  to  the  community,  the  project  can  target  skills  development  for  locals 
especially willing youths. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
• 
First preference for employment should be given to locals, including for 
technical work. 
•  Migrant workers encouraged to bring their spouses along. 
b) 
Occupational Health and Safety Issues:  
Weak  technical  capacity  and/or  negligence  on  operation  of  vehicles  and  machinery 
resulting in temporary and permanent physical injuries, Bronchial diseases from dust, 
and diseases, and/or loss of life. 
The safety of the local population trying to access construction sites (Plantations etc) 
may be at risk during the construction period. The operation of various equipment and 
machinery  and  the  actual  construction  activities  will expose  workers  to work-related 
accidents and injuries.  
Pollutants such as dust and noise could also have negative implications for the health 
of workers and near-by communities such as bronchial diseases from dust and hearing 
impairments  due  to  prolonged  working  under  noisy  conditions.  Personal  Protective 
Clothing  is  required  at  all  times  during  construction  and  operation  of  machinery, 
pesticides and other agro chemicals in accordance with relevant national guidelines. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
•  A Health/Safety/Environment officer should be present during construction. 
•  All safety precautions must be enforced. 
•  Provide PPE to all workers.  
• 
Institute dust and noise suppression measures. 
c) 
Poor Public Health 
The construction and development phase of the project is likely going to bring outside 
workers  to  stay  for  considerable  lengths  of  time.  Communicable  diseases  such  as 
HIV/AIDS infection rate is likely to increase as the workers, drivers interact with the local 
population. Poverty is likely going to be the main driver as young women from poor 
households try to exploit the situation to earn a living. Negotiation power for safe sex 
may be limited. Contractors might be idolised as being wealthy by local people which 
gives  them  an  upper  hand  in  negotiating  for  sex  and  participation  in  illicit  affairs. 
Awareness  raising  within  local  communities  and  workers  through  Information, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
111 | P a g e  
Education and Communication (IEC) and distribution of free condoms and counselling 
and treatment will help alleviate the impacts. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
Education on Public health issues. 
• 
•  Awareness raising within local communities and workers through Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) and distribution of free condoms and 
counselling and treatment will help alleviate the impacts. 
•  Provision of toilets that are constructed in such a way that they cannot leak into 
water resources 
•  Provision  of  potable  water  supply  that  will  include  the  use  of  groundwater 
resources  that  can  be  used  as  a  reference  to  the  performance  of  the  project 
surface water supply 
d)  Gender Based Violence (GBV) 
There are high chances of sexual exploitation (in its various forms) of poor women and 
young girls by construction workers and project implementation personnel. If not well 
controlled, there could be rampant exploitation of women and youths in the project 
area. Assessment of exposure and appropriate preventive actions must be carried out 
to avoid gender-based violence at all costs.  
Assessment of the impact 
The risk of Gender Based Violence (GBV) will be medium to long term in nature and will 
occur for the duration of Constructions/Operations phases.  
The  risk  of  Gender  Based  Violence  (GBV)  will  be  negative  and  direct  in  nature.  The 
impact  will  be  experienced  at the  sub-project  sites  and  at the households  of  project 
beneficiaries. Some indirect impacts could be experienced because of the presence of 
jobseekers  in  the  area  resulting  in  increased  population  of  job  seekers  exposing  the 
vulnerable  ones.  The  consequence  of  the  impact  is  anticipated  to  be  moderate 
detrimental.  The  moderate  detrimental  and  definite  probability  result  in  this  impact 
being of Medium significance. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
•  Zero tolerance to gender-based violence 
•  Ensure sexual harassment Policy at all levels involved in the project. 
• 
. 
Table 8-4      Disturbance from Gender Based Violence (GBV) 
Impact of Disturbance from Gender Based Violence (GBV) 
Project Phase 
Constructions/Operations phases. 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Negative, direct 
medium to long term 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
112 | P a g e  
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Regional 
Medium-high 
Moderate detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  Gender  Based  Violence  (GBV)  on  local 
communities could be reduced to one of No significance for all people. 
e) 
Displacements or shifts of livelihood activities 
Nature of Impact  
The  PSAC  is  not  expected  to  disrupt  the  current  agricultural  activities  of  the 
beneficiaries, displace or disadvantage any persons. The communities in the proposed 
project  Areas  depend  on  agricultural  production  for  their  livelihood  and  are  highly 
dependent on crop production for household sustenance and survival. Crops are grown 
primarily  for  household  consumption  but  in  some  instances  are  sold  and  bartered. 
Households  without  agricultural  fields  often  undertake  sharecropping  or  work  as 
labourers for other households. 
Thus,  resettlement  of  permanent  homes  is  not  anticipated  according  to  the  project 
design, but resettlement of livelihood activities (cattle grazing and hunting grounds) and 
assets  may  occur  to  pave  way  for  project  infrastructure  and  the  fencing  off  of 
plantations. This may result in permanent loss of access to surrounding villagers who 
were also grazing their animals in the project sites. 
The  establishment  of  the  sub-projects  and  in  particular  the  fencing  off  of  plantation 
areas will have a disruptive effect on the day-to-day life of the locals, like cutting off 
their usual footpaths or routes to social and economic service centres and forcing them 
to use longer routes. This will be unavoidable, and the communities have to come up 
with the best alternatives. 
Assessment of Impact 
Communities  will  be  affected  by  the  construction  activities  of  plantations,  sheds, 
warehouses  and  other  agricultural  infrastructure,  fencing  off  of  plantations  to  effect 
better  management,  causing  a  shift  in  livelihoods  for  many  who  were  depending  on 
these  lands  for  hunting,  gathering  and  collection  of  medicinal  plants.  Therefore,  the 
sensitivity of the receptors is rated as low. 
Required Mitigation Measures 
The mitigation measures include: 
• 
•  Relocate the footpaths and construct foot bridges where possible. 
Engage in good catchment management approaches. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
113 | P a g e  
•  Create alternative sources of livelihood e.g., by involving the affected parties in 
the scheme. 
Table 8-5      Loss of agricultural fields  
Impact of loss of agricultural fields 
Project Phase 
Type of Impact 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Pre-Construction, Construction (extending into Operation) 
Pre-Mitigation Impact 
Direct 
Long term 
Footprint 
Low 
Not detrimental 
Definite 
Low 
Residual Impact 
Post-mitigation,  it  is  expected  that  the  impact  of  the  shift  in  livelihoods  of  the  local 
communities could be reduced to one of No significance for all people as they will be 
benefiting from the, jobs at the project sites and at other downstream opportunities 
like processing and packaging plants. 
8.2.2.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Constructions/Operations Phase. 
a) 
Economic Opportunities Employment (job creation) 
Currently  there  are 
limited  economic  opportunities  beyond  subsistence-based 
in  the  proposed  project  areas.  Communities  have  expressed  high 
agriculture 
expectations for employment and business opportunities associated with this Project, 
and  they  anticipate  that  these  opportunities  will  bring  about  improvements  to  their 
standard of living.  
During  the  operational  phase,  there  will  be  several  employment  opportunities 
associated with the Project. The work will require both skilled and unskilled labour. It is 
expected that all the labour will initially be sourced locally in the sub-project areas and 
only unavailable skilled labour will be sourced from elsewhere in Rwanda.  
Most  of  the  consulted  stakeholders  stated  that  one  of  the  positive  impacts  of  the 
proposed project is that there will be jobs created for them during the construction and 
implementation  phases  of  the  PSAC.  They  indicated  that  they  would  like  to  see  the 
contractors as well as the NAEB hire the people from the villages in the project Areas. 
They pointed out that they would like the contractor to look for skilled labour in the 
project  area  before  they  hire  outside  people.  The  same  should  happen  during  the 
operational phase of the project. 
Assessment of Impact 
The communities in the sub-project areas can be considered to have Low sensitivity in 
that  the  economic  opportunities  that  will  most  likely  be  available  are  small  scale 
initiatives since the majority of the population is unlikely to have the skills or capital to 
114 | P a g e  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
set-up big businesses. A few will be able to set-up small initiatives that will increase their 
ability to earn some income. 
The benefits will be experienced as a positive impact, at the local level, will be long-term 
to permanent, of medium intensity and most likely to happen. The impacts will most 
likely  be  high  beneficial  –  the  communities  regard this  as  a  major  long-term positive 
change  as  it  will  improve  their  livelihoods.  The  impacts  are  therefore  of  medium 
significance.  
Required Enhancement Measures 
The enhancement measures include: 
•  Set up favourable working relationships between NAEB and the communities. 
•  Meet all promises. 
•  Endeavour for a win-win situation. 
•  Scout for skilled workers in the project area before hiring outsiders. 
Table 8-6      Economic Opportunities and Improved Livelihoods 
Impact on Economic Opportunities and Improved Livelihoods 
Operation 
Project Phase 
Positive, direct 
Type of Impact 
Long-term to permanent 
Duration 
Extent 
Intensity 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
Local 
Medium 
High beneficial 
Most likely 
Medium 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
115 | P a g e  
8.2.3    Summary of the Magnitude of Potential Social Impacts 
Tables 7-7 below presents an analysis of the probability of the identified impacts occurring, and thus giving an indication of the magnitude of the risk. 
The magnitudes are determined using the Impact Magnitude Scoring Table in Appendix 2. 
Table 8-7      Magnitude of Potential Social Impacts 
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILIT
Y 
SEVERITY OR 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATI
ON 
MAGNITUDE 
OF IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
7.2.1 
PLANNING PHASE 
7.2.1.1    Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(b) 
Limited and 
inadequate 
Stakeholder 
Involvement  
•  Predominance of the top-down 
approach and just handing a 
project to stakeholders 
Inadequate dissemination/sharing 
of information 
• 
(c) 
Poor project 
Inception/Intr
oduction 
•  Unclear roles and responsibilities 
•  Negative perception 
• 
Lack of transparency from the 
implementing Partners. 
Lack of proper timelines for the 
different phases of the project. 
• 
•  Dragging the planning phase too 
long. 
7.2.1.2   
Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
Community-
Based 
Approaches 
(Project 
acceptance) 
• 
• 
The Stakeholders are familiar with 
working as a community for the 
benefit of everyone and will easily 
form clusters for the project, 
stakeholders fully support this 
community-based project 
Negative 
4 
3 
3 
2 
12 
8 
Moderate 
Low 
Negative 
4 
3 
2 
1 
10 
Moderate 
Positive 
4 
4 
3 
5 
16 
High 
7 
Low 
17 
High 
• 
Low chances of success and 
sustainability 
•  Failure to take up ownership of the 
project by the partners 
•  Anxiety and anticipation. 
• 
Limited cooperation 
• 
Suspicion and hence concealing of 
important information 
•  Community prepared to work together 
•  Readily accepting the project concept 
•  Youths are expecting to participate 
and be engaged. 
•  High chances of success and 
sustainability. 
•  Ready to take up ownership of the 
project by the partners. 
•  Available for employment and 
partnerships. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
116 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILIT
Y 
SEVERITY OR 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATI
ON 
MAGNITUDE 
OF IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
7.2.3 
CONSTRUCTION/OPERATIONS PHASE. 
7.2.3.1    Potential Negative Impacts During Constructions/Operations Phase. 
•  Conflict over employment 
Negative 
4 
3 
2 
2 
11 
opportunities. 
•  Conflict over relationships. 
•  Conflict over available resources. 
Temporary and permanent physical 
injuries. 
Negative 
4 
5 
4 
3 
•  Bronchial diseases from dust. 
• 
Loss of life 
Moderate 
16 
(High) 
9 
Low 
9 
Low 
(a) 
(b) 
Conflicts 
between  local 
people 
and 
external  work 
force  
•  Migration of outsiders to the 
potential project sites for 
employment. 
•  Breakdown of social fabric due to 
• 
illicit relationships. 
increased burden on the local 
resources. 
Occupational 
Health 
Safety Issues  
and 
•  Weak technical capacity and/or 
• 
negligence on operation of vehicles 
and machinery 
•  Lack or inadequate use of safety 
gear may also contribute to 
accidents that may result in trauma 
and other casualties. 
•  Weak security measures in the 
project area. 
Public 
•  Presence of contract workers from 
outside the area and interaction 
with locals. 
Influx of people to the areas in 
search of employment 
opportunities. 
• 
(c) 
Poor 
Health  
• 
• 
Spread of communicable diseases 
such as HIV/AIDS. 
Increase in the prevalence of water-
borne diseases (intestinal and urinary 
bilharzia and malaria) 
Negative 
3 
3 
3 
5 
14 
10 
High 
Moderate 
(d) 
(e) 
Gender  Based 
Violence 
•  Development of agriculture systems 
•  Poverty which leads to women 
being exploited by men during 
construction phase. 
• 
Displacements 
or 
shifts  of 
livelihood 
Fencing off the plantations for 
improved Catchment management. 
•  Physical body harm 
• 
Lack of productivity 
•  Communicable disease incidences 
•  Removal/alteration of usual source of 
Negative 
Negative 
5 
4 
livelihood. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
5 
4 
5 
1 
3 
4 
18 
High 
13 
Moderate 
13 
Moderate 
7 
Low 
117 | P a g e  
PARAMETER UNDER CONSIDERATION 
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISK 
REF: 
CATEGORY 
CAUSE 
IMPACT 
QUALITY 
PROBABILIT
Y 
SEVERITY OR 
SIGNIFICANCE 
EXTENT 
DURATI
ON 
MAGNITUDE 
OF IMPACT 
RESIDUAL 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AFTER MITIGATION 
activities 
(cattle  grazing 
and 
hunting 
grounds)   
• 
Expansion of irrigation farmlands 
and construction of micro dams. 
•  Construction of various agricultural 
value chain facilities. 
• 
long-term hardship, impoverishment, 
and social unrest among the affected 
community. 
•  Migration to alternative livelihoods. 
•  Cutting off the usual resources 
areas and areas normally used by 
local people (grazing lands, hunting 
grounds, etc blocked) 
7.2.2.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Constructions/Operations Phase. 
(a) 
Economic 
Opportunities 
Employment 
(job creation) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Improved Horticulture 
approaches. 
Improved Agricultural practices. 
Availability of many small-scale 
initiatives. 
setting-up of businesses in the 
agriculture value chains. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
improvement on their income 
generation. 
Improvement of livelihoods. 
maintained land output gain. 
capacitation on entrepreneurial 
skills. 
Positive 
4 
4 
3 
4 
15 
High 
16 
High 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
118 | P a g e  
9. 
ECSMF matrix 
This chapter outlines the Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) for the 
PSAC. 
9.1      THE ESCMP 
The  ESCMP  for  the  proposed  PSAC,  provides  guidelines  for  the  management  of  potential 
environmental and social aspects at the project sites. The ESCMP also identifies parties responsible 
for monitoring actions, and any training or capacity building needs. 
Mitigation measures have been identified to reduce present and potential impacts associated with 
both the existing and new agricultural activities on the proposed project. In addition, mitigation 
measures  are  identified  as  either  social  or  physical  measures.  Social  mitigation  includes  the 
measures  used  to  mitigate  effects  such  as  noise,  land  use,  and  other  effects  to  the  human 
environment.  Physical  mitigation  includes  measures  that  address  impacts  to  the  physical 
environment, such as biological communities, vegetation, air quality, and others.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
119 | P a g e  
Table 9-1      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP). 
TEXT 
REF. 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
6.4 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS  
5.3.1 
PLANNING PHASE  
6.4.1.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(a) 
Vegetation Clearing for cutlines 
• 
Dust generation and soil erosion 
6.4.1.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(a) 
None Identified 
6.4.2 
CONSTRUCTION PHASE 
6.4.2.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Construction Phase. 
• 
• 
Cutline  clearance  is  to  be  minimized  as  far  as  possible  to 
reduce the potential for dust generation and other impacts. 
Dust  suppression  measures  are  to  be  implemented,  which 
shall include Water sprinklers and covering moulds with nets. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
(a) 
Vegetation Clearing 
• 
Limited Vegetation clearing may occur during the 
establishment of the PSAC project as new 
infrastructure will be erected. 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Preparation of land for Agriculture 
Construction of Sheds, Warehouses, 
Construction of Erosion Control Structures.  
Establishment of new and rehabilitation of old 
Plantations. 
etc 
o 
• 
• 
• 
Sensitive habitats should be avoided. (Wetlands and stream 
banks) 
Clearing should be limited to working areas only, and these 
include areas for plantations, and foundations for agriculture 
infrastructures. 
Revegetation and reforestation must be prioritized. (e.g., 
Planting grass, and trees as appropriate) 
•  Over abstraction of construction materials like sand and 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
Environmental 
awareness training 
• 
• 
• 
gravel should be avoided. 
Habitat restoration must be done where effects have been 
caused i.e., refilling burrows pits and regressing bare areas. 
Sustainable Catchment management must be practiced. 
Dust suppression: 
o 
Dust  suppression  measures  are  to  be  implemented, 
which  shall  include  covering  soil  mounds,  spraying 
water, etc. 
Site  clearance  is  to  be  minimized  as  far  as  possible  to 
reduce the potential for dust and other impacts. 
o  Water  sprinklers  to  be  used,  especially  on  the  roads 
o 
(b) 
Temporary Visual Intrusions (Marred landscape) 
leading to the project sites. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
120 | P a g e  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
TEXT 
REF. 
• 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
Establishment of plantations, erosion control 
infrastructure, Construction of micro dams and 
irrigation infrastructure, agricultural infrastructure, 
and other possible facilities will change the 
characteristics of the area and leave a marred 
landscape. 
Contractors should ensure minimum footprint of 
construction activities and provide decent accommodation 
for workers. 
All altered landscapes (Sand pits, borrow pits, brick moulding 
sites etc) should be rehabilitated by the contractor, i.e., filled 
and re-grassed. 
none 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
District Agriculture Office. 
(c) 
Soil Erosion 
• 
Point source contamination from diesel, lubricants etc 
around working areas.  
Increased soil erosion due to vegetation clearing, soil 
trampling and compaction. 
Increased rapid runoff due to vegetation clearing and 
soil compaction diminishing infiltration capacity 
during construction phase. 
Deterioration of soil characteristics due to increased 
erosion. 
• 
• 
• 
(d) 
Solid waste nuisance  
• 
• 
• 
Pollution of soil and water resources 
Littering and indiscriminate dumping. 
Deterioration of the aesthetics of the areas. 
• 
• 
• 
Appropriate containment measures for all operational areas 
and proper disposal of used lubricants. 
Soil erosion control measures (e.g., re-vegetation, reseeding 
of grasses, land preparation, terracing, use of gabions, 
stabilization of banks etc)  
Restoration of borrow pits, sand and quarry stone 
abstraction sites and brick moulding sites. 
Revegetation, re-grassing of all bare surfaces 
• 
•  Minimisation of vegetation clearing to working areas only 
• 
Installing soil erosion control structures like, gabions, contour 
ridges, swells and catch dams. 
Use  existing  roads  to  access  the  fields  and  farm  sites  and 
employ  drainage  control  measures  and  culverts  to  control 
natural runoff and overland flow.  
Seek guidance of local environmental officers to identify 
acceptable disposal sites. 
Collection of all construction debris for proper disposal at 
designated landfills. 
(e) 
Loss of natural and cultural heritage 
•  Natural features, antics and relics destroyed in the 
project area e.g., during excavations. 
•  Waste from agricultural activities can be further processed 
• 
• 
into other uses, e.g., organic manure.  
Reuse and recycling must be preferred over disposal of the 
waste. 
Establish proper treatment facilities for effluents from tea 
processing plants and coffee washing stations. 
•  May generate biogas from the waste by erecting Bio-gas 
digesters. 
• 
• 
• 
Conduct feasibility studies, fencing, introduce proper 
antiquity education programmes. 
Come up with a Physical cultural resources’ management 
plan. 
Establish procedure for chance finds. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
District Agriculture Office. 
Environmental 
awareness training 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
District Agriculture Office. 
Local Environment Officers 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
Local Environment Officers  
Museums Department. 
Requirement of the 
National Monuments 
Act. 
121 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
(f) 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
Habitat loss and biodiversity disturbances. 
•  Noise and vibrations cause small wild animals to 
• 
migrate, 
contamination of the rivers may cause fish kills and 
destruction of other aquatic life. 
• 
If any natural features, antics, and relics are encountered the 
trenching  should  stop  immediately  and  the  chance  finds 
procedure be followed. 
Enforcement of parks and wildlife law,  
Avoid contamination of soil and water 
Environmental flows must be reserved at all times. 
• 
• 
• 
•  Noisy operations should be conducted at certain times of the 
day. 
• 
Always use well serviced equipment that will be less noisy. 
•  Noise management measures are to be implemented and shall 
include maintenance of vehicles and equipment to run quietly, 
and avoidance of leaving engines running unnecessarily. 
Traffic management measures are to be implemented and 
travel speed of contractors and suppliers’ vehicles will be 
restricted. 
• 
Requirement of the Parks 
and Wildlife Act. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Contractors. 
Local Environment Officers  
Museums Department. 
District Agric. Officer,  
(g) 
Ambient air pollution 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Pollution of air. 
Increases in bronchial disorders. 
Impaired Visibility on the roads. 
Disturbs normal developments of vegetation. 
Causes acid rain. 
(h) 
Ambient Water pollution 
•  Water quality will be impacted by wastewater 
discharges from Coffee washing stations, tea 
processing plants and construction activities including 
onsite sewage and rainwater run-off. 
Soil and water pollution resulting from the 
accumulation of solid and liquid waste. 
Soil and water pollution from chemicals & fertilizers 
meant for production. 
• 
• 
•  Water quality may be impacted by waste streams from 
• 
• 
• 
processing plants. 
Littering and indiscriminate dumping of solid waste 
pollutes land and water resources. 
Poisoning of aquatic and inland ecosystems. 
Ecosystem’s imbalance and destruction of flora and 
fauna 
6.4.2.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Construction Phase.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Dust suppression measures must be instituted at all sites 
which shall include covering soil mounds and spraying bare 
areas with water. 
Site clearance is to be minimized as far as possible to reduce 
the potential for dust and other impacts 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
None 
Contractors to erect proper sanitary facilities. - Toilets at 
convenient locations throughout the project area. 
Pollution from lubricants and other wastes to be avoided. 
Contain all oil leaks at workshops and surfaces by collecting 
in oil separators. 
Controlled disposal of wastes and effluent by use of 
appropriate disposal facilities, use of appropriate drainage 
structures, use of cleaner technologies, proper storage of 
materials, awareness campaigns. 
None 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
•  Waste must be recycled and reused to avoid dumping in 
waterways. 
• 
Polluted water shall be treated prior disposal to watercourse 
•  Maintain  all  vehicles  and  equipment  to  avoid  oil  and  grease 
• 
leaks 
Install oil and grease separators to collect rain runoff around 
workshops and parking areas. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
122 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
(a) 
(b) 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
Revegetation 
• 
In the process of establishing well managed 
plantations, and catchments the vegetation will be 
restored and enhanced. 
• 
Rehabilitation of Fragile and Degraded Ecosystems  
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Rehabilitate and protect the upper reaches of the 
environment protected and conserved 
revegetation by planting required species 
Arrest the Erosion of mountain sides and steep slopes. 
Prevent the Loss of natural ecosystems 
project site 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Study and identify the correct indigenous plants that can 
thrive in the area. 
Conduct deliberate exercise to revegetate the project area 
using fruit trees and other grasses. 
Practice intercropping with fruit trees and agro-forestry with 
shade trees. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
Carry out Environmental Conservation Measures in 
degraded sites of the project areas,  
revegetate by planting grass, install gabions as necessary. 
Re-route and channelise drainage of water from the steep 
gradients to reduce gully formations, 
Revegetate and re-grass bare ground, quickly to avoid 
further degradation, 
Establish Soil erosion control measures (e.g., terracing, use 
of gabions, stabilization of banks etc)  
Construction of the gabions along the riverbanks where the 
project will abstract water to prevent loss of property as well 
as siltation of the river, 
Use of stone pitching along the slopes to prevent soil erosion 
6.4.3 
OPERATION PHASE  
6.4.3.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Operation Phase. 
(a) 
Soil Erosion 
•  Much less potential for soil erosion 
• 
loose soil at the sides of construction sites, levelled 
irrigation pipelines as well as roads on steep slopes will 
still be susceptible to erosion 
(b) 
Solid waste 
• 
Less quantities of solid wastes generated include 
domestic wastes, plastics, etc. 
• 
(c) 
Effluent Discharges 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Revegetation, re-grassing of all bare surfaces, 
• 
•  Minimisation  of  vegetation  clearing  to  working  areas  only  – 
fields under preparation. 
Installing soil erosion control structures like, gabions, contour 
ridges, swells and catch dams. 
Establishment of grassed drainage systems to prevent erosion. 
Collection of all solid waste in a systematic manner for disposal 
at designated landfills. 
Placing  of  waste  collection  bins  at  strategic  positions 
throughout the project area. 
Solid waste should never be burnt on site. 
• 
•  Develop a solid waste management plan and implement it. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
Contractors. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
123 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
(d) 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
•  Most agricultural, agro-processing, packaging, and 
marketing operations produce liquid effluent 
Agro chemicals 
• 
• 
Poisoning of farmers by chemicals. 
Poisoning  of  aquatic  and  inland  ecosystems  by  the 
chemicals. 
Poisoning of the soil by the chemicals. 
Poisoning of farm products consumers by chemicals. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Installation of appropriate effluent treatment facilities next to 
any  processes  that  generate  effluent.  i.e.,  Septic  tanks, 
oxidation ponds, etc 
Collecting  and  channelling  all  effluent  to  a  properly 
constructed  effluent  treatment  plant,  which  could  be 
oxidation ponds, septic tanks or bio-gas digesters 
•  Monitoring  the  quality  of  the  effluent  that  is  ultimately 
discharged  to  the  environment  so  that  it  meets  the  national 
effluent discharge standards. 
• 
Encourage organic farming and limit the use of Agro 
chemicals like inorganic fertilizers.  
•  Use integrated Pest Management approaches to minimize 
• 
• 
pesticide use. 
Conduct awareness training & workshops on safe handling of 
chemicals. 
Erect separate storerooms for all agro chemicals so that they 
are always under lock and key away from food staffs. 
•  Use split application of fertiliser to avoid excess being washed 
away. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
•  No application before major storms 
• 
Don’t store fertilisers and agrochemicals and food in the same 
sore room 
All workers to use appropriate PPE every time 
• 
•  Use  the  least  potent  variants  of  pesticides  to  minimise 
poisoning. 
Contain all oil leaks at workshops and surfaces. 
• 
•  Maintain  all  vehicles  and  equipment  to  avoid  oil  and  grease 
leaks. 
Install oil and grease separators to collect rain runoff around 
workshops and parking areas. 
NAEB. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
identify the correct indigenous plants that can thrive in the 
area. 
Conduct deliberate exercise to revegetate the project area 
using trees and other grasses. 
NAEB. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
(e) 
Ambient Water pollution  
•  Oil and grease leak and spills prevalent in most work 
• 
areas like the farm sheds. 
Leaks can be washed into water ways and end up 
polluting the water resources. 
5.3.3.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Operation Phase. 
(a) 
Revegetation 
• 
planting of grass and continuous rehabilitation of the 
pastures. 
7.2 
SOCIAL AND HEALTH IMPACTS  
7.2.1 
PLANNING PHASE 
• 
• 
• 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
124 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
7.2.1.1  Potential Negative Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(a) 
Limited Stakeholder Involvement 
• 
• 
Low chances of success and sustainability 
Failure to take up ownership of the project 
(b) 
Poor project Inception/Introduction 
Anxiety and anticipation Limited cooperation 
Suspicion and hence concealing important of 
information 
• 
• 
• 
7.2.1.2  Potential Positive Impacts During Planning Phase. 
(a) 
Community-Based Approaches (Project acceptance) 
•  Community prepared to work together 
•  Readily accepting the project concept 
•  Youths are expecting to get employment. 
•  High chances of success and sustainability. 
•  Ready to take up ownership of the project by the 
partners. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Conduct a comprehensive participatory stakeholder mapping 
exercise including roles and responsibilities. 
Timeous dissemination of information. 
Always target buy in at decision making level. 
Stakeholders  are  continuously  appraised  of  the 
project progress. 
Assistance 
is  provided  to  affected  people  to 
improve,  or  at  least  restore  incomes  and  living 
standards  to  at  least  the  equivalent  level  prior  to 
project implementation, if not better. 
Affected  persons  should  be  consulted  on  decisions 
that affect their livelihoods and well-being and shall 
be 
informed  of  their  options  and  the 
compensation rates. 
Grievance  redress  mechanisms  are  developed  and 
accessible. 
fully 
Efforts must be made to stick to agreed timelines. 
Transparency and full disclosure of key elements of the 
project. 
Production of proper plan of action with timelines. 
Presenting  full  disclosure  of  project  decisions  and 
actions to all concerned stakeholders. 
The planning phase should not drag for far too long 
as people tend to lose despair. 
Team building  
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Beneficiaries. 
Local Environment Officers  
District Agriculture Office. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
None 
Enhance Community Participation in the project. 
• 
•  Prefer participating stakeholders for employment in the 
project. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
•  Use bottom-up approaches for project planning so as to 
involve the potential partners effectively. 
•  Provide potential skills development for the local youths in 
•  Available for employment and partnerships. 
the farming sector. 
•  Continuous 
Consultation 
information 
dissemination for the stakeholders to keep abreast 
with the project. 
and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
125 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
•  Availing  the  Grievance  redress  mechanisms  for 
everyone  to  have  a  channel  to  air  their  views  and 
grievances. 
7.2.2 
CONSTRUCTION/OPERATIONS PHASE 
7.2.2.1  Potential Negative Impacts During 
Constructions/Operations Phase 
Conflicts between local people and external work force  
(a) 
•  Conflict over employment opportunities 
•  Conflict over relationships.  
•  Conflict over available resources 
• 
First preference for employment should be given to locals, 
including for technical work. 
•  Migrant workers encouraged to bring their spouses along. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
(b) 
Occupational Health and Safety Issues  
Temporary and permanent physical injuries. 
• 
•  Bronchial diseases from dust. 
•  Diseases and illness from agricultural activities etc).  
• 
Loss of life 
(c) 
Poor Public Health  
• 
• 
Spread of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS.  
Increase in the prevalence of water-borne diseases 
(intestinal and urinary bilharzia and malaria) 
(d) 
Gender Based Violence 
• 
• 
• 
Physical bodily harm. 
Lack of productivity. 
Communicable disease incidences. 
(e) 
Displacements or shifts of livelihood activities 
A Health/Safety/Environment officer should be present 
during construction. 
All safety precautions must be enforced. 
Provide PPE to all workers.  
Institute dust and noise suppression measures. 
Health Dept,  
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
Application of various 
types of PPE and their 
proper use. 
Education on Public health issues. 
Awareness raising within local communities and workers 
through Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
and distribution of free condoms and counselling and 
treatment will help alleviate the impacts. 
Provision of toilets that are constructed in such a way that they 
cannot leak into water resources 
Provision of potable water supply that will include the use of 
groundwater resources that can be used as a reference to the 
performance of the project surface water supply. 
Health Dept,  
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
HIV/AIDS and related 
communicable diseases 
Zero tolerance to gender-based violence. 
Ensure sexual harassment Policy at all levels involved in the 
project. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
Gender Based Violence 
and Sexual Harassment 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
126 | P a g e  
TEXT 
REF. 
IMPACT 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
•  Usual routes closed.  
• 
Long routes in use - women, the elderly and school 
children affected. 
•  Removal/alteration of usual source of livelihood. 
• 
(Cattle grazing and hunting grounds)   
long-term hardship, impoverishment, and social unrest 
among the affected community. 
•  Migration to alternative livelihoods. 
7.2.2.2  Potential 
Positive 
Impacts 
During 
Constructions/Operations Phase. 
Economic Opportunities Employment (job creation) 
(a) 
• 
improvement on their income generation. 
• 
Improvement of livelihoods 
•  maintained land output gain  
•  capacitation on entrepreneurial skills 
• 
• 
• 
Engage in good plantation designs. 
Relocate the footpaths and construct foot bridges where 
possible. 
Create alternative sources of livelihood e.g., by involving the 
affected parties in the plantations. 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
Set up favourable partnership agreements. 
• 
•  Meet all promises 
• 
• 
Endeavour for a win-win situation 
NAEB. 
Local Leadership. 
Local Environment Officers  
• 
• 
Entrepreneurial 
approaches. 
Good 
Husbandry 
animal 
•  Commercial  farming 
approaches. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
127 | P a g e  
10.  CAPACITY NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND TRAINING PLAN 
10.1     INTRODUCTION 
MINAGRI will be the Lead Implementing Agent for the PSAC project with the assistance of 
NAEB.  It  is  important  that  these  institutions  be  capable  of  carrying  out  the  ESCMF 
recommendations. 
The following is an outline of the capacity building and training needs that were identified for 
the  implementing  partners  of  the  PSAC  to  enhance  their  environmental  and  social 
management. 
10.2     CAPACITY BUILDING NEEDS 
The  successful  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate 
Management Framework (ESCMF) together with its environmental and social management 
plans (ESMPs) (Appendix 3) will require that target groups and stakeholders who play a role 
in its implementation be provided with appropriate training and awareness.  
Currently  there  is  little  capacity  within  MINAGRI  to  implement  environmental  and  social 
requirements necessary to manage the potential environmental and social risks and impacts 
resulting from the proposed agricultural activities of PSAC. 
National Level 
i. 
NAEB  will  be  responsible  for  completing  the  Environmental  and  Social  Screening  Form 
(Appendix  1)  to  be  able  to  identify  and  mitigate  the  potential  environmental  and  social 
impacts of rolling out the various agricultural value chains. In the event that a project activity 
under  PSAC  falls  under  the  listed  projects  in  the  Environmental  Law,  MINAGRI/NAEB  will 
review  the  recommendations  from  the  districts  and  undertake  the  process  of  seeking  the 
approval  of  the  EIA  through  the  EIA  Department  of  Rwanda  Environment  Management 
Authority (REMA). In addition, strategic decisions on the direction of rolling out the project 
chains will be undertaken at this level, and therefore those decision makers must be aware 
of potential risks and impacts. The groups that will need training will include: 
•  NAEB Staff 
•  SPIU Staff 
•  PSAC coordinator and management 
•  MINAGRI staff 
•  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) 
•  Ministry of Local Government 
•  Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs (MTEA) 
•  PSAC Steering Committee 
•  Other collaborating institutions. 
District (Local) Level 
ii. 
At  District  and  local  level,  the  groups  that  will  receive  environmental  and  social  training 
include the following: 
• 
the Association members,  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
128 | P a g e  
individual farmers 
• 
•  Extension workers in project impact areas  
•  District environmental officers 
•  District agricultural officers  
10.3     TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 
The proposed PSAC activities will be numerous and challenging. Successful implementation 
of  the  programme  activities  will  require  dynamic  and  multi-disciplinary  professionals. 
Therefore, regular short and tailor-made training courses and seminars will be required to 
reinforce  the  capacity  and  skills  of  the  stakeholders  and  farmers  during  the  entire  project 
period. Training activities and target groups are presented in Table 10-1 below. 
10.3.1   Capacity building needs for PSAC Partners. 
The  key  experts  from  the  PSAC  implementation  partners  are  highly  skilled  in  the  relevant 
fields for which they are responsible. However, there are some areas in Environmental, social 
and  climate  aspects  for  which  they  will  need  some  training  and  sensitisation  in  order  to 
improve effectiveness in the implementation of the project. They will need to be sensitised 
on the specific requirements of the project, including IFAD’s SECAP, 2021, Climate, Land and 
Disclosure Policies for IFAD as well as on the findings and recommendations of the ESCMF. 
This will be geared at bringing them to the same level of understanding as NAEB so that they 
can offer their services from an informed position. 
10.3.2   Capacity Building needs for NAEB  
The  NAEB  will  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day  environmental,  social  and  climate 
interactions on the ground and how existing management actions are being implemented. It 
is therefore important that the capacity within NAEB management office be strengthened in 
order  to  ensure  that  adequate  staff  is  available for the  sustainable  implementation of  the 
various  project  activities  from  an  environmental  and  social  perspective,  also  taking  into 
consideration  any  climate  related  issues that  may arise  from time to  time  in  the  different 
locations for sub-projects.  
10.3.3   Capacity Building needs for beneficiary communities  
The training needs for the beneficiary communities have been identified and they will need 
to  be  trained  to  prepare  and  capacitate  them  for  sustainable  implementation  of  the 
subprojects that they will be engaged with. The training will target the District Development 
Committees as well as the management structures for each benefiting association, depending 
on the stage at which the sub-project activities are at. 
10.3.4   Necessary training to support business farming:  
NAEB,  in  collaboration  with  the  MINAGRI  and  other  strategic  partners,  will  continue  to 
sensitise beneficiary communities (Tea and coffee associations, horticulture associations and 
farmers) in using technological advancements to improve productivity and quality of produce. 
10.3.5   Training on business management. 
NAEB  will  provide  capacity  building  for  tea,  coffee  and  horticulture  farmers  on  important 
aspects  of  farming  such  as  the  construction  of  appropriate  facilities  for  processing  the 
products, as well as handling of waste generated from processing the products.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
129 | P a g e  
10.3.6   Training on the use and interpretation of early warning systems. 
NAEB, in collaboration with the Meteorological Services Department, will also encourage the 
communication  and  dissemination  of  meteorological  bulletins  tailored to  climate  risks  and 
vulnerabilities specific to selected crops grown in those areas. 
10.3.7   Training of all farmers on watershed management issues  
Every tea, coffee and horticulture farmer is key in ensuring compliance with the ESMPs that 
has  been  developed  by  this  ESCMF  process,  it  will  be  important  for  them  to  have  a  good 
understanding  of  how  the  activities  they  will  carry  out  under  PSAC  will  affect  and/or  be 
affected  by  environmental,  social  and  climate  change  aspects,  occurring  in  the  rest  of  the 
watershed.  They  will  need  to  be  trained  on  what  measures  are  required  to  address  these 
watershed management issues. 
10.3.8   Capacity building for gender equity  
Gender balance should be promoted in order to increase awareness of gender roles in the 
households  and  communities  by  improving  the  capacity  of  vulnerable  groups  such  as 
household heads who are female and single parents of either gender, to negotiate their needs 
and  interests.  These  Households  will  be  capacitated  on  how  to  effectively  participate  in 
livelihoods planning and value chain development through gender-equitable solutions.  
10.3.9   Social and psychosocial support for PSAC communities  
NAEB should acknowledge that the implementation of the project is likely to trigger some 
culture shocks within the participating communities and therefore make the necessary plans 
to provide support.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Put  in  place  support  structures  for  the  social  and  psycho-social  needs  of  affected 
communities.  
Sensitise communities to prepare them for the likely changes in their way of life.  
Prepare  communities  for  the  culture  shocks  through  sensitisation  sessions  and 
training.  
Establish structures for the control and resolution of conflicts related to the impacts 
of PSAC on family fabric.  
10.3.10  Training on health, safety and environmental quality issues 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Farm workers should be trained on how to handle and store agrochemicals.  
Farm workers should be sensitised and educated on how to avoid accidental contact 
with pesticides and agrochemicals.  
Sensitisation on the usefulness of Safety data sheets and how to keep and use them.  
Training of farm workers on occupational health and safety issues, relevant Personal 
Protective Equipment necessary for each sub-project, including guidelines that need 
to be followed to prevent the transmission of communicable diseases such as COVID-
19.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
130 | P a g e  
10.4     SUMMARY OF TRAINING REQUIREMENTS. 
Table 11-1 provides a summary of the training needs for the PSAC including the target groups and trainers for each training activity and its cost 
estimates: 
Table 10-1    Environmental and Social Training 
No. 
1. 
2. 
PSAC and linkage to Safeguards policies 
Typical issues 
Budgeting for E&S risk management  
early warning systems 
health, safety and environmental quality. 
TRAINING ACTIVITY 
High  Level  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Risks 
and Impacts of PSAC 
• 
• 
•  Mitigation requirements 
•  Management plans 
•  Monitoring requirements 
•  Management review 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the 
Projects: 
• 
•  Use of checklists 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Preparation of terms of reference. 
Identification of Impacts 
ESIA report preparation and processing 
Policies and laws in Rwanda 
IFAD safeguard policies 
early warning systems 
health, safety and environmental quality 
Screening process. 
TARGET GROUP / TRAINER 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
5 Ministries,  
• 
EIA Department,  
• 
PSAC coordinator and management 
• 
Sub-project management 
•  Other collabourating institutions. 
• 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
30 high level decision makers, 
managers, coordinators trained 
COST ESTIMATES 
$  12,000.00  one  session  during  the 
entire project period) 
Length: 1 day 
Total cost: $ 12,000.00 
TRAINER: 
• 
Rwanda 
Authority (REMA) 
Private Consultant 
• 
Environmental  Management 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
• 
• 
District Agriculture Office Team 
District Environment Units 
Extension workers in project impact areas. 
Environmental  Management 
TRAINER: 
• 
Rwanda 
Authority (REMA) 
Private Consultant 
• 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
Cascading training to lower levels: 
o  Associations/cooperatives/farmers. 
o 
The rest of the District Forestry 
staff 
o  District Councils and Extension 
workers 
TRAINER: 
• 
Rwanda 
Authority (REMA) 
Environmental  Management 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
10 members of District Agriculture 
Office Team are trained. 
10 District Environment Units 
members are trained. 
10 Extension workers in project 
impact areas trained. 
(Three  sessions  during  the  entire 
project period) 
Length: 5 days per session 
Total cost: $ 20,000.00 
30 members of the 
Associations/cooperatives/farmers. 
30 Extension Workers 
10 District Council/Extension 
workers  
(Four  sessions  during  the  entire 
project period) 
Venue: In project areas  
Length: 5 days per session 
Total cost:  $25,000.00 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
131 | P a g e  
No. 
TRAINING ACTIVITY 
TARGET GROUP / TRAINER 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
COST ESTIMATES 
3 
Watershed Management 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Rehabilitation of mountain sides and gullies. 
Reforestation/revegetation. 
Control of Alien Invasive Species. 
General Catchment management. 
• 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
• 
• 
District Agriculture Office Team 
District Environment Units 
Extension workers in project impact areas. 
TRAINER: 
• 
Rwanda 
Authority (REMA) 
Environmental  Management 
Private Consultant 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
Cascading training to lower levels: 
o  Associations/cooperatives/farmers 
o 
The rest of the District Agriculture 
staff 
o  District Councils and Extension 
workers 
TRAINER: 
• 
Rwanda 
Authority (REMA) 
Environmental  Management 
4. 
Facilitate Gender, HIV/AIDS awareness 
• 
Impacts of HIV/AIDS on social wellbeing, 
livelihood and projects 
TARGET GROUP: 
•  Extension workers in project impact areas 
•  Associations/cooperatives/farmers. 
•  Mitigation measures 
• 
• 
• 
Sensitisation on GBV/SEA 
Care of victims 
Social and psychosocial support 
TRAINER: 
•  NAC,  
5.  Water Management 
•  When to irrigate 
• 
How much water to apply 
• 
For how long 
•  Water rights 
Crop Management 
TARGET GROUP: 
• Extension workers and Farmers 
TRAINER: 
• 
Private Consultant  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
10 members of District Agriculture 
Office Team are trained. 
10 District Environment Units 
members are trained. 
10 Extension workers in project 
impact areas trained. 
(Three  sessions  during  the  entire 
project period) 
Length: 5 days per session 
Total cost: $ 20,000.00 
30 members of the 
Associations/cooperatives/farmers 
30 Extension Workers 
10 District Council/Extension 
workers  
10 Extension workers in project 
impact areas trained. 
30 Cluster members/Farmers 
trained 
(Four  sessions  during  the  entire 
project period) 
Venue: In project areas  
Length: 5 days per session 
Total cost:  $15, 000.00 
TO USE NAC RESOURCES 
 (Two  sessions  during  entire  project 
period) 
Venue:  
Length: 5 days 
Total cost:  $10, 000.00 
10 Extension Workers 
30 Farmers from various trial farms 
trained 
(Four  sessions  during  the  entire 
project period) 
Venue: Farms 
Length: 5 days per session 
132 | P a g e  
No. 
TRAINING ACTIVITY 
TARGET GROUP / TRAINER 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
COST ESTIMATES 
6. 
Crop harvesting & storage 
Tea tree management 
Coffee management 
Cropping calendar 
How to apply fertilizer 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Use of organic manure / compost 
•  Weeding 
• 
For Agricultural activities - Pesticide Management 
- Pesticides Types and Use 
- Packaging, labelling and Handling 
- Storage, Stacking and Release 
- Pesticides Record Maintenance 
Pesticides Application and Disposal 
• 
• 
• 
Types and Handling of Equipment 
Pesticides Toxicity 
Safety of Applicators (OSHA) 
o  First Aid 
o  Care, Cleaning and Disposal of Pesticides and 
Equipment 
Agro-facility Management 
• 
disposal of wastes,  
• 
biosafety,  
• 
security,  
• 
emergency response. 
TOTAL ESTIMATED BUDGET 
Total cost: $ 20,000.00 
TARGET GROUP: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Store Keepers 
Pesticide Transporters 
Pesticide Users 
Agro-dealers 
All Farmers 
Trial Farm Management Committee 
Agro facilities, e.g., warehouses, etc. 
TRAINER: 
•  MINAGRI 
• 
• 
• 
10 members of Scheme 
Procurement Committee Trained 
10 Extension Workers 
30 Cluster members/Farmers 
trained  
(Three sessions for the entire project 
period) 
Venue: Farms 
Length: 5 days per session 
Total cost:  $15,000.00 
137,000.00  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
133 | P a g e  
10.5     PROPOSED APPROACH IN EXECUTING TRAINING ACTIVITIES 
PSAC will adopt a strategy of running workshops and refresher courses to disseminate the 
SECAP  related  studies  and  reports.  It  will  also  use  the  training  of  trainers  and  community 
exchange visits approach. 
It will be important that key decision makers, the PSAC coordinator and management staff 
and other high-level persons are sensitized in the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts  due  to  the  proposed  PSAC  activities.  This  training  may  be  conducted  by  a  private 
consultant  or  by  the  EIA  Department  of  Rwanda  Environmental  Management  Authority 
(REMA).  
10.6     FUNDING REQUIREMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING 
The proposed environmental training activities for the programme will be funded directly by 
the programme resources in accordance with the proposed plan laid out in Table 10-1 above.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
134 | P a g e  
11.  FUNDING FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 
11.1      COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE ESCMF 
The  costs  of  implementing  this  ESCMF  primarily  comprise  staff  time,  as  well  as  costs  of 
training of farmers. These costs have been readily integrated into the PSAC cost tables and 
will subsequently be integrated into the Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPB). Additionally, 
service  providers  and  farmers  will  have  costs  in  terms  of  implementing  some  of  the 
interventions needed to reduce risks or impact. Most of these costs will be subsidized through 
the project and are budgeted for in the general project budget lines. 
The following  is a  breakdown  of  the  cost  estimates  for  the  activities  in  the  environmental 
social and Climate  management plan. This detailed  budget is meant for implementing and 
monitoring the recommended mitigation measures throughout the project life. The budget 
is  integrated  into  the  overall  programme  costs  to  ensure  that  the  proposed  mitigation 
measures are actually implemented. 
11.2     SITE-SPECIFIC ESIAs AND ESMPs 
This component will comprise Mitigation issues to do with Site-specific ESIAs (Appendix 3), 
ESMPs and the Environmental License fees for registering these EA studies with the Rwanda 
Environmental Management Authority (REMA) (Table 11-1).  
Table 11-1    Site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs Budget 
No. 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
ACTIVITY 
ESTIMATED COST (US $) 
3 x Site-specific ESIA @ 15,000.00 each site 
Site-specific simplified ESIAs lump sum. 
500  x  Site-specific  ESMPs 
beneficiaries) lump sum. 
(Trained  Field  Officers  to  train 
Sub-Total 
40,000.00 
90,000.00 
100,000.00 
230,000.00 
11.3     MITIGATION MEASURES 
This provision is for implementing mitigation measures in each district. These resources will 
provide for: 
•  prevention of soil erosion, vegetation clearance and land degradation, 
•  Protection  of  critical  natural  habitats  (mountain  sides,  wetlands,  marginal  lands, 
natural forests, nesting sites etc.),  
•  prevention of water-borne diseases,  
•  Climate change resilient activities,  
•  Gender and Youth mainstreaming.  
Mitigation  and  enhancement  measures  were  discussed  in  detail  in  table  10-1  and  the 
following is a summary of some of the measures with cost implications (Table 11-2). 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
135 | P a g e  
Table 11-2    Mitigation and enhancement measures Budget 
No. 
MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
1.0 
2.0 
Stakeholder Participation 
• 
Conduct a comprehensive participatory stakeholder mapping exercise including roles and 
responsibilities at national, provincial, district and local area level 
Conduct adequate situational assessment to determine different vulnerability dimensions. 
• 
Revegetation and reforestation  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Revegetation and reforestation must be prioritized. 
Institute catchment conservation. 
Habitat restoration must be done where effects have been caused 
All altered landscapes (Sand pits, borrow pits, brick moulding sites etc.) should be 
rehabilitated. 
3.0 
Soil erosion control measures 
• 
Institute measures to reduce and control soil erosion like contouring and terracing, 
stabilising slopes and banks, re-vegetation, reseeding of grasses, land preparation, 
use of gabions, etc.)  
Sub-total 
ESTIMATED COST 
(US $) 
25,000.00 
40,000.00 
50,000.00 
115,000.00 
11.4     MONITORING AND EVALUATION  
This  provision  is  for  training  both  the  PSAC  staff  and  the  beneficiaries  in  participatory 
environmental  monitoring.  This  entails  monitoring  the  implementation  of  mitigation 
measures at the sub-project level (e.g., each plantation, washing station, irrigation scheme, 
horticulture project, etc.). (Table 11-3). The component will comprise: 
the monitoring and evaluation issues of the whole programme 
i) 
ii)  Monitoring and Evaluation of the progress of the implementation of the ESCMF. 
Assessing whether it is being effective or not. 
Table 11-3    Monitoring and Evaluation Budget 
No. 
ACTIVITY 
Estimated Cost (US $) 
1.0 
Monitoring and evaluation exercises 
Sub-Total 
80,000.00 
80,000.00 
11.5     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING 
Environmental and Social Training were discussed in detail in table 11-1 and the following is 
a summary of the budgetary requirements for the proposed training activities (Table 11-4). 
Table 11-4    Environmental and Social Training Budget 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
TOTAL 
TRAINING ACTIVITIES 
High level training in Environmental and Social Risks of PSAC 
Training in Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Cascading  training  on  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management 
Framework and its ESMP 
Watershed Management Training 
Cascading training on Watershed Management 
Facilitate Gender, HIV/AIDS awareness 
Water and Crop Management 
Agricultural Chemicals Management  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Estimated Cost (US $) 
12,000.00 
20,000.00 
25,000.00 
20,000.00 
15,000.00 
10,000.00 
20,000.00 
15,000.00 
137,000.00 
136 | P a g e  
11.6     ANNUAL AUDITS 
The project will be subjected to annual audits and an end of project audit. The following is the 
cost estimate for the Audits (Table 11-5). 
Table 11-5    Monitoring and Evaluation Budget 
No. 
ACTIVITY 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Bi- Annual Audit 
Annual Reviews 
End of Project Audit 
Sub-Total 
ESTIMATED COST  
(US $) 
17,000.00 
12,000.00 
25,000.00 
54,000.00 
11.7     ESCMF IMPLEMENTATION BUDGET SUMMARY 
The  following  (Table  11-6)  is  the  ESCMF  Implementation  budget  summary  taking  into 
consideration all the issues covered in sections 11.1 to 11.6: 
Table 11-6    Estimated Budget for ESCMF Implementation (US$) 
                                   YEAR 
No. 
ACTIVITY 
REFERENCE 
TABLE 
YEAR 1 
YEAR 2 
YEAR 3 
YEAR 4 
YEAR 5 
TOTAL 
1. 
Site-specific  ESIAs,  ESMPs  and 
Environmental License fees 
2. 
Mitigation Measures 
Monitoring 
purposes 
Visits) 
and 
evaluation 
(R&D,  M&E,  Field 
Table 11-1 
105,000.00 
85,000.00 
40,000.00  
230,000.00 
Table  7-1  and 
11-2 
Table  9-1  and 
table 11-3 
35,000.00 
30,000.00 
25,000.00 
150,000.00 
10,000.00 
115,000.00 
25,000.00 
20,000.00 
15,000.00 
10,000.00 
10,000.00 
80,000.00 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Environmental 
Training  
Bi-Annual Audit 
Bi-Annual Reviews 
End of Project Audit 
Sub – Total  
10% Contingency 
Grand Total 
and 
Social 
Table 
and 11-4 
10-1 
45,000.00 
32,000.00 
30,000.00 
20,000.00 
10,000.00 
137,000.00 
11-5 
11-5 
11-5 
7,000.00 
5,000.00 
5,000.00 
- 
7.000.00 
5,000.00 
17,000.00 
12,000.00 
25,000.00 
25,000.00 
616,000.00  
61,600.00 
677,600.00 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
137 | P a g e  
12.  MONITORING PLAN AND ARRANGEMENTS 
12.1     INTRODUCTION 
The  PMU  with  the  help  of  relevant  authorities  will  monitor  the  environmental  and  social 
effects of project implementation and the success of mitigation measures. The objective for 
monitoring is twofold:  
▪  To provide timely information about the effectiveness of the environmental and social 
management screening process. 
▪  To generate Information that will inform continuous improvement to the process. 
▪  To establish the progress in implementation of the mitigation measures, the extent to 
which they are effective in maintaining environmental and social integrity and if any 
changes are required to improve the ESCMF implementation.  
Monitoring is done on the basis of agreed upon indicators. Examples of typical environmental 
indicators include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Evidence of anti-soil erosion measures such as terraces,  
Re-planted vegetation,  
Constructed drainage channels,  
Filled up burrow pits, etc 
Social indicators include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Representation on the community management committees, 
Equitable sharing of benefits from the programme intervention, 
Numbers  of  members  attending  programme  planning  and  implementation 
meetings, 
Effect of programme implementation on local household economies. 
12.2     MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING 
The monitoring and evaluation of the measures stipulated in this ESCMF are integrated into 
the project’s overall monitoring and evaluation procedures, as follows: 
•  The NAEB will monitor the environmental and social risks and mitigation measures 
identified through the different procedures identified in this document, 
•  The NAEB will regularly review and synthesize data from these sources to identify 
most important issues as well as emerging themes, 
•  The NAEB will integrate environmental and social sustainability issues into its regular 
reporting to IFAD. 
The  outcomes  of  these  monitoring  and  evaluation  practices  should  be  integrated  into  the 
regular  learning  and  training  programmes  of  the  line  ministries  involved,  picking  up  the 
emerging themes from the monitoring data and inviting experts to provide insights on best 
practices as well as new technologies.  
12.3     AREAS TO BE MONITORED 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
138 | P a g e  
12.3.1   Environmental issues 
a)  Soils 
Soil  degradation  may  occur  as  the  soils  are  exposed  and  or  compacted  during  the 
infrastructure,  soil  erosion  control  structures  and 
construction  of  agriculture 
agricultural activities, potentially affecting the drainage of the areas.  
The  beneficiary  communities  must  ensure  that  no  gullies  or  rills  develop  in  the 
programme areas. This can be avoided by taking such soil erosion control measures as 
construction of embankments and designing drainage along work areas. The absence 
of gullies and rills will be used as a measure of the success of the control measures. 
The soil can also be scotched by chemical spillages. This will render the soil poisonous, 
and it must be discouraged at all cost.  
b)  Vegetation 
Unnecessary  vegetation  clearing  and  grass  fires  must  be  prevented  at  all  costs.  The 
trees should not be gathered for firewood or cut for other purposes. The local residents 
must be monitored to ensure that firewood is not excessively collected.  
c)  Wildlife 
Under such situations, farmers may want to snare small animals. All wildlife should be 
treated in accordance with the Wildlife Act. 
d)  Marginal lands/fragile ecosystems 
Marginal lands and fragile ecosystems must be protected against abuse. 
e)  Chemical pollution 
A great likelihood of chemical pollution of the water and the soil exists and in order to 
monitor the level of pollution in the soil or water, samples must be taken regularly from 
them for pollution testing. 
f)  Water resources 
Both quality and quantity of water resources in the rivers must be properly managed 
for sustainable irrigation activities to persist. 
g)  Ambient air quality 
All air polluting activities need to be checked regularly to minimise their effect on air 
quality. 
h)  Climate Resilience  
It will be important to regularly inspect agricultural infrastructure for its resilience to 
climate  change  and  variability  and  also  any  agricultural  practices,  if  they  are  still 
relevant in the given climatic conditions. 
12.3.2   Social Issues 
a)  Loss of natural and cultural heritage 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
139 | P a g e  
The  rehabilitation/construction  of  roads,  dams,  warehouses  and  other  agricultural 
infrastructure  and fields may  affect  some  natural  features,  antics  and  relics  in  the 
programme  area.  Measures  must  be  put  in  place  for  chance  finds  and  any  such 
incidences must be treated as required by the relevant Act. 
b)  Socio-Cultural Issues 
Regular health checks of the work force/farmers are a way to monitor disease patterns 
of the members of the community to ensure that no new strains of diseases are being 
introduced. 
c)  Noise and Vibrations 
It will be important to routinely monitor noise levels from the machinery to ensure that 
it conforms to the limits recommended for noise levels. 
It is recommended that all environmental parameters mentioned above be monitored during 
the  implementation  and  operation  stages  and  any  impacts  should  be  mitigated  as  soon  as 
possible. The farmers and the PSAC/NAEB should monitor on a periodic basis.  
In the course of monitoring, if and when any significant impacts are detected, the monitoring 
team  should  meet  and  address  the  issue.  All  team  members  should  keep  records  of  such 
meetings. 
12.4     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MONITORING PLAN 
Screening will ensure that no activities in the exclusion list (Table 6-1) will be accommodated 
under PSAC. Thus, the first action by the Environmental Officers will be to monitor whether 
any subprojects: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Require acquisition of land and displacement of people, 
Block the access to or use of land, water points and other livelihood resources used 
by others, 
Encroach onto fragile ecosystems, marginal lands or important natural habitats, 
Impact  on  physical  cultural  resources  of  national  or  international  importance  and 
conservation value. 
The following is an outline of the proposed environmental and social monitoring plan for the 
PSAC programme: 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
140 | P a g e  
The Monitoring Plan is summarized in Table 9-1 below. 
Table 12-1    Monitoring Activities and Indicators 
ISSUE 
Soils 
Vegetation 
METHOD OF MONITORING 
In the process of constructing roads, soil erosion control structures, 
dams  and  other  agriculture  infrastructure,  the  contractors  should 
make  a  daily  inspection  of  earth  works  and  ensure  that  slopes  are 
suitably  graded.  Once  earthworks  are  complete  the  Implementing 
Agent should monitor the restoration measures implemented by the 
Contractor, such as re-vegetation  
The  Associations/cooperatives/farmers  must  clear  areas  to  be  used 
and site works only. 
AREAS OF CONCERN 
Soil erosion 
Conservation activities 
Catchment management 
POSITIVE INDICATOR 
An  absence  of  rills,  gullies  or 
other erosion features occurs  
Clearing of the project 
sites and disturbance of 
animals. 
flora and fauna 
No  unnecessary  vegetation 
cleared  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
FREQUENCY  
Daily  and  ongoing  as 
project is implemented 
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITIES 
•  MINAGRI 
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU 
Weekly  and ongoing  as 
project is implemented 
•  MINAGRI  
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU  
• 
Birds  
Interference with nesting sites 
•  Nesting sites 
•  Migratory routes 
Reproductive  patterns  of 
birds undisturbed 
Weekly  and ongoing  as 
project is implemented 
• 
• 
Small  mammals 
habitat loss 
Ensure  that  no  unnecessary  habitat  loss  occurs,  and  that  poaching  is 
curtailed. 
• 
• 
Animal habitats 
Poaching 
•  No Mammals are displaced 
from their habitats. 
Weekly  and ongoing  as 
project is implemented 
• 
Crime 
Noise 
The NAEB/PSAC-PMU Secretariat should Liaise with police department 
if crime/theft becomes a problem. 
• 
Criminal activities in the 
area 
Noise  monitoring  should  be  carried  out  on  an  ad-hoc  basis  by  the 
Environmental  Monitor  or  the  NAEB/PSAC-PMU  to  establish  noise 
levels in the work areas. 
•  Noise Levels 
•  Number 
incidences 
eliminated. 
of 
poaching 
reduced  or 
to  a 
theft  kept 
Crime 
minimum. Incidences of stock 
theft  and  house  breaking 
minimized. 
Noise  levels  at  the  nearest 
sensitive  receiver  would  be 
kept to a minimum. 
• 
Weekly  and ongoing  as 
project is implemented 
• 
• 
Weekly  and ongoing  as 
project is implemented. 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
Department of National 
Parks and Wildlife 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
Department of National 
Parks and Wildlife. 
Police department. 
Department of National 
Parks and Wildlife. 
Police department. 
District Administrator. 
• 
• 
•  Ministry of Health. 
• 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
141 | P a g e  
ISSUE 
Health 
METHOD OF MONITORING 
NAEB/PSAC-PMU  must  ensure  that  education  and  awareness 
campaigns  are  implemented  and  must  mainstream  HIV/AIDS  issues 
into the project implementation programme. 
Archaeology 
Energy 
This should concentrate on chance finds. Provision should be made to 
allow  archaeologists  to  be  present  on  site  during  the  excavation 
periods  if  they  so  wish.  The  NAEB/APEMP-PMU  should  inspect  all 
excavations, and where archaeological remains are found work must 
stop  until  the  NAEB/PSAC-PMU  has  been  given  the  “all  clear”  to 
proceed. The NAEB/PSAC-PMU should contact the Rwanda National 
Trust Commission in the event of a significant archaeological find. 
• 
The Associations/cooperatives/Developers must inspect the 
provisions made by the Contractor to supply energy to the 
workforce, and ensure that fuel wood is not being collected.  
The Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA). 
should enforce legislation which prohibits cutting down of trees.  
The Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA), PSAC 
and local leadership (cultural and political) should sensitize the 
workers against cutting down of trees. 
• 
• 
POSITIVE INDICATOR 
Reduction in number of cases 
of such diseases as Avian flu, 
AIDS/STD  related  diseases 
recorded  at  hospital  and 
medical clinic  
FREQUENCY  
Monthly and ongoing as 
project is implemented 
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITIES 
Health ministry 
• 
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU 
•  MINAGRI. 
• 
AREAS OF CONCERN 
Public health 
• 
•  Waste management at 
Sub-project sites. 
Disease outbreak due to 
concentration of people at 
the Sub-project sites. 
Disease outbreak due to 
dust and water pollution. 
Archaeological Findings 
• 
• 
Archaeological  remains  not 
excavated, 
or 
destroyed. 
disturbed 
• 
• 
Daily and ongoing as 
project is 
implemented 
Room for chance 
finds 
• 
• 
• 
Types of energy sources 
used in the project 
Regularly 
Energy  supplied  by  electric 
generator  or  other  suitable 
source.  Deforestation  and 
resultant  erosion  controlled 
and reduced 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Institute of National 
Museums of Rwanda 
(INMRB). 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
Department of Forestry. 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
Local Leadership 
Air Pollution 
Observations should be made on the level of dust generated during 
the  construction  and  Agricultural  activities  by  the  Environmental 
Monitor  or  NAEB/PSAC-PMU.  Dampening  should  be  carried  out  if 
levels are unacceptable. 
• 
Levels of dust emissions 
Deposition of dust on surfaces 
should 
with 
decrease 
increased dampening 
Daily 
Health ministry 
• 
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU 
•  MINAGRI 
Water resources  •  Water resources should be managed well 
•  Watercourses and 
• 
The Ministry of Health should test borehole water quality in the 
area to ascertain the suitability for human consumption. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
impoundments. 
Surface water quality 
Ground Water Quality 
Recommended distances 
from watercourses. 
Possible dam construction 
sites. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Tests  for  water  pollution 
to be done Monthly. 
• 
•  Water made available for 
environmental concerns. 
Pollution of water 
resources 
monitored/detected early, 
and remedial measures 
taken on time 
Health ministry 
• 
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU 
•  MINAGRI. 
•  Ministry of Infrastructure 
• 
(Mininfra), 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
142 | P a g e  
ISSUE 
Landscape 
METHOD OF MONITORING 
The NAEB/PSAC-PMU should make visual inspection of earth works to 
ensure that excessive excavation is not being carried out. Temporary 
screening may be appropriate in some cases. 
• 
• 
AREAS OF CONCERN 
Visual intrusions 
Aesthetics  
POSITIVE INDICATOR 
Landscape alteration reduced 
to a minimum 
FREQUENCY  
Monthly  
Complaints 
The NAEB/PSAC-PMU should inspect the record of complaints made 
by  local  residents,  to  be  kept  by  the  coalitions/farmers,  and  should 
check that action is taken quickly and that the number of complaints 
do not rise significantly. 
• 
Complaints  
Number 
decreases. 
of 
complaints 
Monthly 
• 
• 
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITIES 
Institute of National 
Museums of Rwanda 
(INMRB). 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
•  NAEB/PSAC-PMU  
•  MINAGRI.  
• 
Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA). 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
143 | P a g e  
13.  CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The  proposed  PSAC  programme  has  potential  to  significantly  enhance  the  agricultural 
productivity and improve the livelihoods of smallholder Tea, Coffee and Horticulture farmers 
in  the  target  districts.  An  improvement  in the productivity of the  Smallholder  farmers  will 
translate to improved livelihoods as they now will have cash to secure other needs.  
impacts 
The  envisaged  environmental  and  social 
include  disturbance  of  soil  from 
infrastructure  construction,  establishment  of  new  plantations,  rehabilitation  of  existing 
plantations, other agricultural activities, digging of pits and foundations, and irrigation and 
value addition infrastructures construction activities, Solid and liquid waste generation, tree 
cutting  and  general  vegetation  clearing,  emission  of  dust  and  generation  of  noise.  These 
envisaged environmental impacts will generally be localized, minimal, short term and can 
be mitigated. However, this will entail adhering to the requirements of the current ESCMF. 
The  Final  benefits  of  this  programme  to  the  nation  will,  by  far  outweigh  any  potential 
negative effects. 
It is therefore recommended that: 
•  All  agricultural  and  value  addition  infrastructure  must  include  the  requisite  waste 
• 
disposal or handling systems. 
It is important that stakeholder organisations such as District Administrators, Rwanda 
Environmental Management Authority (REMA), NGOs and other interested parties are 
consulted and kept informed of the implementation progress so that they can play 
their part. 
•  Reduction  and  control  of  noise  levels  to  minimize  any  disruption  to  the  living 
conditions of wildlife be strictly adhered to. 
•  The  land  around  any  sub-project  works  should  be  left  intact  and  pollution  be 
minimised. 
•  Bush clearance should be confined to the absolutely necessary part, buffer strips be 
maintained and huge indigenous trees in the area should be preserved as much as 
possible. 
•  Labour intensive methods should be encouraged as they benefit the local community 
in terms of job creation. For this the project should employ locals as much as possible 
to ensure that benefits remain in the area where development is taking place. 
The programme overall will not have any apparent significant environmental impacts if the 
recommended mitigations are carried out. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
144 | P a g e  
14.  REFERENCES 
Becky Carter Institute of Development Studies 9 July 2018 
Availablehttps://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/20.500.12413/14189/359
_Linkages_Between%20_Poverty_Inequalities_and_Exclusion_in_Rwanda.pdf?sequence=1&
isAllowed=y  
Chemonics  International  Inc  (2003).  Rwanda  Environmental  Threats  And  Opportunities 
Assessment. Task Order No. 818 under the Biodiversity & Sustainable Forestry (BIOFOR) IQC 
on: 
LAG-I-00-99-00014-00. 
USAID 
http://www.encapafrica.org/documents/biofor/Rwanda_2003.pdf 
available 
Contract 
Also 
No. 
Diao, X., Randriamamonjy, J., & Thurlow, J. (2017). Urbanization and the Future of Economic 
Development  in  Rwanda.  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Washington,  DC. 
Background paper for Future Drivers of Growth in Rwanda 
Fischer  (2008).  Personal  Communication.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Conference  on  Gorilla 
Naming ceremony. 
Fischer and Killmann 2008 : Eberhard Fischer and Dorothee Killmann (2008). Illustrated Field 
Guide to the Plants of Nyungwe National Park. Kigali (ISBN978-3-941326-00-2) 
Masozera M. (2008).: Valuing and capturing the benefits of ecosystem services of Nyungwe 
Forest National Park, SW Rwanda, University of Florida. Gainesville, U.S.A 
MINECOFIN (2007). Budget Framework Paper 2008-1010. Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Planning (MINECOFIN), Kigali. 
MINIRENA  (2008):  Five-Year  Strategic  Plan  For  The  Environment  And  Natural  Resources 
Sector (2009 –2013). Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA), Kigali. 
MINIRENA (2009). Joint Sector Review. Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA), Kigali. 
MINITERE (2003a). National Strategy and Action Plan for the Conservation of Biodiversity in 
Rwanda. Ministry of Lands, Resettlement and Environment (MINITERE), Kigali. 
Munanura I., Mulindahabi F., Barakabuye N. and Mukakamali (2006). Report of Biodiversity 
Survey of Mukura Forest. ARECO Rwanda Nziza and Wildlife Conservation Society, Kigali. 
NBI  (2005).  National  Nile  Basin  Water  Quality  Monitoring  Report  for  Rwanda.  Nile 
Transboundary Environmental Action Project, Nile Basin Initiative (NBI), Kigali. 
Plumptre,A.J., M, Masozera, P.J. Fasching, A,. McNeilage, C. Ewango, B.A. Kaplin and I. 
Liengola. 2002: Biodiversity Survey of the Nyungwe Forest Reserve in S.W. Rwanda.. World 
Conservation Society (WCS), Kigali. 
REMA  (2006).  Economic  Analysis  Of  Natural  Resource  Management  In  Rwanda.  Rwanda 
Environment Management Authority (REMA), Kigali. 
ROR (2007). Economic Development And Poverty Reduction Strategy, 2008-2012. Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Planning, Republic of Rwanda (ROR) Kigali. 
Rwanda Labor Market systems - http://www.lmis.gov.rw/index.php?id=89 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
145 | P a g e  
SCBD (2000). Sustaining Life on Earth. Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity 
(SCBD), Montreal. ISBN 92-807-1904-1 
UNEP  (2006).  Africa  Environment  Outlook  2:  Our  Wealth,  Our  Health.  United  Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi. 
World Bank, 2015. Climate-Smart Agriculture in Rwanda. CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, 
and Latin America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The world Bank Group. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
146 | P a g e  
15.  APPENDICES 
APPENDIX 1:    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING FORM 
Government of Rwanda. 
Environmental & Social Screening Form 
(Guidelines: Site inspection of project site. The evaluation results to be a consensus of at least three officials) 
Project Name:   
Project   Location : 
District:  
Name of Catchment 
Name of Village: 
Nature/Size:  
Name, Signature & Designation of Evaluator(s):  
 Date of Field Evaluation:  
1…………………………………………………………. 
. 
2…………………………………………………………. 
Sector 
Appraisal 
Significance 
Potential Mitigation Measures 
Yes  No 
Low  mediu
m 
hig
h 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
and 
Social 
Environmental 
Screening 
Will  the  project  generate  the  following 
negative impacts 
Loss of trees/vegetation 
Soil erosion/siltation in the area 
Pollution to land- e.g., from diesel, 
oils  
Dust emissions 
Solid and liquid wastes e.g., open 
defecation  
Spread of HIV/Aids and other STI 
Borrow pits and pools of stagnant 
water 
Rubble/heaps of excavated soils 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
147 | P a g e  
1.9 
1.10 
Alien / Invasive species 
Spread  of  water  borne  diseases 
e.g., Malaria 
Loss of soil fertility 
1.11 
1.12  Contamination 
from 
agrochemicals and pesticides 
1.13  Nuisance from smell or noise 
1.14  Reduced  water  quality 
and 
quantity 
Incidence of flooding 
1.15 
1.16  Disruption of marriages 
1.17  Health  hazards  to  workers  and 
communities 
1.18  Removal of native trees 
Resettlement Screening  
2.0 
Will  the  project  generate  the  following 
negative social and economic impacts? 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
to 
Loss of land by households 
Loss  of  properties  –houses, 
structures 
Loss of trees by households 
Loss of crops by people 
access 
of 
Loss 
river/forests/grazing area 
Loss  of  cultural  site,  graveyard 
land 
Conflicts  over  use  of  local  water 
resources 
Disruption of important pathways, 
roads 
Loss 
churches 
communal 
facilities 
–
Consultation (comments from beneficiaries) 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
148 | P a g e  
Overall evaluation of Environmental and Resettlement Screening Exercises. 
The  results  of  the  screening  process  would  be  either  the  proposed  sub  -  projects  would  be 
exempted or subjected to further environmental and resettlement assessment. The basis of these 
options is listed in the table below: 
Review of Environmental Screening 
1.  The  project  is  cleared.  No  serious 
impacts. (When all scores are “No” in 
form) 
2.There 
further 
need 
assessment.  (when  some  scores  are 
“Yes, High” in form) 
3. Need to prepare site specific ESMP 
for 
is 
Tick 
Tick 
Review of Resettlement Screening 
1.The  project  is  cleared.  No  serious  social 
impact.  
     (Where scores are all “No”, “few” in form) 
2.There 
for 
resettlement/compensation.   
     (When some scores are “Yes, High” in form 
3. Need to prepare RAP 
need 
is 
Endorsement by Environmental District Officer 
Name 
Signature:                                      Date: 
Endorsement by Director of Agriculture 
Name: 
Signature:                                        Date: 
NOTES: 
1.  The NAEB Environment Officer shall ensure that a completed form is filed within project file 
immediately after endorsement. He/She should keep a duplicate. 
2.  Project Management Committee will maintain a copy of completed form 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
149 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 2:    METHODOLOGY FOR SIGNIFICANCE RATING OF IMPACTS 
The significance of adverse impacts from project activities will be rated on the basis of their 
magnitude, duration and probability as shown below in Table APP 1. The scales of rating are 
1 to 5 with 1 being low and 5 being high. Where an aspect is affected by more than one impact, 
the highest rating is taken as the applicable significance of the impact. The ESMP in Chapter 
9 only considers the impacts that have been rated moderate and high significance as these 
present impacts that need attention. 
Table APP 2-1       Methodology for significance rating of impacts (adapted from Ryan Edwards, 2011) 
No. 
1.0 
CRITERIA 
DESCRIPTION 
SCORING 
Assessment 
The criteria used for the assessment of the potential impacts of the 
proposed project are described here in: 
Impact 
Criteria 
Nature 
Duration 
Extent  
Intensity 
Extent 
Type 
Consequence 
Probability 
Significance 
severity 
Nature 
Includes a description of what causes the effect, what will be affected 
and how it will be affected 
Lifetime  of  the  impact  is  measured  in  relation  to  the  lifetime  of  the 
project  
Physical and spatial scale of the project 
Examining  whether  the  impact  is  destructive  or  benign,  whether  it 
destroys the impacted environment, alters its functioning, or slightly 
alters the environment  
Description of the type of impact as positive, negative or neutral, and 
direct or indirect 
Combination of duration, extent and intensity of impact in relation to 
the type  
This  describes  the  likelihood  of  the  impacts  actually  occurring.  The 
impact  may  occur  for  any  length  of  time  during  the  lifecycle  of  the 
activity, and not at any given time  
Synthesis of the characteristics described above and assessed as low, 
medium  or  high.  Distinction  will  be  made  for  the  significance  rating 
without  the  implementation  of  mitigation  measures  and  with  the 
implementation of mitigation measures 
Includes a description of what causes the effect, what will be affected 
and how it will be affected 
2.0  Quality 
Nature of Environmental Change 
Positive 
Negative 
Beneficial impacts 
Adverse Impacts 
3.0 
Probability 
Improbable 
Possible 
Likely 
Highly Likely 
the likelihood of the impact actually occurring 
Possibility  of  the  impact  occurring  is  none,  due  either  to  the 
circumstances, design or experience. The chance of this impact 
occurring is thus zero (0%).   
Possibility of the impact occurring is very low, either due to the 
circumstances, design or experience. The chances of this impact 
occurring is defined as 25%.  
There  is  a  possibility  that  the  impact  will  occur  to  the  extent 
that  provisions  must  therefore  be  made.  The  chances  of  this 
impact occurring is defined as 50%.   
It is most likely that the impact will occur at some stage of the 
development. Plans must be drawn up before carrying out the 
activity. The chances of this impact occurring is defined as 75%.   
N/A 
N/A 
1 
2 
3 
4 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
150 | P a g e  
No. 
CRITERIA 
DESCRIPTION 
SCORING 
Definite 
Impact will take place regardless of nay prevention plans, and 
only  mitigation  actions  or  contingency  plans  to  contain  the 
effect can be relied upon the chances of this impact occurring 
is defined as 100%. 
4.0 
Severity 
Very Low 
Low 
Moderate 
High 
Very High 
5.0 
Extent 
Footprint 
Site 
Regional 
National 
International 
6.0  Duration 
Short-term 
Medium-Short-term 
Medium-Long-term 
affects 
affects 
viability 
viability 
continued 
continued 
integrity  of 
integrity  of 
integrity  of  the 
the  quality,  use  and 
The degree of disturbance 
Impact  affects  the  quality,  use  and 
system/component in a way that is barely perceptible. 
Impact  alters 
the 
system/component  but  system/  component  still  continues  to 
function  in  a  slightly  modified  way  and  maintains  original 
integrity (no/limited impact on integrity). 
Impact  alters 
the 
the  quality,  use  and 
system/component  but  system/component  still  continues  to 
function in a moderately modified way and maintains general 
integrity. 
of 
the 
Impact 
the 
system/component,  and  the  quality,  use, 
integrity  and 
functionality of the system or component is severely impaired 
and  may  temporarily  cease.  High  costs  of  rehabilitation  and 
remediation. 
of 
the 
Impact 
the 
integrity  and 
system/component,  and  the  quality,  use, 
functionality of the system or component permanently ceases 
and  is  irreversibly  impaired  (system  collapse).  Rehabilitation 
and  remediation  often  impossible.  If  possible,  rehabilitation 
and remediation often unfeasible due to extremely high costs 
of rehabilitation and remediation. 
the spatial influence of the effects produced by the impact. 
Impacted  area  extends  only  as  far  as  the  activity,  such  as 
footprint occurring within the total site area 
Impact  could  affect  the  whole,  or  a  significant  portion  of  the 
site 
Impact  could  affect  the  area  around  the  site 
neighbouring farms, transport routes and adjoining towns 
Impact  could  have  an  effect  that  expands  throughout  the 
country (South Africa) 
Impact  has  international  ramifications  that  go  beyond  the 
boundaries of South Africa 
Period when the Impact is Expected to Occur 
The impact and its effects will either disappear with mitigation 
or will be mitigated through natural process in a span shorter 
than the construction phase (0 – 1 years), or the impact and its 
effects will last for the period of a relatively short construction 
period  and  a 
limited  recovery  time  after  construction, 
thereafter it will be entirely negated (0 – 2 years). 
The impact and its effects will continue or last for the period of 
a relatively long construction period and/or a limited recovery 
time after this construction period, thereafter it will be entirely 
negated (2 – 5 years). 
The impact and its  effects will continue or last for some time 
after  the  construction  phase  but  will  be  mitigated  by  direct 
human action or by natural processes thereafter (5 – 15 years) 
including 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
151 | P a g e  
No. 
CRITERIA 
DESCRIPTION 
SCORING 
Long-term 
Permanent 
7.0 
Intensity 
Low 
Low-Medium 
Medium 
Medium-High 
High 
8.0 
Consequence 
Extreme Detrimental 
High Detrimental 
Moderate Detrimental 
Slight Detrimental 
Negligible 
Slight Beneficial 
Moderate Beneficial 
The  impact  and  its  effects  will  continue  or  last  for  the  entire 
operational  life  of  the  development  but  will  be  mitigated  by 
direct human action or by natural processes thereafter (15 – 50 
years). 
The only class of impact that will be non-transitory. Mitigation 
either by man or natural process will not occur in such a way or 
such a time span that the impact can be considered transient 
(Indefinite). 
The assessment of the intensity of the impact will be a 
relative evaluation within the context of all the activities and 
the other impacts within the framework of the project. 
Impact alters the affected environment in such a way that the 
natural processes or functions are not affected 
Impact alters the affected environment in such a way that the 
natural processes or functions are slightly affected 
Affected  environment  is  altered,  but  functions  and  processes 
continue, albeit in as modified way 
Affected  environment  is  altered,  but  functions  and  processes 
are modified immensely 
Function or process of the affected environment is disturbed to 
the  extent  where  the  function  or  process  temporarily  or 
permanently ceases 
The Consequence of issues will be determined using the following 
formula: 
Consequence = Type x (Duration + Extent + Intensity) 
A  very  serious  negative  impact  which  may  be  sufficient  by  itself  to 
prevent  implementation  of  the  Project.  The  impact  may  result  in 
permanent  change.  Very  often  these  impacts  are  immitigable  and 
usually result in very severe effects. The impacts will be irreplaceable 
and 
irreversible  should  adequate  mitigation  and  management 
measures not be successfully implemented. 
A serious negative impact which may prevent the implementation of 
the  Project.  These  impacts  would  be  considered  by  society  as 
constituting  a  major  and  usually  a  long-term  change  to  the  (natural 
and/or social) environment and result in severe effects. The impacts 
may result in the irreversible damage to irreplaceable environmental 
or social aspects should mitigation measures not be implemented. 
An important negative impact which requires mitigation. The impact is 
insufficient by itself to prevent the implementation of the project but 
which 
its 
implementation. These impacts will usually result in negative medium 
to long-term effect on the social and/or natural environment.  
A  small  negative  impact.  The  impact  will  result  in  medium  to  short-
term effects on the social and/or natural environment. 
An  acceptable  negative/positive  impact  for  which  mitigation  is 
desirable but not essential. The impact by itself is insufficient even in 
combination  with  other  low  impacts  to  prevent  the  development 
being approved. These impacts will result in negative/positive medium 
to short-term effects on the social and/or natural environment.  The 
impacts are reversible and will not result in the loss of irreplaceable 
aspects.    
A small positive impact. The impact will result in medium to short-term 
effects on the social and/or natural environment. 
An  important  positive  impact.  The  impact  is  insufficient  by  itself  to 
justify the implementation of the Project. These impacts will usually 
result  in  positive  medium  to  long-term  effect  on  the  social  and/or 
natural environment.  
in  conjunction  with  other 
impacts  may  prevent 
4 
5 
-18 to 20 
14 to > - 17 
-10 to 13 
-6 to 9 
-5 to 5 
6 to 9 
10 to 13 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
152 | P a g e  
No. 
CRITERIA 
DESCRIPTION 
High Beneficial  
Extreme Beneficial 
A beneficial impact that may help to justify the implementation of the 
Project. These impacts would be considered by society as constituting 
a major and usually a long-term positive change to the (natural and/or 
social) environment. 
A  very  beneficial  impact  which  may  be  sufficient  by  itself  to  justify 
implementation of the project. The impact may result in permanent 
positive change.  
SCORING 
14 to 17 
1 to 20 
9.0  Magnitude 
negligible  
low  
moderate 
high  
very high 
Effect on Environmental and Social Processes 
Magnitude  =  Probability  +  Severity  +  Extent  + 
Duration  
not serious: Changes are barely perceptible. 
acceptable, mitigable 
undesirable but mitigable 
very serious 
totally unacceptable 
< 6 
6-9 
10-13 
14-17 
>17 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
153 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 3:    GUIDELINES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUB-PROJECT ESMPs 
APP 3.1    ESMP Development 
When  a  sub-project  includes  distinct  mitigation  measures  (physical  works  or  management 
activities), an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) needs to be included with 
the sub-project application. An example ESMP is presented in Chapter 7 of this ESCMF. 
ESMP Contents: 
An ESMP usually includes the following components: 
•  Description of adverse effects: The anticipated effects are identified and summarized. 
•  Description  of  mitigation  measures:  Each  measure  is  described  with  reference  to  the 
effect(s)  it  is  intended  to  deal  with.  As  needed,  detailed  plans,  designs,  equipment 
descriptions, and operating procedures are described. 
•  Description of monitoring program: Monitoring provides information on the occurrence 
of environmental effects. It helps identify how well mitigation measures are working, and 
where better mitigation may be needed. The monitoring program should identify what 
information will be collected, how, where and how often.  It should also indicate at what 
level of effect there will be a need for further mitigation.  How environmental effects are 
monitored is discussed below. 
•  Responsibilities:  The people, groups, or organizations that will carry out the mitigation 
and monitoring activities are defined, as well as to whom they report and are responsible.  
There may be a need to train people to carry out these responsibilities, and to provide 
them with equipment and supplies. 
Implementation schedule: The timing, frequency and duration of mitigation measures and 
monitoring  are  specified  in  an  implementation  schedule  and  linked  to  the  overall  sub-
project schedule.  
• 
•  Cost  estimates  and  sources  of  funds:  These  are  specified  for  the  initial  sub-project 
investment  and  for  the  mitigation  and  monitoring  activities  as  a  sub-project  is 
implemented.  Funds to implement the EMP may come from the sub-project grant, from 
the  community,  or  both.  Government  agencies  and  NGOs  may  be  able  to  assist  with 
monitoring. 
Monitoring Methods: 
Methods for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures or environmental effects 
should be as simple as possible, consistent with collecting useful information (see example 
below) and that community members can apply themselves. For example, they could just be 
regular observations of sub-project activities or sites during construction and then use. Are 
fences  and  gates  being  maintained  and  properly  used  around  a  new  water  point?  does  a 
stream look muddier than it should and, if so, where is the mud coming from and why? are 
pesticides being properly stored and used? Most observations of inappropriate behaviour or 
adverse effects should lead to common sense solutions. In some cases (e.g., unexplainable 
increases in illness or declines in fish numbers), there may be a need to require investigation 
by a technically qualified person. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
154 | P a g e  
App 2.2     Typical Sub-Project ESMPS 
The following groups of agricultural activities have been considered: 
Irrigation and Drainage 
•  Weirs and Reservoirs 
• 
•  Crop Production 
•  Agro-industry (Processing Agricultural products) 
1.0     Weirs and Reservoirs 
• 
• 
Establishing/maintaining Small Storage Reservoirs (tanks, small dams/weirs). 
Development of Small-scale Farmer Driven Rainwater Harvesting. 
No. 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
1. 
Soil erosion 
• 
2. 
Negative environmental effects of construction: 
from 
and  water  pollution 
• 
• 
• 
air 
construction and waste disposal 
soil erosion 
destruction of vegetation, sanitary and 
health  problems  from  construction 
camps 
3. 
Dislocation of people living in inundation zone. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
land 
forest, 
(agricultural, 
Loss  of 
wetlands) by inundation to form reservoir. 
Loss of historic, cultural, or aesthetic features by 
inundation. 
Loss of wildlands and wildlife habitat. 
range, 
Proliferation  of  aquatic  weeds  in  reservoir  and 
downstream impairing dam discharge, irrigation 
systems, navigation and fisheries and increasing 
water loss through transpiration. 
Impediment  to  movement  of  livestock  and 
humans. 
Threat to historic, cultural or aesthetic features. 
10. 
Siting of project to less vulnerable area. 
11. 
Social misdemeanour by construction workers  
Impacts  associated  with  the  contractor’s  camp 
include: 
• 
• 
disposal of liquid and solid wastes.  
theft, alcoholism, and sexually transmitted 
diseases (especially HIV/AIDS).  
Proper  design  and  layout  of  structures  avoiding  too  steep  a 
gradient. 
Land levelling. 
Design of terraces on hillside minimizing surface erosion hazard. 
• 
• 
•  Measures to minimize impacts: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
location  of  camps,  buildings,  borrow  pits, 
air and water pollution control 
careful 
quarries, spoil and disposal sites 
precautions to minimize erosion 
land reclamation 
• 
• 
Relocation of people to suitable area, provision of compensation 
in kind for resources lost,  
provision  of  adequate  health  services,  infrastructure,  and 
employment opportunities. 
Siting of dam to decrease losses; decrease size of dam and reservoir; 
protect equal areas in region to offset losses. 
Siting of dam or decrease of reservoir size to avoid loss, salvage or 
protection of cultural properties. 
Siting of dam or decrease of reservoir size to avoid/minimize loss. 
establishment  of  compensatory  parks  or  reserved  areas;  animal 
rescue 
and relocation. 
Clearance  of  woody  vegetation  from  inundation  zone  prior  to 
flooding (nutrient removal); provide weed control measures; harvest 
of weeds for compost, fodder or biogas; regulation of water discharge 
and manipulation of water levels to discourage weed growth. 
Provision of passageways. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Siting of project to prevent loss. 
 salvage or protection of cultural sites. 
Siting of project to less vulnerable area. 
Limitation  and  regulation  of  water  take-off  to  minimize 
problems to extent possible. 
As  a  contractual  obligation,  contractors  should  be  required  to 
have  an  HIV/AIDS  policy  and  a  framework  (responsible  staff, 
action plan, etc) to implement it during project execution. 
Contractor to curb thefts and misbehaviour through a code of 
conduct. 
Contractor to manage any of its waste properly. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
155 | P a g e  
3.0      Irrigation and Drainage. 
• 
• 
Establishing/maintaining Small Scale gravity irrigation schemes. 
Improved homestead gardening e.g., using drip irrigation kits. 
No. 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
1. 
Soil erosion (furrow, surface) 
2. 
3. 
Soil erosion (with sprinkler irrigation on hilly area). 
Waterlogging of soils. 
• 
• 
• 
Proper design and layout of furrows or field avoiding too 
steep a gradient. 
Land levelling. 
Design  of  terraces  on  hillside  minimizing  surface  erosion 
hazard. 
Design of sprinkler system minimizing erosion hazard assuring 
infiltration rate   exceeds    application rate of the sprinklers. 
• 
• 
Regulation  of  water  application  to  avoid  overwatering 
(including controlled turn-out to   allow cutting off water 
supply to irrigation ditches), 
.  installation  and  maintenance  of  adequate  drainage 
system. 
4. 
Salinization of soils 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Scouring of canals 
Clogging of canals by sediments. 
Leaching of nutrients from soils. 
Algal blooms and weed proliferation. 
Clogging of canals by weeds. 
Deterioration of river water quality below irrigation 
project  and  contamination  of  local  ground  water  ( 
higher  salinity  Nutrients,  agrochemicals)  affecting 
fisheries and downstream users 
Reduction of downstream flows affecting flood plain 
use,  flood  plain  ecology,  riverine  and  estuarine 
fisheries, users of water, dilution of pollutants. 
Encroachment  on  swamps  and  other  ecologically 
sensitive Areas. 
Alteration  or  destruction  of  wildlife  habitat  or 
impediment to movement of wildlife. 
14. 
15. 
Impediment to movement of livestock and humans. 
Threat to historic, cultural, or aesthetic features. 
16. 
Siting of project to less vulnerable area. 
17. 
Dislocation of populations and communities. 
• 
• 
Leaching of salts by flushing soils periodically 
Cultivation of  
•  Use of lined canals or pipes to prevent seepage. 
•  Use of sprinkler or drip irrigation. 
•  Measures to avoid water logging: 
• 
• 
Design of canal system to minimize risk and use of lined canals. 
Measures to minimize erosion on fields. 
• 
• 
Reduction  of  input  to  release  of  nutrients  (nitrogen  and 
phosphorous) from fields. 
• 
Avoidance of overwatering. 
 replacement of nutrients by fertilizers or crop rotations. 
Design  and  management  of  canals  to  minimize  weed 
growth. 
. Provision of access to canals for treatment or removal of 
weeds. 
improved  agricultural 
Improved  water  management; 
practices  and  control  of  inputs  (particularly  biocides  and 
chemical fertilizers). 
Imposition of water quality criteria. 
Relocation or redesign of project. 
. Regulation of take-off to mitigate effects. 
Compensatory measures where possible. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Siting of projects to avoid or minimize encroachment on critical 
areas. 
• 
Siting of project to minimize loss or avoid encroachment 
on most sensitive or critical areas. 
Establishment of compensatory parks or reserved areas. 
Animal rescue and relocation. 
Provision of corridors for movement. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Provision of passageways. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Siting of project to prevent loss. 
 salvage or protection of cultural sites. 
Siting of project to less vulnerable area. 
Limitation  and  regulation  of  water  take-off  to  minimize 
problems to extent possible. 
Siting of project to minimize effect. 
Resettlement scheme ensuring at least equal standard of 
living. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
156 | P a g e  
Prevention measures: 
use of lined canals or pipes to discourage vectors 
Avoidance of stagnant or slowly moving water 
use of straight or slightly curving canals 
Installation  of  gates  at  canal  ends  to  allow  complete 
flushing 
Filling or draining of borrow pits along canals  
disease prophylaxis 
disease treatment 
• 
• 
• 
•  Wastewater treatment (e.g., settling ponds) prior to use. 
• 
for 
enforcement 
standards 
and 
 Establishment 
wastewater use. 
Means  to  ensure  equitable  distribution  among  users  and 
monitor to assure adherence. 
Limitation of withdrawal so that it does not exceed ‘safe yields’ 
(recharge rate). 
• 
• 
• 
All safety precautions must be enforced. 
Provide PPE to all workers. 
institute dust and noise suppression measures. 
18. 
Introduction or increase in incidence of water-borne 
or  water-related  disease  (schistosomiasis,  malaria, 
onchocerciasis, etc.). 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Disease  and  health  problems 
wastewater in Irrigation. 
from  use  of 
Conflicts over water supply and inequalities in water 
Distribution throughout service area. 
Over pumping of groundwater. 
Occupational Health Safety risks 
• 
The movement of trucks to and from the site, 
the  operation  of  various  equipment  and 
machinery and the actual agricultural activities 
will  expose  the  workers  to  work-related 
accidents and injuries.  
Pollutants  such  as  dust  and  noise  could  also 
have  negative  implications  for  the  health  of 
workers.  
• 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
Social misdemeanour by construction workers  
Impacts  associated  with  the  contractor’s  camp 
include: 
• 
• 
disposal of liquid and solid wastes.  
theft,  alcoholism  and  sexually  transmitted 
diseases (especially HIV/AIDS).  
• 
• 
• 
As a contractual obligation, contractors should be required 
to have an HIV/AIDS policy and a framework (responsible 
staff,  action  plan,  etc)  to  implement  it  during  project 
execution. 
Contractor  to  curb  thefts  and  misbehaviour  through  a 
code of conduct. 
Contractor to manage any of its waste properly. 
4.0     Horticulture Crop Production 
•  Asparagus, mushrooms and fruits for export. 
•  Growing tree seedlings (fruit trees, ornamental trees, fuel wood). 
•  Basic seed multiplication and sale. 
No. 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
1. 
Soil erosion (furrow, surface) 
2. 
Pollution,  environmental  disruption  and  health 
hazards from Diseases and pest control measures 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
3. 
Reduction  of  genetic  variability  due  to  selective 
breeding 
Proper design and layout of furrows or fields avoiding too 
steep a gradient. 
Land levelling. 
Design  of  terraces  on  hillside  minimizing  surface  erosion 
hazard. 
Choice of chemical that is species-specific, short residence 
time (active period), and has low impact on other biologic 
resources. 
Protective measures for field workers. 
Spraying  methods  and  timing  to  minimize  potential  of 
water pollution. 
Selection of disease-resistant crop varieties. 
• 
Conservation  of  genetic  diversity  in-site  (protection  of  wild 
in  natural  Habit,  maintaining  variability  within 
relatives 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
157 | P a g e  
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Negative  effects  of  uncontrolled  burning  for  brush 
control  on  soil  and  vegetation  (deterioration  of  soil 
fertility  and  soil  structure,  altered  wildlife  habitat, 
destruction of vegetation) 
Conflicts over water supply and inequalities in water 
Distribution throughout service area. 
Siting  of  project  to  less  vulnerable  area  (marginal 
areas). 
Encroachment  on  swamps  and  other  ecologically 
sensitive Areas (fragile ecosystems). 
Disease  and  health  problems 
wastewater in Irrigation. 
from  use  of 
15. 
Threat to historic, cultural or aesthetic features. 
16. 
17. 
Occupational Health Safety risks 
• 
The movement of trucks to and from the site, 
the  operation  of  various  equipment  and 
machinery and the actual agricultural activities 
will  expose  the  workers  to  work-related 
accidents and injuries.  
Pollutants  such  as  dust  and  noise  could  also  have 
negative implications for the health of workers.  
Social misdemeanour by construction workers  
Impacts  associated  with  the  contractor’s  camp 
include: 
• 
• 
disposal of liquid and solid wastes.  
theft,  alcoholism,  and  sexually  transmitted 
diseases (especially HIV/AIDS).  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
populations  by  breeding)  and  ex-situ  (e.g.,  preservation  of 
genetic material in `banks`). 
Implementation  of  well-planned  and  controlled  burning 
programs. 
Means  to  ensure  equitable  distribution  among  users  and 
monitor to assure adherence. 
• 
• 
Siting of project to less vulnerable area. 
Limitation  and  regulation  of  water  take-off  to  minimize 
problems to extent possible. 
Siting of projects to avoid or minimize encroachment on critical 
areas. 
•  Wastewater treatment (e.g., settling ponds) prior to use. 
• 
for 
enforcement 
standards 
and 
 Establishment 
wastewater use. 
Siting of project to prevent loss. 
 salvage or protection of cultural sites. 
All safety precautions must be enforced. 
Provide PPE to all workers. 
institute dust and noise suppression measures. 
As a contractual obligation, contractors should be required 
to have an HIV/AIDS policy and a framework (responsible 
staff,  action  plan,  etc)  to  implement  it  during  project 
execution. 
Contractor  to  curb  thefts  and  misbehaviour  through  a 
code of conduct. 
Contractor to manage any of its waste properly. 
5.0      Agro-industry (Processing Agricultural products) 
•  Canning fruits 
•  Tea Processing 
•  Coffee Processing 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
Soil erosion 
• 
• 
Increased  soil  erosion  due  to  clearing  of 
vegetation and trampling. 
Increased siltation of surface waters. 
Siting  of  plant  or  facility  complex  on/near  sensitive 
habitats 
•  Proper  design  and  layout  of  structures  avoiding  too  steep  a 
gradient. 
Land levelling. 
• 
•  Design of terraces on hillside minimizing surface erosion hazard. 
•  Restriction of construction activities to good ground. 
•  Soil erosion control measures (e.g., reforestation, terracing). 
• 
• 
Location of plant in rural area away from estuaries, wetlands, or 
other sensitive or ecologically important habitats, or in industrial 
estate  to  minimize  or  concentrate  the  stress  on 
local 
environment and services. 
Involvement  of  natural  resource  agencies  in  review  of  siting 
alternatives. 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
158 | P a g e  
No. 
4. 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
Siting  of  agro-industry  along  water  courses  leading  to 
their eventual degradation. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Siting of agro-industry so that air pollution problems are 
aggravated. 
Environmental  deterioration  (erosion,  contamination 
of  water  and  soil  loss  of  soil  fertility,  disruption  of 
wildlife habitat, etc.) from intensification of agricultural 
land use. 
Aggravation of solid waste problems in the area 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
•  Site 
selection  examining  alternatives  which  minimize 
environmental  effects  and  not  preclude  beneficial  use  of  the 
water body using the following siting guidelines: 
o  on  a  watercourse  having  a  maximum  dilution  and  waste 
o 
absorbing capacity 
in  an  area  where  wastewater  can  be  reused  with  minimal 
treatment for agricultural or industrial purposes 
o  within a municipality which is able to accept the plant wastes 
o 
in their sewage treatment system 
Improved  water  management; 
practices and control of inputs. 
o  Proper handling of waste. 
o 
Imposition of water quality criteria.  
improved  agricultural 
Location of plant at a high elevation above local topography, in an area 
not subject to air inversions, and where prevailing winds are away from 
populated areas. 
Control  of  agricultural  inputs  and  cropping/grazing  practices  to 
minimize environmental problems. 
For facilities producing large volumes of waste, incorporation of 
• 
the following guidelines in site selection: 
o  plot size sufficient to provide a landfill or on-site disposal 
o  proximity to a suitable disposal site 
o  convenient for public/private contractors to collect and haul 
solid wastes for final disposal 
8. 
Water pollution from discharge of liquid effluents 
• 
•  Plant: TSS; temperature; pH 
•  Materials storage piles runoff: TSS; pH 
•  Most  agricultural, 
livestock,  agro-industries, 
packaging,  and  marketing  operations  produce 
solid waste. 
-  Steam and hot water boilers produce ash 
-  Fresh  food  and  processed  food  markets, 
waste from canning. 
Particulate emissions to the atmosphere from all plant 
operations. 
Gaseous and odour emissions to the atmosphere from 
processing operations. 
Accidental  release  of  potentially  hazardous  solvents, 
acidic and alkaline materials. 
Occupational health effects on workers due to fugitive 
dust,  materials  handling,  noise,  or  other  process 
operations. 
Accidents  occur  at  higher  than  normal  frequency 
because of level of knowledge and skill. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Labouratory  analysis  of  liquid  effluent  (including  cooling  water 
runoff  from  waste  piles)  in  O/G,  TDS,  TSS,  BOD,  COD  and  in-situ 
temperature monitoring. 
•  Seek  guidance  of 
local  environmental  officers  to 
identify 
acceptable disposal sites. 
•  Waste  from  agricultural  activities  can  be  further  processed  into 
other  uses,  e.g.,  organic  manure.  Reuse  and  recycling  must  be 
preferred over disposal of the waste. 
Control  of  particulates  by  fabric  filter  collectors  or  electrostatic 
precipitators. 
Control by natural scrubbing action of alkaline materials; an analysis of 
raw materials during feasibility stage of project can determine levels of 
sulphur to properly design emission control equipment. 
Maintenance  of  storage  and  disposal  areas  to  prevent  accidental 
release; provide spill mitigation equipment. 
Development of a Safety and Health Program in the facility designed to 
identify, evaluate, and control safety and health hazards at a specific 
level of detail to address the hazards to worker health and safety and 
procedures  for  employee  protection,  including  any  or  all  of  the 
following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
site characterization and analysis 
 site control 
training 
medical surveillance 
engineering  controls,  work  practices  and  personal  protective 
equipment 
monitoring 
information programs 
handling raw and process materials 
decontamination procedures 
emergency response 
illumination 
regular safety meetings 
sanitation at permanent and temporary facilities 
159 | P a g e  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
No. 
13. 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS 
Disease and health problems from use of wastewater to 
irrigate crops. 
14. 
Threat to historic, cultural, or aesthetic features. 
15. 
Temporary Visual Intrusions 
•  Rehabilitation  and  upgrading  of  agricultural 
facilities like small irrigation schemes, small dams 
and  other  possible  facilities  will  change  the 
characteristics  of  the  area  and  leave  a  marred 
landscape. 
13. 
Noise 
•  Noise  and  vibration  caused  by  machines,  site 
vehicles, pneumatic drills etc 
•  Noise from the chicken, pigs or whatever animals 
which are being raised. 
MITIGATING MEASURE 
•  Wastewater treatment (e.g., settling ponds) prior to use. 
• 
 Establishment and enforcement standards for wastewater use 
in crop production. 
 salvage or protection of cultural sites. 
•  Siting of project to prevent loss. 
• 
•  Contractor  should  ensure  minimum  footprint  of  construction 
activities and provide decent accommodation for workers. 
•  All  altered  landscapes  (Sand  pits,  borrow  pits  etc)  should  be 
rehabilitated by the contractor. 
•  Contractor to avoid old equipment. 
•  Heavy duty equipment to be minimized. 
•  Noisy operations to be limited to certain times. 
•  Noise levels to be limited to within acceptable levels. 
•  Animal raising to be in designated areas to avoid being a nuisance 
•  Noise 
from 
the  processing  of  agricultural 
to the public. 
produce. 
14. 
Social misdemeanour by construction workers  
• 
Impacts  associated  with  the  contractor’s  camp 
include: 
•  disposal of liquid and solid wastes.  
• 
theft,  alcoholism,  and  sexually  transmitted 
diseases (especially HIV/AIDS).  
•  Processing plants should be sited away from residential areas. 
•  As  a  contractual  obligation,  contractors  should  be  required  to 
have  an  HIV/AIDS  policy  and  a  framework  (responsible  staff, 
action plan, etc) to implement it during project execution. 
•  Contractor  to  curb  thefts  and  misbehaviour  through  a  code  of 
conduct. 
•  Contractor to manage any of its waste properly. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
160 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 4    PROOF OF PUBLIC CONSULTATION AND DISCLOSURE. 
APP 4.1      CONSULTED STAKEHOLDER 
The following is the lists of the stakeholders who were consulted during the ESCMF study. 
Table APP 4.1     List of Consulted Stakeholders from field visits. 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
INSTITUTION/FARMERS 
DISTRICTS 
AREA 
CONTACT DETAILS 
Courtesy visit to Karongi district office 
KARONGI 
KOPAKAKI Dutegure Cooperative 
KARONGI 
Rubengera 
0788802132 
Mubuga Coffee 
KARONGI 
Mubuga 
0788522405 
KATECOGRO COOP 
KARONGI 
Macadamia  :Nocolas Ndagijimana 
KARONGI 
SACCO Gishyita 
KARONGI 
Courtesy visit to Nyamasheke district office 
NYAMASHEKE 
Gitesi, 
Rwankuba, 
Twumba. 
Mubuga 
0788872597 
0788757298 
0788254613  
0722476111 
COACAM Cooperative 
NYAMASHEKE 
Macuba 
0783598284 
Muraho/Rugali CWS 
NYAMASHEKE 
Macuba 
0783677555 
11 
12 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
10 
COTHECYAKA 
COTHEGA 
NYAMASHEKE 
Kanjongo, 
Cyato 
0782573279 
NYAMASHEKE 
Karambi 
0783444913 
macadamia:Kayijuka Alphonse/Nicolas 
NYAMASHEKE 
Kagano 
0785020126 
13 
Kubwimana Jean Bosco 
NYAMASHEKE 
Gihombo 
0788477768 
14 
Sacco /Kagano 
NYAMASHEKE 
0788489907 
SACCO COTHEGA 
NYAMASHEKE 
Courtesy visit to Rusizi district office 
COCAGI Cooperative 
RWACOF Mashesha CWS 
Tea Trials: Martin 
macadamia, Avocado & essential oils: 
COHUMU/President COHUMU/ President 
Ngarambe Ferdinand 
22 
SACCO Mururu or Giheke  
23 
24 
Courtesy visit to HUYE district office 
San Francesco Bay: model for rejuvenation, 
closer density 
25 
Abahuzamugambi Cooperative 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
RUSIZI 
HUYE 
HUYE 
HUYE 
Rwimbogo 
0783053415 
Gitambi 
NTENDEZI 
0784077329 
Bugarama 
0782338708 
Nzahaha (8 
sectors around 
Bugarama) 
0788303595 
0782834587 
0788287779 
Kigoma 
0783830771 
Maraba 
0788635763 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
161 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 5:    INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT PLAN (IPMP) 
1.0      INTRODUCTION 
The  Small-scale  farmers  will  be  involved  in  the  growing  of  horticulture  crops,  tea  and 
coffee.  These  agricultural  livelihoods  activities  will  entail  the  use  of  agro  chemicals 
(pesticides, fertilisers etc). This outline of the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
has been developed as a decision-making process for the selection, implementation, and 
evaluation of pest management practices to be employed in the project.  
2.0      EXISTING PEST MANAGEMENT APPROACHES AND THEIR LIMITATIONS. 
The farmers carry out routine management of pests in their fields, mainly through the use 
of pesticides. Farm and crop management techniques are also used to control pests but 
there are limitations and problems that the farmers face in using these methods. Below 
are the existing and potential pest management efforts and their limitations.  
• 
• 
Growing a Healthy Crop by Starting with Healthy Seed  
A crop that germinates from seed that is healthy is likely to be less vulnerable to 
pest  damage.  Also,  a  crop  grown from  seed that has been bred from  resistant 
strains is less likely to be damaged during plant growth and crop storage.  
Most of the farmers do not have ready access to good seed at the time of planting 
and  as  a  result  they  use  seed  from  the  previous  harvest.  Commercial  seed  is 
usually too expensive for the farmers who mostly rely on seed and farm input 
donations.  
Good Farming Practices to Ensure Vigorous Crops  
A  plant  growing  in  good  farm  conditions  is  generally  less  vulnerable  to  pest 
damage than a plant growing under stressed conditions. Good farming practices 
include  timely  and  recommended  soil  preparation  and  planting,  and 
recommended water and nutrient application.  
Limitations  and  constraints  for  the  farmers 
lack  of  appropriate 
skills/knowledge  on  water  and  nutrient  management,  lack  of  farm  inputs  and 
resources to adequately and timely prepare their farms.  
include 
•  Making the Crop Unattractive or Unavailable to Pests  
This strategy includes adjusting planting times to ensure that crop development 
does  not  coincide  with  pest  appearance.  The  success  of  using  this  strategy 
requires good knowledge of the seasons and the ability to forecast the right time 
for planting.  
The farmers need the appropriate training and information through the extension 
workers to ensure that they plant at the right times.  
• 
Crop Diversity or Rotation, Early Planting  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
162 | P a g e  
Crop rotations or multiple cropping removes the chance for the re-appearance of 
persistent pests. This strategy depends on the availability of seed to the farmers 
who, most of the times, are in short supply of adequate and good quality seed.  
In  the  Horticulture  sector  it  was  noted  during  the  field  trip  that  crop 
diversification and rotation was practiced to a limited extent. Some of the crops 
were  difficult  to  sell  due  to  lack  of  markets.  The  farmers  mentioned  lack  of 
markets as one of the reasons why they preferred to stick to the crops that had 
ready markets. Crop rotation is also difficult due to limitations on availability of 
land.  
General Hygiene  
Good sanitation of the farms and surroundings, including crop storage structures 
and buildings ensures clean and healthy crops as well as seed for planting. 
The  farmers  need  to  be  well  trained  in  crop  and  seed  management  to  avoid 
damage. They need to appreciate the importance of preparing their farms in time 
and the benefits of weeding at the appropriate times.  
Biological/ecological control  
This  is  achieved  by  conserving  and  enhancing  natural  biological/ecological 
controls already in the field and in selected situations, through natural enemies 
of  pests.  This  method  requires  research  and  thorough  evaluation  before  new 
species are introduced to avoid disrupting existing ecosystems.  
The farmers need to be trained in available and appropriate biological controls 
that can be used to prevent emergence of pests. Farmers are not fully aware of 
the potential for this control method which, by creating an enabling environment 
could tame natural biological systems to discourage pests.  
Physical Control  
Physical controls, such as flooding to eliminate snails are practiced where there 
is good supply of irrigation water. Other physical controls include hand picking of 
pests, uprooting infested crop, using fire to remove pests on crop residues and 
frequent weeding.  
These methods are commonly used by the farmers. However, there is need to 
enhance  their  application  to  ensure  that  they  are  used  in  a  systematic  and 
coordinated manner.  
Use of pesticides  
Pesticides may be used with care to ensure their toxicity to non-target organisms 
is  as  low  as  possible.  The  effectiveness  of  pesticides  should  be  as  selective  as 
possible. Certain pesticides of natural origin are compatible with integrated pest 
management  (IPM),  causing  minimum  disturbance  to  natural  biological  and 
ecological pest control mechanisms.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
163 | P a g e  
It  was  noted  that  farmers  are  using  different  types  of  pesticides  for  the  same 
crops  and  that  the  type  of  pesticide  used  is  determined  by  affordability  and 
availability.  Use  of  pesticides  is  a  commonly  preferred  method  of  pest  control 
since it is perceived as a rapid method that does not require much effort. The 
farmers therefore need to be guided and trained to understand the limitations 
and  environmental  consequences  of  using  pesticides.  They  should  be 
knowledgeable  of  pesticides  that  are  compatible  with  IPM  and  that  do  not 
degrade the natural biological and ecological pest control systems. The farmers 
need  to  be  equipped  with  information  on  pesticide  application  quantities  and 
methods;  prevention  of  chemical  poisoning/accidents  and  effects  of  high 
pesticides residues in crops. Enforcement of the act that deals with Pesticides is 
of primary importance to control importation and use of pesticides.  
3.0      INTERGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) refers to a mix of farmer-driven, ecologically based 
pest  control  practices  that  seeks  to  reduce  reliance  on  synthetic  chemical  pesticides.  It 
involves (a) managing pests (keeping them below economically damaging levels) rather 
than  seeking  to  eradicate  them;  (b)  relying,  to  the  extent  possible,  on  non-chemical 
measures to keep pest populations low; and (c) selecting and applying pesticides, when 
they have to be used, in a way that minimises adverse effects on beneficial organisms, 
humans, and the environment. 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is a comprehensive approach to solving pest problems. 
IPM  shifts  the  focus  from  controlling  a  pest  now;  to  making  the  best  management 
decisions for the long-term; and builds a comprehensive response to pest problems. The 
goal  is  to  identify  and  implement  coordinated  strategies  that  work  together  in  an 
integrated  manner  to  provide  optimum  results;  with  the  view  to  achieving  long-term 
positive environmental and social benefits. The concept of integration works on multiple 
levels  in  that  remedial  strategies  for  individual  pests  are  integrated  with  each  other  to 
ensure  compatibility  with  the  need  to  manage  other  pests.  The  pest  management 
strategies  must  be  consistent  with  the  objectives  to  protect  the  environment  and  to 
address social concerns.  
The IPM approach arises as a response to negate over-reliance on pesticides and short-
term solutions that do not account for all of the long-term costs and externalities. IPM 
acknowledges that pesticides are still valuable, but stresses that chemical control is but 
one of the many tactics considered in an IPM approach. Pesticide use in IPM is limited to 
situations where there is an identified need and lack of suitable alternatives. This contrasts 
with  a  preventive  chemical  approach  where  pesticides  are  used  on  a  prescribed  basis 
without determining the need or making full use of alternative measures.  
IPM  techniques  can  be  separated  into  two  major  groups:  i)  Relatively  straightforward 
replacements for chemicals, and ii) Supporting measures. 
Chemical replacement includes: 
•  Biological control: the introduction of insects, mites, micro-organisms that prey 
on or parasitize harmful species. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
164 | P a g e  
•  Bio-pesticides: these have a pathogenic micro-organism as the active ingredient, 
for example a bacterium, fungus or a virus. 
•  Botanicals:  botanical  pesticides  contain  plant  extracts  that  have  biocidal 
properties e.g., Neem (Azadirachta indica). 
•  Semi-chemicals:  chemicals  (especially  pheromones)  are  used  to  stimulate 
particular behaviours or interactions between individual insects so as to control 
pests.  
Choosing  appropriate  measures 
is  not  straightforward  and  requires  significant 
understanding of the interactions between the environment, crop, pest, and predator. The 
scientific  basis  for  farmer  decision-making  in  biological  control  depends  on  detailed 
knowledge  of  the  life  histories  of  pests  and  their  natural  enemies,  crop  ecology,  and 
interactions within the agro-ecosystem. Supporting measures include traditional methods 
in  subsistence  farming  systems:  cultural  control  (e.g., 
of  pest  control  as  used 
intercropping),  habitat  manipulation  (e.g.,  creating  diversity),  mechanical  and  physical 
control,  natural  biological  systems  and  host  plant  resistance.  Farmer  participation  and 
learning are therefore essential in ensuring proper pest management practices.  
The basic requirements for implementing IPM in the  PSAC sites includes understanding 
the biology and economics of the pest and the system in which the pest exists, monitoring 
the  pests  and  natural  controls,  and  establishing  their  economic  or  aesthetic  injury 
thresholds.  IPM  can  be  achieved  by  selecting  an  appropriate  strategy  of  cultural, 
mechanical,  biological,  and/or  chemical  prevention  or  control  techniques,  as  briefly 
described below:  
• 
Cultural Practices:  
These include habitat modification and adapting operating procedures so that pest 
damage  is  reduced,  and  natural  control  is  enhanced.  It  involves  sanitation  or 
cleaning of sources of pest infestation, choosing plant varieties that are resistant 
to  pest  injury,  adjusting  planting  time,  fertilization,  tillage,  and  harvesting 
operations to have the most beneficial effect for the pest management situation.  
•  Biological Controls:  
These are predators, parasites, and diseases that attack pests. Measures should be 
taken to conserve naturally occurring populations of these biological controls. In 
some  situations  where  naturally  occurring  biological  controls  are  not  effective, 
they can be introduced from outside sources.  
•  Chemical Control: 
This  involves  selecting  a  pesticide  with  the  lowest  toxicity  to  humans  and  non-
target  organisms  (including  biological  controls)  and  using  it  in  such  a  way  to 
prevent  or  minimize  undesirable  environmental  effects.  The  lowest  effective 
amount  of  pesticide  is  applied,  using  appropriate  and  carefully  calibrated 
equipment.  In  many  cases,  use  of  pesticides  cannot  be  entirely  eliminated. 
However, use of pesticides must be controlled so as to reduce or eliminate social 
and environmental impacts.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
165 | P a g e  
A comprehensive IPM should support a pesticide management plan that is designed to 
ensure  that  pesticides  are  procured,  handled,  stored,  applied  and  disposed  in  such  a 
manner that protects life and the environment. The plan shall consider the entire life cycle 
of the pesticides. Hence the various livelihood activities and operations must observe the 
following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
All pesticides must be purchased from registered pesticides dealers. 
Pesticides must be purchased strictly according to the requirements to avoid 
over-stocking. A follow up system for the procurement, transportation, receipt 
and custody of pesticides must be established. 
During movement or transportation of pesticides they must not be mixed up 
with  other  items,  particularly  food  items.  They  should  be  in  well  confined 
containers. 
Pesticides shall be stored in a dedicated and centralized warehouse or storage 
facility,  separately  from  agricultural  produce  and  other  items.  All  pesticides 
must always be under lock and key and under the custody of a very responsible 
person.  Storage  of  pesticides  in  farmers'  houses  must  be  prohibited. 
Warehouses must be protected from sources of fire. Access to the warehouses 
must be restricted to responsible and authorized persons. 
All pesticide mixing containers and spraying equipment must be washed and 
cleaned in a safeguarded central point. All containers must be disposed of in 
line  with  the  requirements  of  the  Pesticides  Act  and  the  Environmental 
Management Act.  
IPM strategies will comprise of soil pests, weeds, field and post- harvest pests, and pest 
diseases management. Use of certified seeds or seed dressing will protect crop from soil 
borne pests. Weed control could either be manual or use of appropriate herbicides, for 
example, pre- and post-germination herbicides. However, extreme care is needed in the 
use  of  herbicides,  as  wrong  or  uninformed  use  is  likely  to  cause  total  loss  of  crops  or 
pollution of water and soil.  
As a rule, beneficiaries should observe strict surveillance of their crop and observe high 
levels of crop hygiene as a first step to manage the pests and diseases in their plots, as 
appropriate. These include removal and destruction of affected plants and then preventive 
control of the identified problem. Post-harvest pests are managed even before harvesting 
by  cleaning  the  stores  and  destroying  the  residues  from  previous  harvest.  Use  of 
recommended pesticides on the harvested crop before storage contributes immensely to 
the preservation of the harvested crop against attacks by pests. 
IPM initiatives have the potential to improve the management of pests on the farms and 
in  food  handling facilities  to  improve  yields  and to prevent damage  to  crops.  Section 2 
above highlights some of the IPM practices that are being used to a limited extent, by the 
farmers.  These  practices  have  great potential  and  therefore  need to  be supported  and 
strengthened  through  extension  services  and  targeted  training  activities  to  ensure 
maximum benefits.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
166 | P a g e  
4.0      INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLAN  
Table 1     Integrated pest management and monitoring plan 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Item  
No  
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practice
s  
Monitoring 
Institution  
Monitoring  
Frequency  
1.  
PHYSICAL AND BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS  
1.1  
beans, 
maize, 
sorghum,  horticulture 
crops damage by pests  
Low crop yields  
resistant 
Use  healthy  seed  and 
varieties. Train farmers on importance 
of using healthy seed  
Associations/cooperativ
es management 
IPM practices  
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
Quarterly  
Good  farming  practices  (timely  and 
recommended soil preparation, water 
and  nutrient  management).  Train 
farmers in good farming practices  
Provide  information  to  farmers  on 
appropriate planting times  
Crop  rotation,  diversity  and  inter-
cropping  
Train  farmers 
in  enhancement  of 
biological control of pests. Research in 
IPM methods  
Make farm inputs and information on 
pests,  pesticides  and  pest  resistant 
seeds available to farmers  
Extension workers,  
Cluster  management  & 
farmers  
Recommended 
practices, IPM practices  
agricultural 
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
Extension workers.  
Extension workers  
agricultural 
Recommended 
practices, IPM practices  
Recommended agricultural  
practices  
IPM practices  
Extension 
workers 
Agricultural  Research, 
NGO's  
Micro-credit  
institutions  (FINCLUDE), 
Extension workers, seed 
suppliers and NGO's  
IPM  
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
2. 
CHEMICAL CONTROLS (PESTICIDES) 
Issues / Concerns During Pesticide Transportation  
2.1 
2.1.1   Adulteration  
Lack of controls  
Inspection, sampling and testing  
Transporters  
2.1.2   Accidents / spillages   -Vehicle condition, -Road 
condition,  -Poor  driving 
skills  
Ensure  that  roadworthy  vehicles  are 
used.  Ensure  drivers  are  properly 
instructed.  
NAEB 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
-Packaging 
standards 
specifications 
Act 
Pesticides Act  
traffic 
-Road 
Vehicle 
requirements  
NAEB 
and 
storage 
-Product 
–Environment 
regulations. 
-
maintenance 
- Rwanda 
Environmental 
quarterly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
Half yearly  
As need arises  
167 | P a g e  
Item  
No  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practice
s  
Monitoring 
Institution  
Monitoring  
Frequency  
Management 
Authority (REMA) 
2.1.3   Accidental 
Contamination  
Using  same  vehicle  for 
different purposes  
Ensure  vehicles  are  inspected  and 
cleaned when changing use  
Transporters  
(pesticide 
- 
regulations).  
Environment 
As need arises  
- 
transport 
Department  
MINIAGRI -DA  
2.2 
2.2.1   Pesticide 
Issues/Concerns During Pesticide Storage  
loss, 
and 
-Inappropriate  building 
for storage of pesticides.  
degradation 
contamination.  
-Suitable warehouse  
Transporters 
 Agro dealers  
- regulations  
Rwanda 
- 
Environmental 
Management 
Authority (REMA) 
-NAEB 
Before  approval  of 
storage  faculties  for 
pesticides  
or 
inspection  and 
-Routine 
checks  
-Provide adequate and separate  
storage space for pesticides  
inventory 
Agro-dealers  
Agro-dealers  
-  regulations,  -  manufacturer's 
guidelines  
- regulations,  
- manufacturer's  
guidelines  
-  
- NAEB  
- NAEB 
Half yearly  
Half yearly 
shelving 
Wrong 
stacking  
-Inadequate 
space. 
housekeeping 
purpose 
warehouse  
Theft and vandalism 
use 
storage 
--Bad 
-Multi-
of 
Restrict  entry  to  pesticide  areas. 
Check pesticides records regularly 
Associations/cooperativ
es management. 
Farm security policy 
Over-stocking  
Buying the required quantities only   Agro-dealers  
Pesticides Act  
As need arises  
quarterly 
Associations/coope
ratives 
management 
Associations/coope
ratives 
management  
Ministry of Labour,  
NAEB  
2.2.2 
Farm members safety Lack  of 
trespassers 
control  on 
Restrict entry to pesticide areas 
Provide appropriate warning signs 
Associations/cooperativ
es management. 
MBS, FAO Guidelines. Factories 
Act 
Annually 
2.2.3   Occupational Health   Exposure to pesticides  
-Provide protective clothing and  
ensure it is used.  
-Train farmers in proper  
pesticides handling.  
-Routine medical examination  
Agro-dealers. 
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
labour regulations,  
regulations  
-Min. of labour.  
-  
- NAEB 
Annually  
Issues/concerns during pesticide application  
2.3  
2.3.1   Pesticide misuse, over 
/ under use  
of 
lack 
knowledge  
appropriate 
-Training and awareness campaigns   MINIAGRI  
NAEB  
Pesticide 
regulations  
manufacturers 
-, NAEB 
-DEO  
Annually  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
168 | P a g e  
Item  
No  
Potential 
Concerns  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practice
s  
Monitoring 
Institution  
2.3.2  
Intentional poisoning  Frustration, 
pressures  
Social 
-Ensure  responsible,  mentally  sound 
and mature persons are given charge 
and control of pesticides.  
-Restrict accessibility to pesticides.  
-Spot checking  
Agro-dealers  
2.3.3   Accidental  
poisoning  
lack  of  knowledge  of 
pesticide  potency  and 
negligence  
Training  
MINIAGRI  
NAEB 
- MINIAGRI 
NAEB 
type 
-Equipment malfunction  
-Wrong 
of 
equipment.  
-  Time  and  method  of 
application (spraying)  
of 
recommended 
-Regular maintenance of equipment.  
-Use recommended equipment.  
-Use 
approved  methods 
application.  
-Use 
clothing.  
-Training 
Pesticide Management  
-Clean 
equipment as recommended by  
equipment 
seminars 
and  dispose 
-Integrated 
protective 
-Improper  cleaning  of 
equipment.  
MINIAGRI 
NAEB 
-Improper  disposal  of 
cleaning  water  and  old 
equipment  
manufacturer.  
-Use  bio-beds  and  draining  dams  to 
dispose cleaning and drainage waters  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
Multi-purpose  use  of 
equipment or pesticides  
Control  use  of  equipment  and 
pesticides.  
-Thorough cleaning of equipment  
-Training  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
MINIAGRI 
Pesticides Act  
-  
-Min of labour  
- NAEB  
Pesticides Act  
-  
-DEO  
-Manufacturer's 
recommendations.  
-Equipment maintenance policy  
-  
- NAEB  
Monitoring  
Frequency  
Annually  
Annually  
Annually  
-Manufacturer's 
recommendations.  
- NAEB 
-PSAC  
-  regulations.  Water  resources 
regulations  
- NAEB 
-PSAC 
Annually  
Pesticides Act  
- - NAEB 
-PSAC 
Annually  
2.4.  
Issues / Concerns during disposal of pesticides containers and equipment  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
169 | P a g e  
Item  
No  
Potential 
Concerns  
2.4.1   Water 
Environmental 
pollution  
and 
-Cleaning of equipment,  
-Disposal of remains of  
pesticides  
-Disposal  of  containers 
and equipment  
Issues 
Cause of Concern  
I 
Control/Mitigation  
Measure  
Responsible 
Person/institution  
Standards/Regulation/Practice
s  
Monitoring 
Institution  
--- NAEB 
-PSAC 
- Environmental 
Management Authority 
(REMA) 
-Min of Water  
-Pesticides  and  equipment  - 
manufacturer's 
recommendations.  
-Water pollution standards.  
Rwanda 
Environmental 
Management 
Authority (REMA) 
Monitoring  
Frequency  
Annually  
,  
2.4.2   Post 
Application 
Monitoring  
Pesticides residues in the 
food chain  
-- NAEB 
-PSAC 
-Environmental standards  
-Wastewater standards  
Rwanda 
Annually  
- 
Environmental 
Management 
Authority (REMA) 
- NAEB 
-PSAC 
-Use  of  bio-beds,  draining  channels 
and draining dams.  
-Use chemical remains to re- spray.  
-Clean equipment in one place.  
-Use  plants  such  as  water  lilies  to 
absorb waste pesticides.  
-Take stock of pesticide containers  
-Integrated Pesticide Management  
specifications  on 
-Integrated Pest Management  
-Adherence 
to 
control of residues  
-Sensitize  farmers  not  to  harvest 
produce immediately after spraying  
-Information management  
-Develop  manuals 
grassroots level  
for  use 
at 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
170 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 6:    TARGETED ADAPTATION ASSESSMENT 
SHORT-LISTING OF FEASIBLE ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
The first step is to identify a long list of adaptation options to build resilience for the  Promoting 
Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC).  
The second step was to categorise the long list of options. This resulted in a shorter list of feasible 
options. 
The third step was to filter the short list of options down to the list of “most feasible adaptation 
options”.  
The filtration process led to the identification of the “most feasible programmatic options.” As 
Table Ann 5-4 shows, these options have different characteristics in terms of the climate hazards 
they address, and the issues in the agriculture sectors that are critical to their delivery. 
The options were filtered according to a number of criteria: 
•  First criterion.  
Does the option pass an initial assessment of relevance and feasibility to be implemented 
in the local context?  
•  Second criterion.  
Does  the  option  provide  a  positive  contribution  to  reaching  the  national  targets  of 
agricultural productivity levels? 
•  Third criterion.  
Does the option help to alleviate the constraints in the Tea, coffee, and horticulture value 
chains?  
•  Fourth criterion.  
Does  the  option  provide  significant  reductions  to  the  current  costs  of  withstanding 
weather variability and future climate change?  
The following table Ann 5-4 presents the most feasible adaptation options that were identified in 
regard to the Tea, Coffee, and horticulture sector. 
Table Ann 5-4      Climate change adaptation options. 
HIGHLY VULNERABLE ISSUE 
ADAPTATION OPTION 
No. 
1.0 
Cost  of  agricultural  production  and 
agriculture in general 
2.0 
Climate and climate Shocks 
5.0 
Soil erosion and soil improvements 
Agricultural disaster risk reduction and management (DRR/M) 
Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness training programs) 
The  development  of  knowledge  and  decision-support  systems  including  improved 
monitoring and early warning systems. 
The  development  of  new  crop varieties and technologies to  support  farming.  (improved 
coffee varieties and tested tea clones) 
Off-farm enterprise promotion like coffee shops etc 
Implementation  of  climate  smart  agriculture  (CSA)  practices  and  environmentally 
sustainable practices 
Improved water management including the development of water harvesting techniques. 
Reduction  of  soil  erosion,  nutrient  leaching  from  soil  and  minimized wind  damage.  (Soil 
erosion control and water holding structures) 
Improved net assimilation of tealeaf and additional organic matter from leaf litter including 
composting and mulching. 
The use of shade trees and inter-cropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple crops 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
171 | P a g e  
7.0 
Production  of 
Horticulture crops 
Tea,  Coffee, 
and 
Shifting cropping calendars; when to plant, which varieties to plant and which inputs to use 
Adjustment of spraying programs and timing of husbandry activities such as pruning and 
fertilizer application 
APPRAISAL OF FEASIBLE OPTIONS 
The most feasible options were identified using expert decision making. However, to know which 
option and when the options should be implemented, they need to be appraised in more detail. 
The answer to “where”, is given by a Multi-Criteria Analysis, (MCA) approach, whilst the answer 
to “when”, is given by an iterative risk management (IRM) approach. (FDRE, 2013; Seitz J, 2014) 
Multi-Criteria Analysis, (MCA) Approach 
The  Multi-Criteria  Analysis,  (MCA)  approach  is  used  to  decide  which  “most  feasible  options” 
should  be  implemented.  In  appraising  the  options,  the  approach  takes  into  consideration  a 
number  of  criteria  including  costs,  benefits  and  urgency.  The  approach  was  used  to  prioritize 
urgent  and  immediate  adaptation  options.  It  was  purely  an  expert-driven  process,  using 
information gathered from a wide stakeholder engagement.  
The MCA method was chosen because there was a clear indication that numerous criteria and 
indicators,  not  just  monetary  ones,  must  be  considered  in  the  prioritization  of  the  adaptation 
options37. The “most feasible adaptation options” which were identified above (Table Ann 5-4), 
will be prioritized in the current section. The prioritization will follow the following steps: 
•  Step 1: Identify prioritization criteria, 
•  Step 2: Identify outcome and performance of options against the criteria, 
•  Step 3: Assign weights to each criterion. 
Step 1: Identify prioritization criteria” The criteria against which the feasible adaptation options 
were  judged  and  prioritized  were  identified.  The  different  criteria  used  in  the  MCA  were 
independent of each other, and included the following: 
•  Economic costs and benefits, 
•  Level of climate resilience and robustness, 
•  Synergy with national plans and Multilateral Environmental Agreements, 
•  Urgency, 
•  Complementarity with national plans institutional feasibility. 
Step 2: Identify outcome and performance of each option so that they can be ranked against 
identified criteria: The performance of each option was assessed against each criterion on a scale 
of 0 – 1. This was done by developing a performance matrix for the adaptation options as depicted 
in  Table  Ann  5-4.  Each  criterion  is  ranked  on  a  0–1  scale  and  combined  based  on  the  criteria 
weights to find a combined score for each option, which then was used to rank the options for 
decision making. 
The  adaptation  option,  “Establishment  of  farmers'  support  (subsidies,  awareness  training 
programs)” ranked highest followed by “The development of new crop varieties and technologies 
to support farming, (Improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones).” and then by “Reduction of 
37  FDRE  (2007),  Climate  change  National  Adaptation Programme  of  Action  (NAPA)  of  Ethiopia.  The  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia. 
(2007). Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/eth01.pdf 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
172 | P a g e  
soil  erosion,  nutrient  leaching from  soil  and  minimized  wind damage.  (Soil  erosion  control  and 
water holding structures)”. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
173 | P a g e  
Table Ann 5-4      Adaptation decision matrix (without criteria weighting) 
              CRITERIA 
Source: Adapted from RoR, (2006)38 
ECONOMIC 
COSTS  AND 
BENEFITS 
LEVEL  OF  CLIMATE 
RESILIENCE 
AND 
ROBUSTNESS 
OPTIONS 
URGENCY 
SYNERGY 
WITH 
NATIONAL PLANS AND 
MULTILATERAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
AGREEMENTS 
COMPLEMENTAR
Y WITH NATIONAL 
PLANS 
INSTITUTIONAL 
FEASIBILITY 
FINAL 
SCORE 
RANK 
0.50 
0.75 
0.75 
0.5 
0.75 
0.75 
0.25 
0.5 
0.75 
1 
0.75 
1 
0.85 
1 
1 
1 
0.75 
0.75 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.5 
0.75 
0.75 
1 
0.60 
0.25 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.75 
1 
0.75 
0.5 
0.6 
3.10 
11 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4.25 
4.10 
7 
8 
0.75 
0.5 
2.25 
12 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.90 
0.75 
0.80 
1 
1 
1 
4.60 
4.90 
4.50 
4.80 
4.00 
4.75 
5.00 
5 
2 
6 
3 
9 
4 
1 
0.5 
3.50 
10 
disaster 
farming. 
Agricultural 
risk 
reduction  and  management 
(DRR/M) 
Shifting  cropping  calendars; 
when  to  plant,  which  varieties 
to plant and which inputs to use 
The development of knowledge 
and  decision-support  systems 
including  improved  monitoring 
and early warning systems. 
Implementation  of 
climate 
smart agriculture practices and 
environmentally 
sustainable 
practices. 
Off-farm  enterprise  promotion 
like coffee shops etc 
The  development  of  new  crop 
varieties  and  technologies  to 
(improved 
support 
coffee  varieties  and  tested  tea 
clones) 
Improved  water  management 
including  the  development  of 
water harvesting techniques. 
Reduction  of 
soil  erosion, 
nutrient leaching from soil and 
minimized  wind  damage.  (Soil 
erosion  control  and  water 
holding structures) 
Improved  net  assimilation  of 
tealeaf  and  additional  organic 
matter from leaf litter including 
composting and mulching. 
The  use  of  shade  trees  and 
inter-cropping  of  nitrogen-
fixing plants with staple crops 
Establishment 
farmers' 
support  (subsidies,  awareness 
training programs) 
spraying 
Adjustment 
of 
programs 
of 
and 
husbandry  activities  such  as 
pruning 
fertilizer 
and 
application 
timing 
of 
Source: Adapted from RoR, (2006) 
38    RoR,  (2006),  National  Adaptation  Programme  of  Action,  Republic  of  Rwanda.  page  44.  Available  at: 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/rwa01e.pdf 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
174 | P a g e  
Step 3: Assign weights to each criterion to reflect its relative importance and aggregate:  Once 
options have been identified and a set of criteria has been developed, the next step of an MCA 
method requires deciding if separate weights need to be assigned to different criteria. The weights 
reflected  the  importance  of  each  criterion  in  meeting  the  overall  objectives  of  the  decision, 
including preferences of stakeholders derived from the consultations. This is illustrated in in Table 
Ann 5-6. 
This was done by proposing the following weights for the identified criteria: 
Table Ann 5-5      weights for the identified criteria 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
IDENTIFIED CRITERIA 
WEIGHT 
Economic costs and benefits 
Level of climate resilience and robustness 
Synergy with national plans and Multilateral Environmental Agreements 
Urgency 
Complementary with national plans institutional feasibility 
0.20 
0.30 
0.15 
0.20 
0.15 
This time around, the adaptation option, “Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness 
training  programs)”  ranked  highest  followed  by  “The  development  of  new  crop  varieties  and 
technologies to support farming. (improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones)” and then by 
“Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and minimized wind damage. (Soil erosion 
control and water holding structures)”. The inclusion of weightings reshuffled the priority of the 
options, aligning them more to the preferences of the stakeholders and the political and strategic 
priorities of the country or sector. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
175 | P a g e  
Table Ann 5-6      Adaptation decision matrix (with criteria weighting) 
                              CRITERIA 
OPTIONS 
ECONOMIC  COSTS  AND 
BENEFITS 
LEVEL  OF 
RESILIENCE 
ROBUSTNESS 
CLIMATE 
AND 
URGENCY 
SYNERGY WITH NATIONAL 
AND 
PLANS 
MULTILATERAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
AGREEMENTS 
COMPLEMENTARY  WITH 
PLANS 
NATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONAL 
FEASIBILITY 
FINAL 
SCORE 
RANK 
CRITERIA WEGHT 
0.20 
0.30 
0.15 
0.20 
0.15 
Agricultural  disaster  risk  reduction  and  management 
(DRR/M) 
Shifting cropping calendars; when to plant, which varieties 
to plant and which inputs to use 
The  development  of  knowledge  and  decision-support 
systems including improved monitoring and early warning 
systems. 
Implementation of climate smart agriculture practices and 
environmentally sustainable practices. 
Off-farm enterprise promotion like coffee shops etc 
The development of new crop varieties and technologies 
to support farming. (improved coffee varieties and tested 
tea clones) 
Improved water management including the development 
of water harvesting techniques. 
Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and 
minimized wind damage. (Soil erosion control and water 
holding structures) 
Improved  net  assimilation  of  tealeaf  and  additional 
organic matter from leaf litter including composting and 
mulching. 
The  use  of  shade  trees  and  inter-cropping  of  nitrogen-
fixing plants with staple crops 
Establishment  of  farmers'  support  (subsidies,  awareness 
training programs) 
Adjustment of spraying programs and timing of husbandry 
activities such as pruning and fertilizer application 
Source: Adapted from Seitz J, (2014),  
0.50 X 0.20 = 0.1 
0.75 X 0.30 = 0.225 
0.75 X 0.15 = 0.1125 
0.5 X 0.20 = 0.1 
0.6 X 0.15 = 0.09 
0.6275 
11 
0.75 X 0.20 = 0.15 
0.5 X 0.30 =0.15 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0. 15 
0.75 X 0.20 = 
0.75 X 0.30 = 0.225 
0.60 X 0.15 = 0.09 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0. 15 
0.8 
0.865 
9 
8 
0.25 X 0.20 = 
0.5 X 0.30 = 0.15 
0.25 X 0.15 = 0.0375 
0.75 X 0.20 = 0.15 
0.5 X 0.15 = 0.075 
0.6125 
12 
0.75 X 0.20 = 
1 X 0.20 = 
0.85 X 0.30 = 0.225 
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 
1. X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
0.90 X 0.15 = 0.135 
0.925 
0.985 
0.75 X 0.20 = 
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
0.75 X 0.15 = 0.1125 
0.9625 
1 X 0.20 = 
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
0.80 X 0.15 = 0.12 
0.97 
0.75 X 0.20 = 
0.75 X 0.30 = 0.225 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
0.925 
1 X 0.20 =0.20 
1 X 0.30 = 0.3 
0.75 X 0.15 = 0.1125 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
0.9625 
1 X 0.20 = 0.20 
1 X 0.30 = 0.30 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
1 X 0.15 = 0.15 
1 
6 
2 
4 
3 
6 
4 
1 
0.5 X 0.20 = 0.1 
0.75 X 0.30 = 0.225 
0.75 X 0.15 = 0.1125 
1 X 0.20 = 0.2 
0.5 X 0.15 = 0.075 
0.7125 
10 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
176 | P a g e  
4.4.2    Iterative Risk Management 
Having  prioritised  the  most  feasible  adaptation  options  using  the  MCA,  the  iterative  risk 
management  (IRM)  approach  was  then  used  to  know  when  the  “most  feasible  options” 
should be implemented, i.e., the sequencing of  the options. It was used to sequence the 
implementation  of  the  identified  resilience  options.  This  approach  takes  care  of  the 
uncertainty in future climate change and is derived from the recommendations of the Inter-
Governmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC),  whose  special  report  on  extreme  events, 
recommended the use of IRM approaches 39  
The approach uses a monitoring, research, evaluation and learning process (cycle) to improve 
future management strategies. It is  well suited for decision contexts characterised by high 
uncertainties and can help decision makers to avoid taking irreversible decisions and develop 
plans where decisions can be adjusted appropriately. IRM is based on the idea that current 
decisions are essentially constrained by imperfect knowledge and cognitive bias, and cycles 
of revisions are necessary to improve the performance of strategies and actions. Thus, IRM 
incorporates learning at the core of its methodology40. 
IRM has a focus on starting with current climate variability (and the adaptation deficit) and 
then  looking  at  future  climate  change  within  a  framework  of  decision  making  under 
uncertainty.  Early  steps  within  IRM  have  a  strong  focus  on  building  adaptive  capacity, 
implementing  low  and  no-regret  options,  and  identifying  areas  of  long-term  concern  that 
warrant early investigation or action. By encouraging the “what if?” question, IRM promotes 
the development of flexible approaches where decisions are taken at the right time and can 
be adjusted later. 
Thus, IRM looks at how to implement options over time, based on current impacts (and the 
adaptation deficit) and projected future climate change, against a background of uncertainty 
(Figure  Ann  5-10).  The  analysis  of  the  Prioritised  Options  shows  that  all  should  be 
implemented  in  some  form  immediately,  though  some  of  the  long-term  areas  might  only 
require initial investigation. The implementation of the options is depicted in figure Ann 5-10: 
•  Band  “A”  consists  of  long-term  resilience  actions.  Initially  a  few  actions  and 
investigations will be implemented to avoid locking Rwanda into irreversible decisions 
which may not be needed in the future. These actions are proactive investigations and 
implementation  of  certain  long-term  issues  that  need  to  start  immediately.  They 
involve  protecting  the  infrastructure  from  structural  damages  by using  natural  and 
man-made  approaches  to  avert  impacts  from  floods  and  heat.  These  should  be 
implemented  and  integrated  into  the  infrastructural  development  immediately  to 
make development more effective and ‘climate smart’. In the Prioritised Options for 
Rwanda  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC)  these 
include  
39 IPCC AR4 (2007); IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007 (AR4), Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/contents.html 
40  IPCC, (2012); International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2012). Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance 
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Field, C.B., 
V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
177 | P a g e  
o  Agricultural disaster risk reduction and management (DRR/M) 
o  Shifting cropping calendars; when to plant, which varieties to plant and which 
o 
o 
inputs to use. 
Implementation of climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices and 
environmentally sustainable practices. 
Improved water management including the development of water harvesting 
techniques. 
o  Reduction of soil erosion, nutrient leaching from soil and minimized 
•  Band “B” consists of actions which will result in benefits whether the climate changes 
or  not,  and  thus  provide  immediate  benefits  for  economic  growth,  as  well  as 
enhancing  long-term  resilience.  They  involve  building  capacity  to  ensure  the 
institutional  frameworks  and  an  enabling  environment  are  created  for  subsequent 
resilience mainstreaming and integration. In the prioritised options for the  Rwanda 
Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export  Competitiveness  Project  (PSAC),  low  and  no 
regret options can include all the listed options but most appropriately the following. 
o  The development of knowledge and decision-support systems  
o  Off-farm enterprise promotion like coffee shops etc 
o  The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. 
o 
o 
(Improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones) 
Improved water management including the development of water harvesting 
techniques. 
Improved net assimilation of tealeaf and additional organic matter from leaf 
litter including composting and mulching. 
o  The use of shade trees and inter-cropping of nitrogen-fixing plants with staple 
crops 
o  Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness 
The experience gained through the implementation of low-regret measures can serve 
as a basis to start designing and assessing more costly adaptation actions that could 
be implemented in the future. 
•  Band “C” consists of Enabling steps, involving building capacity and the enabling steps 
for  the  whole  programme  to  take  off.  Once  the  climate  resilience  actions  become 
rooted  into  the  system,  less  and  less  of  these  actions  will  be  implemented.  In  the 
prioritised  options 
the  Rwanda  Promoting  Smallholder  Agro-Export 
Competitiveness Project (PSAC), these include  
o  The development of knowledge and decision-support systems  
o  The development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. 
for 
(Improved coffee varieties and tested tea clones) 
o  Establishment of farmers' support (subsidies, awareness training programs) 
o  Adjustment of spraying programs and timing of husbandry activities such as 
pruning and fertilizer application 
Further the IRM looks at three-time periods in which to sequence options based on these key 
climate risks: the short term (now), the medium term (2025) and the long term (2050+). It 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
178 | P a g e  
looks at how to implement options based on current and projected future climate and the 
associated  risks.  Options  should  be  sequenced  in  a  robust  and  flexible  manner  given  this 
uncertainty and should be matched to risk areas and key decision thresholds41. 
Short term 
(i) 
In  the  short  term,  the  three  bands  of  adaptation  programmes  will  be  implemented 
simultaneously at different rates as follows: 
•  Band “A” 
These  include  Climate  Resilience  and  Climate-justified  actions,  which  constitutes 
“early  actions  for  long  term  change”  They  will  start  with  a  few  actions  and 
investigations to avoid locking Rwanda into irreversible decisions which may not be 
needed in the future. The number of the adaptation actions are expected to grow as 
the programme takes shape. 
Figure Ann 5-10     Iterative sequencing of resilience options (Adapted from FDRE, 2013) 
•  Band “B” 
These are the Low- and no-regret actions, which result in social and economic benefit 
irrespective of the future climatic changes. They will start in full force as much as is 
possible. 
41  FDRE,  (2013);  Ethiopia’s  climate  resilient  green  economy.  Climate  Resilience  Strategy,  Agriculture  and  Forestry,  Federal  Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
179 | P a g e  
•  Band “C” 
These are the enabling steps. They have to be implemented in order for the climate 
resilience programme to take root. The enabling steps will taper off in the long run as 
the Climate resilience actions become rooted in the system. 
(ii)  Mid Term up to 2025 
In the period up to 2025, the low and no regret options will have taken root and Rwanda will 
be having the institutional and technical capacity to deliver climate resilient growth. As the 
low and no regret options (Band B) will continue being implemented, more focus will now be 
directed to actions that increase resilience of the agriculture sector (Band A), fully integrating 
these  into  the  delivery  of  development  activities  to  ensure  climate  resilient  growth.  The 
number  of  band  “A”  actions  in  figure  Ann  5-10  will  start  to  increase,  whilst  Band  “C” 
programmes will be tapering off. 
Long Term (Post 2025) 
(iii) 
In the long term (post 2025) all the portfolios of options will need to be implemented, noting 
that  the  specific  activities  will  vary  according  to  the  evolution  of  climate  risks.  The 
implementing agent will need to act iteratively as risks evolve.  
The key advantage of such an approach is that it seeks to exploit quick wins, by addressing 
the existing adaptation deficit at the same time as building future resilience. It also makes 
sure irreversible decisions are not taken now, which may or may not be needed depending 
on the level of climate change that arises. By doing so it encourages decision makers to ask 
“what if” and develop a flexible approach, where decisions are reviewed over time, and plans 
adjusted  as  the  evidence  emerges.  This  builds  in  flexibility,  reduces  the  risk  of  lock-in  or 
stranded assets, and aims to keep future options open.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
180 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 7:    LABOUR AND COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
1.0      INTRODUCTION 
This  Labour  Management  Procedures  (LMP)  was  developed  by  the  Rwanda  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) to manage risks under the Promoting Smallholder 
Agro-export Competitiveness Project (PSAC) funded by IFAD. The LMP sets out the Program’s 
approach  to  meeting  national  requirements  as  well  as  the  objectives  of  the  IFAD’s  Social, 
Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  of  IFAD  2020,  specifically  the 
objectives  of  Environmental  and  Socials,  Standard  5:  Labour  and  Working  Conditions  and 
Standard 6. Community health and safety. 
The aim of the PSAC project is to increase incomes of the rural poor, by supporting inclusive 
agro-exports value chains by increasing their climate resilient productive capacity and market 
access. The proposed project will focus on key activities that are priorities for the MINAGRI 
within  the  context  of  economic,  social,  and  governance  transformation  towards  the 
aspirations of Vision 2050.  
The components and sub-components of the project are summarized below. 
1.2      PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE (PDO) 
The  Project  Development  Objective  is  “To  support  the  inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted 
export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-resilient  productive  capacity  and 
market access”. 
1.3      PROJECT COMPONENTS 
To  address  the  Smallholder  Agro-export  Competitiveness  challenges  and  support  the 
achievement of the PDO, the proposed project consists of three main components: 
1.3.1    Component 1:  
Investments  to  enhance  climate  smart  production  and  productivity  of  selected 
export-driven value chains  
This component will support the intensification and improve the competitiveness of 
the  production  levels  of  the  selected  export-driven  value  chains  through  targeted 
investments along two sets of interventions as detailed below: 
Sub-component 1.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity.  
This subcomponent (SC) will focus on expansion and rehabilitation of plantation areas, 
innovative  climate-resilient 
supported  by  the  development  and  adoption  of 
technologies  and  practices.  At  the  inception  level  the project  will  conduct  study  to 
determine the most cost-effective strategies in coffee processing and production. It 
will  support  the  coffee  drying  parabolic  structures  to  address  the  challenges  of 
increasing  wet  periods  affecting  the  quality  of  the  coffee  during  harvest.  Support 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
181 | P a g e  
conservation measures at tea plantations and promote a community-based approach 
for the production of avocado and mango seedlings  
Sub-component 1.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities.  
PSAC  will  address  the  key  infrastructure  gaps  that  are  hindering  smallholder 
cooperatives/POs in each export-driven VC. Acquisition of trucks to fast-track delivery 
of fresh tea leaves. The investment in an Avocado grading acquisition of Complete Soil 
and Water Testing Kit Investments in new hangar construction in 52 tea and 2 coffee 
cooperatives. Basic facilities, tools and equipment to all investments involving a grant 
will be supported under component 2 for business planning and linkage to financing, 
in  addition  to  the  overall  capacity  building  support  to  be  provided  for  improved 
cooperative governance and enhanced technical skills. 
1.3.2    Component 2: 
Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains) 
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted 
VCs  by  improving  smallholder  value  chain  actors’  access  to  advisory  services, 
sustainable markets and financial services. 
Sub-component 2.1 – Capacity building of Producer Organizations.  
The support will be provided to both established cooperatives, especially the ones that 
have  been  identified  as  weak  in  previous  assessments,  the  new  cooperatives,  out-
grower schemes, farmer groups that will be formed to accompany the expansion of 
certain crops as foreseen under component 1. Issues to be addressed will focus will 
include:    governance,  decision-making  process  and  management;  group  dynamics, 
gender  equality  climate  change  adaptation  approaches,  and  environmental  and 
natural resources management.  
Quality  control  and  market-driven  certification:    PSAC  support  will  support  in  the 
accreditation of certain testing services, creating a national pool of various voluntary 
standards certified lead trainers  
Backward and forward market linkages: The project will support efforts that promote 
brands that display the uniqueness of the Rwandan produce in Tea and coffee as well 
as  horticulture  through  digital  marketing  and  capacity  building  of  exporters  about 
international business environment   
Enhanced access to financial services: The project, through its business development 
services will support the quality and outreach of rural financial services by financial 
institutions, and build the capacity of the target groups to access financial services 
1.3.3    Component 3:  
Policy support and coordination  
Policy  dialogue:  in  PSAC  will  aim  at  efficiently  completing  the  work  undertaken  by 
other development projects and agencies.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
182 | P a g e  
Enabling  rural  finance  environment.  To  ensure  enabling  agriculture  finance 
environment,  especially for  export  agriculture,  PSAC  in  collabouration  with  Cordaid 
and  AFR  will  create  a  platform  to  coordinate  the  proposed  activities  of  the  final 
strategy.  
Other  issues  affecting  PSAC  export-driven  value  chains:  PSAC,  through  NAEB  will 
contribute  and  will  ensure  close  follow  up  on  policy  products  that  are  expected  to 
have a positive impact on the project’s target group.  
Specific support to value chain platforms: In this area PSAC intends to:  
(iii) 
(iv) 
support roundtables for policy formulation in the coffee VC;  
build  Capacity  of  Business  Membership  Organizations  (BMOs)  like  Coffee 
Exporters and Processors Association of Rwanda (CEPAR 
2.0      OVERVIEW OF LABOUR ON THE PSAC PROJECT 
The LMP is applicable, to all the PSAC Project workers as per the following condition: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
People employed or engaged directly by PSAC to work specifically in relation to the 
Project, 
The  Government  public  servants,  who  may  provide  support  to  the  Project,  will 
remain  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  existing  public  sector 
employment agreement or arrangement, 
People  employed  or  engaged  by  consultants  to  perform  work  related  to  core 
function of the Project, regardless of location, 
People employed or engaged by PSAC’s primary suppliers, 
2.1      LABOUR REQUIREMENTS 
2.1.1    Direct Workers: 
Direct workers include, the NAEB staff, Program-based Staffs and Permanent MINAGRI Staffs. 
NAEB will employ consultants and support staff who are working on contractual bases as part 
of  the  PFU.  Terms  and  conditions  of  these  consultants  are  guided  by  the  Labour  law.  In 
addition, the civil servants (MINAGRI Staff) at the local level will be involved in the program 
implementation on a full time or on part-time basis. The consultants will be engaged by the 
Program to undertake short period assignments as necessary. These are consultants guided 
by specific contractual agreements between them and PSAC. 
Direct  workers  are  eligible  to  work  for  a  fixed  contract  period  of  not  more  than  1  year. 
Contracts will be renewed for another year based on satisfactory services. Consultants will be 
engaged under a short-term period of not more than six months and the labour requirement 
including the time schedule and deliverables will be stipulated in their respective contracts. 
NAEB will oversee the running of the Project. It will host the following key positions that will 
be recruited on a competitive basis:  
o  Project Operation Manager;  
o  3 Value Chain Specialists (coffee, tea, horticulture);  
o  Access to Finance (A2F) Specialist;  
o  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist;  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
183 | P a g e  
o  Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist;  
o  Environmental Specialist;  
o  Knowledge Management (KM) & Communication Specialist;  
o  Administrative Assistant;  
o  Accountants (reporting to Financial Manager of SPIU for IFAD-funded projects);  
o  Procurement Officer (reporting to Sr. Procurement Officer of SPIU for IFAD-funded 
projects);  
o  3 drivers (one for each value chain). In addition,  
o  NAEB Focal Person (young graduates, men and women) will be posted in each target 
district to ensure smooth coordination at field level. 
2.1.2    Contracted Workers:  
Based on the requirement in every component the NAEB will employ contractors who will 
hire contracted workers based on their level of skills and program needs. If agreed with the 
NAEB  sub-contracts  of  the  work  could  be  given.  Sub-contractors  recruited  may  supply 
labourers as per the agreed terms and conditions.  
Contracted  workers  are  eligible  to  work  for  a  contract  period  fixed  by  the  NAEB.  Their 
contracts will be renewed, if required, based on satisfactory services. 
2.1.3    Primary Supply Workers:  
Based on the requirement in every component primary supply workers will be recruited by 
the suppliers as required. It will be ensured (and monitored periodically by the NAEB) that no 
children are recruited and supplied as workers. Furthermore, it will be monitored like above 
that  these  workers  are  not  subjected  to  ‘forced  labour’  in  any  manner.  NAEB  will  be 
responsible  to  make  sure  that  these  standards  are  followed  strictly.  If  any  deviation  is 
identified NAEB will take action as prescribed in the contract/ agreement following the LMP. 
Their tenure service will be based on supplies as procured. 
3.0      ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL LABOUR RISKS 
The  main  labour  risks  associated  with  the  Project  are  assessed  to  be  related  to  the  work 
environment and associated risks of accidents. Based on current conditions in the sector it is 
assessed that the risk of child or forced labour is negligible, and already managed through 
national legislation.  
The  MINAGRI  has  developed  this  LMP  as  part  of  the  environment  and  social  safeguards 
instruments for the project. It serves to illustrate the types of workers to be engaged and their 
management  in  line  with  IFAD  and  national  labour  laws.  Even  though  labour  influx  is  not 
anticipated, social impacts such as GBV, sexual exploitation and communicable diseases for 
local communities cannot be ruled out. Thus, management and mitigation of GBV/SEA risks 
were integrated in both the stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) and the LMP. 
3.1      LABOUR INFLUX 
It is not expected that there will be any labour influx in any project community. The PSAC will 
mandate and localize the economic benefits and only allow for outside, including expatriate 
labour,  where  there  is  a  requirement  for  special  skills.  There  will  be  no  dedicated  camps 
established for worker accommodation in the Project. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
184 | P a g e  
Specific  requirements  to  manage  risks  associated  with  labour  influx,  related to  interaction 
between project workers and local communities, such as communicable diseases and gender-
based  violence,  are  managed  through  contractual  requirements,  Code  of  Conduct  and 
training set out in this document. These procedures are guided by the national legislation.  
3.2      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY:  
The  Occupational  health  and  Safety  measures  and  actions  will  be  developed  and 
implemented to assess and manage risks and impacts to the community arising from Project 
activities and workers. The consultants to be engaged will ensure that their employees/staff 
will be trained on occupational health and safety and records of which are to be inspected 
monthly and audited bi-annually in compliance with the Rwandan labour laws.  
Article 77 and 78 of the Rwandan Labour Law Law N° 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 and Article 132 
to 138 of the Rwandan Labour Code, Law N° 51/2001 of 30/12/2001 deal with occupational 
health and safety where employers are required to ensure the health, safety and welfare in 
the  workplace  for  employees.  The  law  include  measures  relating  to  OHS  for  protecting 
workers from injuries, illness or impacts associated with exposure to hazards encountered in 
the work place during work. The OHS measures include provision of PPE, awareness raising, 
trainings and guidance on how to prevent accidents at work place.  
PSAC  will  provide  workers  with PPE,  facilities  for  a  safe  and  clean  environment  to  eat  and 
change, sanitation facilities, and first aid kits.  
The law also requires the employer to inform the management of the social security and the 
Inspectorate  of  labour  where  the  enterprise  is  located,  occupational  accident,  disease  or 
death in accordance with relevant Laws.  
The law also Elabourates offences and penalties relating to occupational health and safety 
where the employer was negligent about health and safety of employees.  
3.3      GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE:  
Based on IFAD Gender-based violence including sexual exploitation and abuse risk assessment 
rating, the social risks of Sexual Exploitation/Harassment and GBV are rated as moderate, and 
the project will not directly or indirectly cause or contribute to any of the pre-existing social 
issues  related  to  gender-based  violence  but  will  attempt  to  ultimately  contribute  to  their 
mitigation through improving the livelihoods of the poor stakeholders. 
Nonetheless, there is a possibility of contextual risks of GBV and there could be an increase 
in  the  risk  and  exposure  of  GBV/SEA  against  women  because  of  economic  improvement 
opportunity as a result of the project. There is thus a need to uphold safe environments at all 
sub-project areas and implement the GBV Action Plan contained in the project ESMF.  
3.4      CHILD AND FORCED LABOUR: 
The  risk  of  child  labour will  be  very  minimal  and  will be  mitigated through  Certification  of 
labourers’  age.  This  will  be  done  by  using  the  legally  recognized  documents  such  as  the 
National Identification Card, and Birth Certificate. Further, awareness-raising sessions will be 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
185 | P a g e  
conducted regularly to the communities to sensitize on prohibition and negative impacts of 
child  and  forced  Labour.  In  addition,  this  procedure  will  guide  the  authority  to  monitor 
periodically that no such practice is/ are being practiced in PSAC. 
4.0      OVERVIEW OF LABOUR LEGISLATION: TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
This section sets out the key aspects of national labour legislation with regards to terms and 
conditions of work, and how national legislation applies to different categories of workers. 
The  overview  focuses  on  legislation  which  relates  to  the  working  relationship  between 
employers and workers in Rwanda as governed by the Law No. 66/2018 of 30 August 2018 
Regulating Labour in Rwanda, and the Rwandan Labour Code, Law N° 51/2001 of 30/12/2001, 
The scope of this Law applies to the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
6. 
Employment relations based on an employment contract between an employee and an 
employer in the private sector,  
Employment relations based on an employment contract between an employee and an 
employer in the public service, unless otherwise provided by the general statutes for 
public service,  
An apprentice,  
An intern; a self-employed person with regard to occupational health and safety,  
An informal sector employee with regard to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
occupational health and safety, 
the right to form trade unions and employers’ associations, 
the right to salary, 
the minimum wage in categories of occupations determined by an Order of the 
Minister in charge of labour, 
the right to leave, 
social security 
protection against workplace discrimination, 
protection from forced labour 
prohibited forms of work for the child, pregnant or breastfeeding woman.  
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
4.1      THE GENERAL PROVISIONS 
The General provisions are contained in: 
Chapter I General Provisions And Fundamental Rights: Article 10 to 40 of the  labour law, 
deals with the rights of an employee which include: 
•  working in an environment where health and safety in the workplace are guaranteed, 
• 
to receive equal salary for works of equal value without discrimination of any kind, 
• 
to be provided leave as provided for by Law, 
• 
to join a trade union of his/her choice, 
• 
to be trained by his/her employer, and 
• 
to receive information relevant to his/her work.  
Article  7  prohibits  any  form  of  forced  labour,  article  8  prohibits  sexual  harassment  in 
workplace. Sexual harassment in any form against supervisee is prohibited. It is prohibited to 
dismiss  an  employee  for  having  reported  or  testified  on  sexual  harassment  committed  by 
his/her supervisor. If there is tangible evidence that an employee has resigned due to sexual 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
186 | P a g e  
harassment  committed  against  him/her  by  his/her  supervisor,  his/her  resignation  is 
considered as unfair dismissal. All project workers will sign a Code of Conduct. 
Article 9. The recruitment of project workers will be free from any kind of discrimination as 
provided for by the Law regulating Labour in Rwanda especially in its article 9 stipulating that 
“An employer must give employees equal opportunities at the workplace”. “An employer is 
prohibited from discriminating employees on basis of ethnic origin, family or ancestry, clan, 
skin color or race, sex, region, economic categories, religion or faith, opinion, fortune, cultural 
difference, language, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination. Every 
employer must pay employees equal salary for work of equal value without discrimination of 
any kind”. The same provision of the law will also be applicable in case of any labour influx 
occurrence.  
Chapter II:  dealing with Employment Contract, Apprenticeship and Internship Contracts. 
Article 11 of the law provides guidelines on the conclusion of an employment and provides 
options for written and unwritten contracts provided that whichever of both has proof. In 
light of this, an employment contract for PSAC workers shall be fixed and in written form with 
specification of employment terms and conditions and shall be signed off by the employer 
and employee so as to avoid any conflict or dispute that may arise in relation to this.  
Article 12 Apart from foreign consultant who might be contracted to perform specific duties 
that  might  require  special  expertise  that  cannot  be  sourced  locally,  in  this  project,  the 
likelihood of migrant workers is very low. Nevertheless, in the event of their employment, 
provisions of the law regulating labour in Rwanda and other relevant laws on these matters 
shall be applied especially article 12 of the Law N° 66/2018 of 30/08/2018. 
Chapter  III:  General  Working  Conditions  -  which  deals  with  rights,  obligation  and 
responsibilities  of  both  employers  and  employees.  Article  43  states  the  terms  of  working 
hours, which sets 45 as the maximum working hours per week however provides a window 
for extra hours for an employee upon the agreement with his or her employer on appropriate 
compensation for the overtime and leaves the responsibility to prepare daily timetable for 
work hours and break for an employee to the employer.  
Chapter IV: Salary -  Article 67 states that employers will pay the employee the whole salary 
to which he/she is entitled and deposits it in an account given by the employee in writing in 
a bank or in a financial institution recognised in accordance with the provisions on payment 
intervals of the written contract signed by the two which could be every day for an employee 
employed on hourly or daily basis, every week for an employee recruited for a week, every 
fifteen days for an employee recruited for a fortnight and every month for employee recruited 
on a one-month basis. 
Chapter V: Occupational Health And Safety -  Article 77 deals with General health and safety 
conditions  in  the  workplace,  Article  78  requires  employers/enterprises  to  establish 
Occupational Health and Safety Committee, while Article 79 emphasizes on the importance 
of Personal protective equipment while performing a certain type of activities under which 
most of the works to be performed under PSAC fall.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
187 | P a g e  
Chapter VI: Association of Employees and Association of Employers 
Article 83 Employees’ right to freedom of association An employee has the right to: 1) join 
others in forming a trade union; 2)  join a trade union of his/her choice; 3) participate in lawful 
activities of a trade union. Article 84, Employers’ right to freedom  of association An employer 
has the right to: 1)  form employers’ association; 2) join employers’ association of choice; 3) 
participate in lawful activities of employers’ association. Article 85, Registration of employees’ 
organisations  and  employers’  organisations  Employees’  organisations  and  employers’ 
organisations are registered in accordance with the provisions of this Law. 
Chapter VIII: Labour Disputes Settlement -  which requires the employees’ representatives 
to  amicably  settle  individual  labour  disputes  between  employers  and  employees.  Where 
employees’ representatives fail to settle the disputes amicably, the concerned party refers 
the  matter  to  the  labour  inspector  of  the  area  where  enterprise  is  located.  If  the  Labour 
Inspector fails to settle the dispute due to the nature of the case or the conflict of interests, 
he/she refers the dispute to the Labour Inspector at the national level. If amicable settlement 
fails at this level the case is referred to the competent court. However, the court can decide 
not to receive the case after determining that steps for amicable settlement provided for in 
this Article have not been followed. 
Chapter IX: Right To Strike And Lockout -  Strike and lockout Employees have the right to 
strike and employers have the right to lock out in the respect of the provisions of this Law. 
The strike for employees or lockout for an employer is legal when the arbitration committee 
has  exceeded  fifteen  (15)  working  days  without  issuing  its  decision  or  the  conciliation 
resolution  on  collective  dispute  or  the  court  award  being  enforceable  have  not  been 
implemented. In any case, a strike or lockout must be preceded by a notice of four (4) working 
days. 
Chapter XI: Declaration Made by An Enterprise Article 116: Declaration of an enterprise and 
employees  An  employer  who  opens  an  enterprise  declares  it  in  writing  to  the  labour 
inspectorate  of  his/her  area.  He/she  also  provides  an  initial  declaration  of  information 
relating to the situation of his/her employees within one (1) month from commencement of 
enterprise. An employer wishing to close business or relocate an enterprise declares it to the 
Labour Inspector of his/her area within. 
5.0      RESPONSIBLE STAFF AND PROCEDURES 
The  Lead  Implementation  Agency  will  be  National  Agricultural  Export  Development  Board 
(NAEB),  under  the  responsibility  of  its  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  will  have  the  overall 
responsibility to oversee all aspects of the implementation of the PSAC in particular to ensure 
contractor  compliance.  The  project  will  be  implemented  by  the  NAEB, addressing  all  PSAC 
aspects  as  part  of  procurement  for  works  as  well  as  during  contractor  induction.  The 
contractors will subsequently be responsible for management of labour issues in accordance 
with contract specific labour Management Plans, implementation of which will be supervised 
by  the  NAEB  on  a  monthly  basis  or  at  shorter  intervals  as  defined  by  specific  Plans.  The 
detailed approach is described in the following sections. 
5.1      OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY. 
The  PSAC  Environmental  Specialist  must  ensure  that  the  implementation  of  PSAC  will  be 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
188 | P a g e  
conducted  in  compliance  to  occupational  health  and  safety  requirements.  The  PSAC 
Environmental  Specialist  will  make  sure  that  each  participating  institution  receives  the 
template OHS programs, establish safety representatives for day-to-day monitoring of safety 
requirements, record and report all incidents accordingly to the PSAC. 
5.2      LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. 
Government civil servants, who may provide support to the Project, will remain subject to the 
terms  and  conditions  of  their  existing  public  sector  employment  agreement  or 
arrangement  as  per  provisions  of  the  Labour  Law.  In  addition  to  these  the  COVID  –  19 
regulations will also apply. 
5.3      CONTRACTORS OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY.  
Contractors  must  engage  a minimum  of  one  safety  representative.  Smaller  contracts  may 
permit  for  the  safety  representative  to  carry  out  other  assignments  as  well.  The  safety 
representative  will  ensure  the  day-to-day  compliance  with  specified  safety  measures  and 
records of any incidents are done. Minor incidents are reported to the NAEB on a monthly 
basis;  serious  incidents  are  reported  immediately.  Minor  incidents  are  reflected  in  the 
quarterly reports to IFAD while major issues are flagged to IFAD immediately. 
5.4      CONTRACTOR LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS. 
Contractors will keep records in accordance with specifications set out in this LMP. The NAEB 
may at any time require records  to ensure that labour conditions are met. NAEB will review 
records against actuals at a minimum on a monthly basis and can require immediate remedial 
actions if warranted. A summary of issues and remedial actions will be included in quarterly 
reports to IFAD. 
5.5      WORKER GRIEVANCES. 
The  NAEB  procedures  currently  in  place  will  remain  for  Project  staff.  Contractors  will  be 
required to present a worker grievance redress mechanism which responds to the minimum 
requirements in this LMP. The NAEB  Social  Officer  will  review  records  on  a  monthly  basis. 
Where worker concerns are not resolved, the national system will be used as set out in the 
section, but NAEB will keep  abreast  of  resolutions  and  reflect  them  in  quarterly  reports to 
IFAD. 
5.6      ADDITIONAL TRAINING. 
Contractors are required to, at all times, have a qualified safety officer on board. If training is 
required, this will be the contractor’s responsibility. The safety officer will provide instructions 
to contractor staff. NAEB will provide training to address risks associated with labour influx 
and will provide a schedule for trainings required. The contractor will be obligated to make 
staff  available  for  this  training,  as  well  as  any  additional  mandatory  trainings  required  by 
NAEB, as specified by the contract. 
6.0      POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
The engagement and treatment of program staff will be made on the basis of characteristics 
related to inherent job requirements. It will be based on the principle of equal opportunity 
and fair treatment,  and there  will  be no discrimination  with  respect  to  any aspects  of the 
employment relationship, such as recruitment and hiring, compensation (including wages and 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
189 | P a g e  
benefits), working conditions and terms of employment, access to training, job assignment, 
promotion, termination of employment or retirement, or disciplinary practices.  
Contractors  will  be  responsible  for  mitigating  all  environmental  and  social  impacts  of 
subprojects  resulting from  activities  directly under  their  control.  The  NAEB  Environmental 
Specialist will incorporate standardized environmental and social clauses in the tender and 
contract documents in order for potential bidders to be aware of environmental and social 
performance requirements that will be expected from them and are able to reflect that in 
their bids and required to implement the clauses for the duration of the contract. NAEB will 
enforce compliance by contractors with these clauses. 
The contractor will be required to ensure that all documentation related to environmental and 
social management, including the LMP, is available for inspection at any time by the NAEB or 
its appointed agents. The contractual arrangements with each project worker must be clearly 
defined in accordance with Rwandan Legislation. All environmental and social requirements 
will be included in the bidding documents and contracts in addition to any additional clauses, 
which are contained, in the Projects environmental and social instruments. 
The NAEB, Contractors, suppliers or sub-contractors will never engage forced labour. Forced 
labour includes bonded labour (working against an impossible debt), excessive limitations of 
freedom  of  movement,  excessive  notice  periods,  retaining  the  worker’s  identity  or  other 
government-issued  documents  or  personal  belonging, 
imposition  of  recruitment  or 
employment fees payable at the commencement of employment, loss or delay of wages that 
impede  the  workers’  right  to  end  employment  within  their  legal  rights,  substantial  or 
inappropriate  fines,  physical  punishment,  use  of  security  or  other  personnel  to  force  or 
extract work from project workers, or other restrictions that compel a project worker to work 
on a non- voluntary basis. 
6.1      LABOUR INFLUX AND GENDER BASED VIOLENCE 
Contractors will need to maintain labour relations with local communities through a code of 
conduct  (CoC).  The  CoC  commits  all  persons  engaged  by  the  contractor,  including  sub-
contractors  and  suppliers,  to  acceptable  standards  of  behaviour.  The  CoC  must  include 
sanctions  for  non-compliance,  including  non-compliance  with  specific  policies  related  to 
gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and sexual harassment (e.g., termination). The CoC 
should be written in plain language and signed by each worker to indicate that they have: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Received a copy of the CoC as part of their contract, 
Had the CoC explained to them as part of induction process, 
Acknowledged that adherence to this CoC is a mandatory condition of employment, 
Understood that violations of the CoC can result in serious consequences, up to and 
including dismissal, or referral to legal authorities. 
A  copy  of  the  CoC  shall  be  displayed  in  a  location  easily  accessible  to  the  community  and 
project affected people. It shall be provided in English and translated into Kinyarwanda  
Contractors must address the risk of gender-based violence, through: Mandatory training and 
awareness raising for the workforce about refraining from unacceptable conduct toward local 
community members, specifically women. Training may be repeated, 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
190 | P a g e  
• 
• 
• 
Informing  workers  about  national  laws  that  make  sexual  harassment  and  gender-
based violence a punishable offence which is prosecuted, 
Adopting  a  policy  to  cooperate  with  law  enforcement  agencies  in  investigating 
complaints about gender-based violence, 
Developing  a  system  to  capture  gender-based  violence,  sexual  exploitation  and 
workplace sexual harassment related complaints/issues. 
This process will be under the portfolio of the Environmental Specialist to be recruited under 
the NAEB and shall identify and engage the relevant stakeholders on GBV and HIV and Aids 
related issues. 
6.2      OCCUPATIONAL, HEALTH AND SAFETY 
PSAC is committed to:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Complying  with  legislation  and  other  applicable  requirements  which  relate  to  the 
occupational health and safety hazards. 
Enabling  active  participation  in  OH&S  risks  elimination  through  promotion  of 
appropriate skills, knowledge and attitudes towards hazards. 
Continually improving the OH&S management system and performance. 
Communicating  this  policy  statement  to  all  persons  working  under  the  control  of 
PSAC with emphasis on individual OH&S responsibilities. 
Availing this policy statement to all interested parties at all participating educational 
facilities and institutions.  
The PSAC Environmental Specialist will be responsible for overseeing the workplace Safety, 
Health and Environmental issues. He/she must: 
• 
• 
• 
Identify potential hazards, 
In  collabouration  with  the  employer,  investigate  the  cause  of  accidents  at  the 
workplace, 
Attend meetings of the safety and health committee to which that safety and health 
representative is a member, 
•  Make  recommendations  to  the  employer  in  respect  of  safety  and  health  matters 
affecting employees. 
Further to avoid work related accidents and injuries, the contractor will:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Provide occupational health and safety training to all employees involved in PSAC 
works.  
Ensure availability of first aid box. 
Provide employees with access to toilets and potable drinking water. 
Provide  safety  and  occupational  safety  measures  to  workers  with  Personal 
Protection  Equipment  (PPE)  when  installing  solar  systems  to  prevent  accidents 
during replacement and installation and follow safety measures in installing them. 
Properly dispose of solid waste at designated permitted sites landfill allocated by the 
local authorities. 
Further  to  enforcing  the  compliance  of  environmental  management,  contractors  are 
responsible and liable of safety of site equipment, labours and daily workers attending to the 
site installations and safety of citizens for each sub-project site, as mandatory measures. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
191 | P a g e  
7.0      AGE OF EMPLOYMENT 
Rwanda is a member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) hence it adheres to its 
standards.  The  national  Law  No  66/2018  of  30/08/2018  regulating  Labour  in  Rwanda  was 
elabourated in reference to the International Labour Law. Therefore, this LMP was prepared 
and will be implemented in respect of the international labour standards.   
More specifically the following principles as set forth in the ILO Declaration on Fundamental 
Principles and Rights at Work of 1998 amended in 2022 will be respected:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
The right of workers to associate freely and bargain collectively 
The end of forced and compulsory labour 
The end of child labour 
The end of unfair discrimination among workers 
In addition to article 6 of the labour law which points out with a general outlook on various 
prohibited forms of work for the child, the ministerial instructions no 01/2017 of 17/11/2017 
relating to prevention and fight against child labour in its article 9 states that a child aged 
between l6-17 may perform work like an adult of above 18 years as long as the work is not 
forced and is in compliance with national legislation.  
8.0      TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
The  terms  and  conditions  of  employment  in  terms  of  this  project  are  governed  by  the 
provisions of the national Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 regulating Labour in Rwanda which 
makes it mandatory for employers to give its employees a copy of the written particulars of 
employment with definite agreements spelt out. This requirement however is not applicable 
to casual employees. For this project, contractors will be required to provide all its employees 
with written particulars of employment, including casual employees. 
Contractors will also be required to comply with the most current Regulation of Wages Order 
for their particular sector, e.g., the Building and Construction Industry which is issued by the 
Order of the Minister in charge of labour and reviewed on a regular basis. The Wages Order 
specifies the minimum wages, hours of work, overtime pay, leave entitlements, travelling and 
subsistence allowances, and the issue of protective clothing. 
8.1      WORKER’S ORGANIZATION 
The national Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 regulating Labour in Rwanda was elabourated in 
reference to the International Labour Law. The following articles demonstrate this fact  
Article 83: Employees’ right to freedom of association An employee has the right to: 1) join 
others in forming a trade union; 2) join a trade union of his/her choice; 3) participate in lawful 
activities of a trade union. 
Article 84: Employers’ right to freedom of association An employer has the right to: 1)  form 
employers’  association;  2)  join  employers’  association  of  choice;  3)  participate  in  lawful 
activities of employers’ association. 
Article 85: Registration of employees’ organisations and employers’ organisations Employees’ 
organisations and employers’ organisations are registered in accordance with the provisions 
of this Law.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
192 | P a g e  
Rwanda is a member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) hence it adheres to its 
standards.  Therefore,  this  LMP  was  prepared  and  will  be  implemented  in  respect  of  the 
international  labour  standards.  Therefore, NAEB  provides  employees  with the  right to  join 
and form an organization for purpose of labour representation.  
9.0      DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES AND GRIEVANCE MECHANISM 
In  any  working  environment  it  is  essential  for  both  employers  and  employees  to  be  fully 
conversant with all aspects of disciplinary processes, the grievance handling procedures and 
the legal requirements and rights involved. In implementing an effective dispute management 
system consideration must be given to the disputes resulting from the following: 
• 
• 
Disciplinary Action 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
9.1      DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 
The starting point for all disciplinary action is rules. These rules may be implied or explicit and 
of course will vary from workplace to workplace. Some rules are implied in the contract of 
employment  (e.g.,  ruling  against  use  of  alcohol  and  drugs  at  workplace),  however  it  is 
advisable that even implied rules be included in the disciplinary code or schedule of offences. 
Therefore, the workplace rules must be: 
Valid and reasonable 
Clear and unambiguous 
The employee must understand the procedure to be applied if he/she contravenes 
nay of the rules. 
• 
• 
• 
A  comprehensive  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  has  been  developed  for  the  project, 
however the following dispute resolution procedures at workplace will be as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Conducting  of  a  comprehensive  investigation  to  determine  whether  there  are 
grounds for a hearing to be held. 
If a hearing is to be held, the employer is to notify the employee of the allegations 
using a language that the employee can understand. 
The employee is to be given reasonable time to prepare for the hearing and to be 
represented by a fellow employee or lawyer. 
The employee must be given an opportunity to respond to the allegations, question 
the witnesses of the employer and to lead witnesses. 
If  an  employee  fails  to  attend  the  hearing  the  employer  may  proceed  with  the 
hearing in the absence of the employee. 
The  hearing  must  be  held  and  concluded  within  a  reasonable  time  and  is  to  be 
chaired by an impartial representative. 
If an employee is dismissed, it must be given the reasons for dismissal and the right 
to refer the dispute concerning the fairness of the dismissal to the labour Court. 
Therefore,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  Consultants/Contractor  to  ensure  that  they  have  a 
disciplinary  procedure  and  Code  and  Standards  which  the  employees  are  aware  of.  Each 
Consultant/Contractor will be required to produce this procedure to ensure that employees 
are not treated unfairly. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
193 | P a g e  
9.2      INDIVIDUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
Termination of Employment requires every employer, including contractors, to have a Formal 
Grievance Procedure which should be known and explained to the employee. Such procedure 
should at least: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Specify to whom the employee should lodge the grievance, 
Refer to time frames to allow the grievance to be dealt with expeditiously, 
Allow the person to refer the grievance to a more senior level within the organization, 
if it is not resolved at the lowest level, 
If a grievance is not resolved the employee has the right to lodge a dispute with the 
employer. 
All  the  contractors  who  will  be  engaged  for  the  project  will  be  required  to  produce  their 
grievance  procedure  as  a  requirement  for  tender  which  at  a  minimum  comply  with  these 
requirements. In addition, good international practice recommends that the procedures be 
transparent,  is  confidential,  adheres  to non-retribution  practices  and  includes  the  right  to 
representation.  After  they  are  engaged,  they  will  be  required  to  produce  proof  that  each 
employee has been inducted and signed that they have been inducted on the procedure. 
9.3      COLLECTIVE GRIEVANCES AND DISPUTES RESULTING FROM THE NEGOTIATIONS OF 
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENTS. 
Where  a  trade  union  is  recognized,  it  is  entitled  to  negotiate  on  a  regular  basis  with  the 
employer over terms and conditions existing at the workplace and the employer is obliged to 
negotiate  with  it.  The  procedures  followed  in  such  instances  is  usually  contained  in  the 
Recognition  Agreement,  which  states  how  the  issues  are  raised,  the  procedure  for 
negotiations, the composition of the parties involved in the negotiation and the procedure to 
deal with issues that are not resolved through consensus. Chapter VIII of the national labour 
Law No 66/2018 of 30/08/2018 deals with issues of Labour Disputes Settlement while articles 
92 and 93 provide guidelines for collective bargaining. Disagreements on salaries and other 
entitlements or working conditions will be solved through workers representation.  
9.4            GENDER-BASED  VIOLENCE,  SEXUAL  EXPLOITATION  AND  WORKPLACE  SEXUAL 
HARASSMENT 
Violence and harassment in the work world deprives people of their dignity, is incompatible 
with decent work, and a threat to equal opportunities and to safe, healthy, and productive 
working environments. It remains a widespread phenomenon, present in all countries and 
disregarding sectors, occupations, and workplace arrangements. In line with IFAD’s policy to 
preventing  and  responding  to  sexual  harassment,  sexual  exploitation,  and  abuse,  in  cases 
these  occur,  there  should  be  established  reporting  and  response  protocols  in  place,  with 
specific procedures for gender-based violence, including confidential reporting with safe and 
ethical  documenting of such  cases, that  indicate  when  and  where  to  report  incidents, and 
what follow-up actions will be undertaken. In addition, there should be modalities to provide 
services and redress to survivors. 
CONTRACTOR MANAGEMENT 
The  NAEB  will  require  that  contractors  monitor,  keep  records  and  report  on  terms  and 
conditions  related  to  labour  management.  The  contractor  must  provide  workers  with 
evidence of all payments made,  including social security benefits, pension contributions or 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
194 | P a g e  
other entitlements regardless of the worker being engaged on a fixed term contract, full-time, 
part- time or temporarily. The application of this requirement will be proportionate to the 
activities and to the size of the contract, in a manner acceptable to NAEB and IFAD: 
• 
• 
Labour  conditions:  records  of  workers  engaged  under  the  Project,  including 
contracts, registry of induction of workers including Code of Conduct (CoC), hours 
worked,  remuneration  and  deductions  (including  overtime),  collective  bargaining 
agreements. 
Safety:  recordable  incidents  and  corresponding  Root  Cause  Analysis  (lost  time 
incidents, medical treatment cases), first aid cases, high potential near misses, and 
remedial and preventive activities required (for example, revised job safety analysis, 
new or different equipment, skills training, and so forth). 
•  Workers:  number  of  workers,  indication  of  origin  (expatriate,  local,  nonlocal 
nationals), gender, age with evidence that no child labour is involved, and skill level 
(unskilled, skilled, supervisory, professional, management). 
Training/induction: dates, number of trainees, and topics. 
Details of any security risks: details of risks the contractor may be exposed to while 
performing  its  work—the  threats  may  come  from  third  parties  external  to  the 
project. 
• 
• 
•  Worker grievances: details including occurrence date, grievance, and date submitted; 
actions  taken and dates; resolution (if any) and date; and follow-up yet to be taken 
grievances listed should include those received since the preceding report and those 
that were unresolved at the time of that report. 
Every Safety File is ‘site-specific’. It will be compiled following the client’s and the site’s safety 
specifications. The overall information requirements remain the same, and the site- specific 
documents will be added. When Health and Safety File is set up, it will consist of the following 
Documents: 
Letter of Good Standing 
•  Contractor appointment letter.  
•  Notification of Construction Work 
•  Copy of the OHS regulations 
•  Occupational Health and Safety Management Plan 
•  Company Occupational Health and Safety Policy 
• 
•  Material Safety Data Sheets for hazardous materials used (if required) 
•  Tax Clearance Certificate 
•  Risk Assessments 
•  Safe work procedures (Site Specific) 
•  Fall Protection Plan (if required) 
• 
Legal  appointment  with  proof  of  training  (Ex.  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Risk 
Assessor, First Aider, etc.) 
Incident Reporting Procedures 
• 
Incident Reports  
• 
Incident Registers 
• 
•  Reports of Accidents 
•  Emergency Preparedness Documents 
•  First Aid Documents 
Induction Records 
• 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
195 | P a g e  
•  Medical Surveillance Records 
•  Safety Communication (e.g., Toolbox talks) 
•  Minutes of Safety Meetings 
• 
Inspection Registers 
COMMUNITY WORKERS  
(There will be no provision for Community Workers.) 
PRIMARY SUPPLY WORKERS 
This section addresses labour management risk associated with people employed or engaged 
by  NAEB’s  primary  suppliers.  Primary  suppliers  are  suppliers  who,  on  an  ongoing  basis, 
provide goods or materials directly to the Project. 
The project will require procurement of a substantial number of materials, including protection 
and control equipment, power-poles, steel products, Solar products, computer products etc.  
All  primary  suppliers  are  formal  businesses  who  are  required  to  procure  and  produce 
materials subject to high standards. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
196 | P a g e  
APPENDIX 8:    GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
1.0      GENERAL 
A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a process for receiving, evaluating and addressing 
project related concerns of, and complaints by, project affected communities or persons. 
IFAD’s  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  allows  affected  complainants  to  have  their  concerns 
resolved in a fair and timely manner through an independent process. IFAD’s GRM requires i) 
working  proactively  with  the  affected  parties  to  resolve  complaints;  ii)  ensuring  that  the 
complaints procedure is responsive and operates effectively; and iii) maintaining records of 
all complaints and their resolutions.  
The principles of a good GRM are42:  
•  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities.  
•  Designed  to  take  into  account  culturally  appropriate  ways  of  handling  community 
concerns.  
•  A  clear  and  understandable  mechanism  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
affected communities at no cost.  
•  Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders. 
•  A  mechanism  that  prevents  retribution  and  does  not  impede  access  to  other 
remedies. 
The key steps for grievance management are43:  
i.  Publicising grievance management procedures so that the mechanism is accessible 
to everyone.  
ii.  Receiving (i.e., collecting, recording, and registering) and keeping track of grievances.  
iii.  Reviewing  and  investigating  grievances  to  assess  the  nature  of  the  grievance,  its 
severity and legitimacy.  
iv.  Developing  resolution  options  commensurate  with  the  nature  of  grievances  and 
preparing  and  communicating  a  clear  response  and  closing  out  cases  when 
agreement with the complainants is reached. 
v.  Monitoring  grievances  through  tracking  to  ascertain  effectiveness,  adapting  the 
mechanism to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and 
lessons learned. 
2.0      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR KIIWP   
Common  disputes  and  disagreements  may  be  related  to  land  property  boundaries, 
destruction of land resources following valuation processes including standing crops, amount 
of monies to be compensated and delay in disbursement of agreed compensation.  
Mostly PSAC interventions will be delivered to community beneficiaries through cooperatives, 
who  manage  grievances  and  conflicts  through  internal  committees.  The communities have 
confidence in these cooperative grievance redress mechanisms. Once an aggrieved person is 
not satisfied at any level, there is room for escalating the grievance to higher levels. 
42 IFC (2009); Good Practice Note – Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities, Guidance for 
Projects and Companies on Designing Grievance Mechanisms  
43 ibid  
197 | P a g e  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
Figure  1  depicts  the  pathways  the  grievance  redress  may  follow.  It  may  follow  either  the 
Abunzi  system  if  the  aggrieved  party  is  not  a  member  of  the  cooperative  concerned,  or  it 
would- follow the resolution mechanism typically used by the cooperatives as stipulated in 
the provisions of Law N° 48/2013 of 28/06/2013 establishing the Rwanda Cooperative Agency 
(RCA). 
Figure 1      Grievance Redress Mechanism for KIIWP 
The  RCA  requires  that  cooperatives  request  arbitration  on  unresolved  grievances 
registered  by  their  members.  RCA  evokes  its  grievance  redress  mechanism,  failure  at 
which the grievance is escalated to the national court system. Aggrieved parties who are 
not members of a cooperative would register grievances in the Abunzi system or directly 
in the national courts, depending on the gravity of the grievance as defined by the law. 
This mechanism is also proposed at Project operation level as the GRM for resettlement 
requirements before Project commencement is provided for by law.  
3.0      OPERATION OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
The grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a system by which queries or clarifications about 
the  project  will  be  responded  to,  problems  with  implementation  will  be  resolved,  and 
complaints and grievances will be addressed efficiently and effectively.  
3.1      PURPOSE OF THE GRM 
The GRM will serve the following purpose: 
• 
• 
to  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  beneficiaries  and  to  address  and  resolve  their 
grievances. 
to  serve  as  a  conduit  for  soliciting  inquiries,  inviting  suggestions,  and  increasing 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
198 | P a g e  
community participation. 
to collect information that can be used to improve operational performance. 
to enhance the project’s legitimacy among stakeholders. 
to promote transparency and accountability. 
to deter fraud and corruption and mitigate project risks. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
3.2      STRUCTURE OF THE GRM 
The GRM consists of a small number of components:   
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The access point for impacted/concerned people 
Grievance log 
Acknowledgement stage 
Assessment stage 
Passing of resolution 
Response  
Room for appeal 
Case closure 
The components are summarized in the process flow diagram below. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
199 | P a g e  
3.2.1    Process Overview 
The following key steps must be followed for all complaints received by PSAC staff: 
Receive, 
classify& log 
Acknowledge 
Assess and Investigate 
Resolve & 
Confirm 
Respond to Complainant 
Appeal &Follow up 
QA & Close 
The requirements for each of these steps is detailed below 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
200 | P a g e  
3.2.2    The Process of the GRM 
i)       Receive, classify & log 
All  potential  issues  must  be  captured  and  classified  for  escalation,  review  and  action  as 
required. 
a)       Receiving the Grievance: 
The  access  points  will  be  as  close  to  the  users  as  possible.  An  easily  accessible  and  well 
publicized focal point or user-facing ‘help desk’ is the first step. This will be established at 
each sub-project, and PSAC Offices so that it will be seen as credible and accessible. The main 
issues for the access point include the following: 
•  Uptake channels should include some or all of the following: 
o 
phone hotline,  
o 
email,  
o  mail,  
o 
SMS,  
o  webpage,  
o 
or face-to-face. 
•  The  uptake  channels  will  be  publicized  and  advertised  via  local  media  and  the 
implementing agency.  
•  Verbal complaints should be recorded by staff for them to be considered.  
•  Many complaints may be resolved ‘on the spot’ and informally by the PSAC staff but 
should also be logged in order to (i) encourage responsiveness; and (ii) ensure that 
repeated or low-level grievances are being noted in the system.  
•  The GRM should have the ability to handle anonymous complaints. 
Typically, the complainant will be provided with a receipt and ‘roadmap’ telling him/her how 
the complaint process works and when to expect further information. 
b)       Logging and classifying: 
Any complaint, issue or negative stakeholder interaction (whether this is formally logged by 
the complainant or not), must be logged and classified for action. 
All of these complaints must be formally logged using the standard forms and all complaints 
must be prioritized as follows: 
•  Priority  1  –  urgent,  potential  high  health  and  high  business  impact.  This  require  a 
response to the Complainant within three (3) working days.  
o  This should be used (sparingly) for major health issues where the complaint may have 
disastrous impacts on either human, the environment or PSAC itself. 
o  Also, this could be used in a situation where the complainant may be in a position to 
influence or make public statements that would impact upon the PSAC reputation. 
•  Priority 2, - non-urgent, lower health environmental and social impact. This requires a 
response to the complainant within 2 working weeks.  
o  This should be used for most complaints with individual stakeholders, as this allows a 
reasonable time to collect information and produce a balanced response. 
•  Discretion and flexibility should be exercised in prioritizing all complaints 
  The staff member logging the complaint should review the complaint and its priority 
with the Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager before proceeding to the next step.  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
201 | P a g e  
  The Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager will decide on the appropriate person(s) to 
carry out subsequent steps, including the investigation. 
  All  Priority  1  complaints  must  be  escalated  immediately  to  the  PSAC  Project 
Manager. 
ii)      Acknowledge 
Ensure  that  every  complaint  receives  a  formal  written  acknowledgement,  containing  an 
expectation of when they will receive a response, and the person dealing with it. 
•  All complaints, regardless of priority, should receive a pro forma acknowledgement sent 
out 1st class mail on the day of receipt. 
iii)     Assess &Investigate 
Follow up all aspects of the complaint, both internal and external, to ensure that the key facts 
are identified and clarified. 
•  The priority of the complaint will drive the timescale for completion (3 days for urgent or 
2 weeks for non-urgent). 
•  All  areas  of  interaction  and  communication  should  be  established  (who,  what,  where, 
when, why etc.) and documented where possible. 
iv)      Resolve & Confirm  
Ensure  that  the  final  resolution  is  clear  and  fair.  Also  confirm  the  proposed  action  and 
resolution with another senior person (PSAC Management). 
•  Ensure  that  the  proposed  resolution  meets  corporate  guidelines  and  does  not 
prejudice PSAC in any unnecessary legal or financial manner. 
•  Document the proposed action and discuss and agree with the PSAC Project Manager. 
•  Discuss and review the solution from both the corporate and complainant viewpoint 
to ensure fairness and clarity. 
•  The review should include recognition and documentation of any underlying issues 
that have contributed to the complaint and recommendations for actions to prevent 
further occurrence.  
•  This should then be reviewed as part of the bi-monthly quality assurance reviews. 
v)       Respond to Complainant  
Provide the Complainant with the resolution within the timescales promised. 
•  The  details  of  the  findings  and  proposed  resolution  should  be  clearly  explained  (in 
written  or  verbal  form  as  appropriate)  to  the  complainant-  within  the  agreed 
timescales. 
If this cannot be done on time the Complainant should be contacted by telephone to 
request further time. 
• 
vi)      Appeal & Follow 
Ensure that complaints are followed up to confirm that the complainants are satisfied with 
the response given. If not satisfied the Complainant is advised on the route for Appealing 
•  All Priority 1 complaints and 95% of priority 2 complaints must be followed up within 
a reasonable timescale. 
•  This will be carried out by PSAC Administration team / PSAC Project Manager’s office. 
•  The follow-up should identify the following  
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
202 | P a g e  
Is the complainant satisfied with the response? 
o 
o  Did they feel that their complaint was properly and fairly handled? 
•  Any  negative  responses  to  these  questions  should  be  referred  to  PSAC  Project 
Managers for action and direct follow up with the complainant. 
•  The complainant is given room for appealing to the MINAGRI or Courts of Law, if he is 
not satisfied. 
vii)     QA & Close 
Ensure that the PSAC as a whole is aware of the complaints and any underlying issues. Plan 
actions to remove these and prevent future recurrence. 
•  All  complaints  should be  reviewed  monthly  as  part of  the  quality  assurance  review 
meetings. 
•  Any complaints where action can be taken to avoid recurrence must be acted upon 
and raised with the appropriate managers/teams across the PSAC. 
ESCMF - Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project (PSAC). 
203 | P a g e  
Rwanda
Promoting Smallholder Agro-Export Competitiveness Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 20. Fpic Implementation Plan
Mission Dates:
09-27 May 2022
Document Date:
14/12/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003934
6186-RW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
PROMOTING SMALLHOLDER AGRO-EXPORT 
COMPETITIVENESS PROJECT (PSAC) 
____________________________________________ 
FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
____________________________________________ 
Prepared for:       
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI). 
KG 569 Street. 
Kigali. 
Rwanda. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF FIGURES .................................................................................................................. 3 
TABLE OF TABLES .................................................................................................................... 3 
EXECUTIVE SUMMoARY .......................................................................................................... 4 
1. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT ....................................................................................... 7 
1.0      PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 7 
1.2      PROJECT STRUCTURE .................................................................................................... 7 
1.2.1    Component 1: .......................................................................................................... 8 
1.2.2    Component 2: .......................................................................................................... 8 
1.2.3    Component 3: .......................................................................................................... 8 
1.2.4    Impacting Activities .................................................................................................. 8 
1.3      WHEN IS FPIC REQUIRED? ............................................................................................ 9 
2. 
THE SCREENING PROCESS ............................................................................................. 10 
2.1       IDENTIFYING STAKEHOLDERS. ................................................................................... 10 
2.2      KEY STAKEHOLDERS .................................................................................................... 10 
2.3     SOCIO-CULTURAL AND LAND ASSESSMENTS. ............................................................. 11 
3. 
PARTICIPATION, CONSULTATION AND FPIC PROCESSES .............................................. 12 
3.0      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 12 
3.1      IDENTIFICATION OF DECISION-MAKING INSTITUTIONS AND REPRESENTATIVES ...... 12 
3.2      CONSULTATIONS LEADING TO FPIC ........................................................................... 12 
3.3      ONGOING STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ................................................ 14 
3.3.1    On-going Stakeholder Engagement ....................................................................... 14 
3.4      CONSIDERATIONS FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT .............................................. 14 
3.4.1    Resourcing Stakeholder Engagement: ................................................................... 14 
3.4.2    Managing expectations: ......................................................................................... 15 
3.4.3    Securing stakeholder participation: ....................................................................... 15 
3.5      PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE ........................................... 15 
3.6      PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR CONSULTATION .............................................................. 15 
3.7      FORMALISINGE THE CONSENT AGREEMENT ............................................................. 17 
3.8      DISCLOSURE ................................................................................................................ 17 
3.9      DOCUMENTING THE FPIC PROCESS ........................................................................... 17 
4. 
THE PSAC FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ...................................................................... 18 
4.1      PSAC FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ........................................................................... 18 
5. 
CAPACITY SUPPORT ...................................................................................................... 20 
5.1     TRAINING REQUIREMENTS .......................................................................................... 20 
5.2     PROPOSED APPROACH IN EXECUTING THE CAPACITY BUILDING ............................... 21 
5.3      FUNDING REQUIREMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING .............. 21 
6. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS .................................................................................................... 22 
6.1      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISMS ON LAND ISSUES .............................................. 22 
7. 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................................... 28 
7.1      POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ......................................................... 28 
7.2      ASSESS FPIC IMPLEMENTATION. ................................................................................ 29 
8. 
BUDGET AND FINANCING ............................................................................................. 30 
TABLE OF FIGURES 
Figure 1-1      Area of Intervention ............................................................................................. 7 
Figure 6-1      Grievance Redress Mechanism for PSAC. .......................................................... 23 
Figure 6-2      The GRM Process Overview. .............................................................................. 25 
Figure 7-1      Implementation Arrangements for FPIC. ........................................................... 28 
TABLE OF TABLES 
Table 1-1      When is FPIC required? ......................................................................................... 9 
Table 3-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques ................................................................. 16 
Table 4-1      Summarised PSAC FPIC Implementation Plan .................................................... 18 
Table 5-1      Capacity Building for FPIC Implementation. ....................................................... 20 
Table 8-1      Estimated Budget for ESMF Implementation (US$) ........................................... 30 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Government of Rwanda is in the process of preparing the “Promoting Smallholder Agro-
export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), with the assistance from IFAD. PSAC will support the 
inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted  export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-
resilient productive capacity and market access. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is 
“To support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted export-driven value chains, by increasing 
their climate-resilient productive capacity and market access”. 
The  project  will  target  a  total  of  fourteen  (14)  districts  distributed  across  Rwanda,  with  a 
particular emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, that are also including some of the 
most vulnerable rural populations. 
Even though the project will not cause any physical displacements, it may arise in shifting of 
livelihoods  for  some  small-scale  farmers,  in  the  process  of  establishing  the  agricultural 
activities, tea, coffee and horticulture plantations. So, there will be an issue involving land 
and land rights, and livelihoods, thus the need to develop this FPIC implementation plan. The 
FPIC process requires the following steps: 
Socio-Cultural and Land Assessments 
One of the project’s priority activities is to carry out assessments on the sociocultural and land 
tenure  conditions  of  the  project  areas  right  at the  beginning  of PSAC  implementation  and 
before any investment is made at community level. This will also involve the screening, and 
preliminary stakeholder identification. 
Identification of Decision-Making Institutions and Representatives 
The key institutional actors involved with issues of resettlement, property and land rights, 
access to resources, etc, are the local government departments both at National level and 
District  level.  The  implementing  agency  will  be  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal 
Resources (MINAGRI) through NAEB. There will be several key implementing Ministries that 
will be involved in the FPIC process. 
Consultations leading to FPIC 
Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of key 
decision-making  institutions,  consultations  will  be  held  with  the  sub-project  communities 
during programme implementation – when site specific ESMPs and designs are being updated 
or prepared, as the case may be. Consultations will be conducted by the NAEB Environmental 
and Social Specialist, or by an independent facilitator/advisor hired by NAEB. 
As part of the engagements in preparing the PSAC Project, several missions and consultations 
were undertaken, including the project design mission conducted in May 2022. 
Formalising the Consent Agreement 
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPCI agreement are identified, this will be 
formalised  in  a  written  form  in  English  as  well  as  in  Kinyarwanda.  The  effective  time  the 
consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed upon during the consultation process 
and needs to be formalised before any investment is made. 
The consent agreement will be prepared by the NAEB District Teams. The format for a consent 
agreement would, among others, include: 
•  Project activities on which consent is provided 
•  Respective expectations 
•  Proposed project duration, expected results and activities 
•  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures 
• 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms 
•  Terms of withdrawal of consent 
•  Record  of process  through  means  and  languages  accessible  to  all  stakeholders  and 
parties involved. 
Capacity Support 
The successful implementation of the PSAC FPIC programme activities will require that the 
stakeholders and the implementing partners be on the same page. Thus, a series of training 
workshops  to  sensitise  both  parties  so  that  they  will  be  able  to  make  informed  decisions 
through  the  FPIC  process  has  been  proposed.  The  regular  short  and  tailor-made  training 
courses  and  seminars  that  will  be  offered  to  reinforce  the  capacity  and  skills  of  the 
stakeholders and farmers during the entire project period include the following: 
•  Training  of  implementing  partners  on  background  of  project:  -Environmental  and 
Social Risks and Impacts of PSAC 
•  Training  of  Extension  staff  on  background  of  project:  -  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact Assessment of the Projects. 
•  Cascading  training  to  lower  levels  on  background  of  project:  -  Environmental  and 
Social Impact Assessment of the Projects: 
•  Training of Stakeholder on Gender, HIV/AIDS awareness 
•  Training of Stakeholder on land issues: Land Tenure and rights 
Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
Land  and  livelihood  issues  can  easily  generate  grievances  and  complaints,  which  include 
objections to use of someone’s land, encroachment on private land, theft of properties within 
the  land,  harassment  of  women,  marginalization  in  distribution  of  material  assistance, 
dissatisfaction with amount of compensation and dissatisfaction with size and nature of land 
replacement. 
Such  grievances  are  likely  to  crop  up  in  one  way  or  another  in  the  implementation  of  the 
agricultural  activities  to  be  funded  PSAC  and  to  take  care  of  these,  a  grievance  redress 
mechanism (GRM) has been proposed. The project affected people will be sensitised to make 
use of the GRM. The process of grievance redress mechanisms will involve informal courts 
handled by traditional leaders (village headmen, Chiefs). In some cases, there may be need 
for involvement of the District Commissioner and the formal courts within the judiciary. 
FPIC Implementation Arrangements 
A description of the arrangement, responsibilities and mechanisms for seeking FPIC, has been 
outlined. The lead implementing agency for the project is MINAGRI, with the assistance of 
NAEB. NAEB will be tasked with day-to-day coordination, planning and management of select 
project  activities,  Whilst  the  overall  steering  of  the  project  will  be  done  by  a  Steering 
Committee. 
NAEB will spearhead the implementation of the FPIC process and will be assisted by several 
key implementation ministries who have staff down to district level.  NAEB staff with their 
District teams comprised of the staff from the key implementing partners will be capacitated 
by undergoing scheduled training. The target beneficiaries will similarly be capacitated. All 
the  training  will  be  conducted  by  designated  Ministries  or  private  consultants.  Once 
capacitated the teams will start the consultation processes leading to FPIC. This process will 
also be assisted with private consultants. 
Funding For the FPIC Process 
The  estimated  cost  for  the  implementation  of  the  FPIC  process,  which  covers  land  tenure 
assessments, identification of stakeholders, capacitating both the implementing partners and 
the beneficiaries, and monitoring the FPIC implementation is USD 258,000.00. 
1. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT 
1.0      PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The Government of Rwanda is in the process of preparing the “Promoting Smallholder Agro-
export Competitiveness Project (PSAC), with the assistance from IFAD. PSAC will support the 
inclusion  of  rural  poor  in  targeted  export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-
resilient productive capacity and market access.  
The PSAC Project Development Objective. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “To support the inclusion of rural poor in targeted 
export-driven  value  chains,  by  increasing  their  climate-resilient  productive  capacity  and 
market access”. 
Geographical targeting.  
The  project  will  target  a  total  of  fourteen  (14)  districts  distributed  across  Rwanda,  with  a 
particular emphasis on the Western and Southern regions, that are also including some of the 
most vulnerable rural populations (Figure 1-3). These will be: Nyamasheke, Rutsiro, Karongi, 
Nyabihu and Rusizi in Western Province; Huye, Nyaruguru, Nyamagabe, Ruhango and Nyanza 
in  Southern  Province;  Rulindo  and  Musanze  in  Northern  Province  and  Rwamagana  and 
Bugesera in Eastern Province. In addition to these, Kayonza district will be targeted solely for 
the purpose of conducting trials on new improved essential oils varieties. 
Figure 1-1      Area of Intervention 
1.2      PROJECT STRUCTURE  
PSAC  has  three  components:  The  first  two  (technical  components)  will  generate  varying 
effects to different components of the environment and the society at large. 
1.2.1    Component 1: 
Investments  to  enhance  climate  smart  production  and  productivity  of  selected  export-
driven value chains  
This  component  will  support  the  intensification  and  improve  the  competitiveness  of  the 
production levels of the selected export-driven value chains through targeted investments 
along two sets of interventions: 
•  Sub-component 1.1 – Support smallholder farmers’ production and productivity.  
•  Sub-component 1.2 - Improvement of rural infrastructure facilities.  
1.2.2    Component 2: 
Enabling business environment along selected export-driven value chains) 
This component will enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the targeted VCs by 
improving  smallholder  value  chain  actors’  access  to  advisory  services,  sustainable  markets 
and financial services through various components of the following sub-components: 
•  Sub-component 2.1 – Capacity building of Producer Organizations.  
o  Quality control and market-driven certification. 
o  Backward and forward market linkages. 
o  Enhanced access to financial services. 
1.2.3    Component 3: 
Policy support and coordination  
This component will support policy and coordination through the following activities: 
•  Policy dialogue  
•  Enabling rural finance environment.  
•  Other issues affecting PSAC export-driven value chains.  
•  Specific support to value chain platforms: In this area PSAC intends to:  
1.2.4    Impacting Activities 
The  critical  components  for  environmental  related  negative  impacts  are  derived  from  the 
PSAC activities that will require development, construction, and operation of infrastructure 
such as:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
rehabilitation and or establishment of tea, coffee and horticulture plantations, 
irrigation schemes infrastructure installations, 
agro-processing and storage facilities construction and operations, 
operations of washing stations, 
rural roads’ rehabilitation, and  
use of agrochemicals; fertilisers, herbicides, pesticides, etc 
The  potential  environmental,  social  and  climatic  risks  emanating  from  these  activities  will 
include  deforestation;  land  degradation;  inappropriate  use  of  agrochemicals  leading  to 
pollution; conflicts; gender-based violence; child labour and social unrests.  
These activities may cause pollution of environmental media such as water, soil, etc, and pose 
occupational health hazard, water use conflicts, conversion and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources during construction of infrastructures etc. Most of the impacts will be localized to 
the project site, short term and most importantly can be avoided/reduced or mitigated by 
properly applying mitigation measures. 
The establishment of new tea or coffee plantations, coffee washing stations, tea processing 
plants etc may cut-off some of the villagers from using certain resources which they were 
used to, and they may not have easy access to communal resources such as:  
•  blocking of some foot paths causing people to take longer routes. 
•  Blocking  other  community  members  from  using  the  areas  taken  over  by  the 
plantations. 
•  Blocking of others from accessing resources, medicinal plants, etc. 
•  Loss of assets or access to assets. 
• 
•  Loss of income sources, and or means of livelihood 
interfere with the normal access to assets like grazing or hunting grounds 
1.3      WHEN IS FPIC REQUIRED? 
The following chart provides guidance to establish under what circumstances FPIC is required. 
Table 1-1      When is FPIC required? 
Source: IFAD SECAP 2014 
The PSAC is not likely going to cause any resettlement but may cause a shift in the livelihoods 
of the small-scale farmers. Land rights and user rights are key elements as regards the need 
for FPIC, and since they are an important issue in PSAC this has triggered the requirement for 
an FPIC implementation plan. 
2. 
THE SCREENING PROCESS 
2.1       IDENTIFYING STAKEHOLDERS. 
To develop an effective FPIC process, it is necessary to determine who the stakeholders are 
and  understand  their  needs  and  expectations  for  engagement,  and  their  priorities  and 
objectives in relation to the Project. This information is then used to tailor engagement to 
each  type  of  stakeholder.  As  part  of  this  process,  it  is  particularly  important  to  identify 
individuals and groups who may find it more difficult to participate and those who may be 
differentially or disproportionately affected by the project because of their marginalised or 
vulnerable status. 
Stakeholders for the purpose of this project have been and will continue to be identified on a 
continuous  basis  by  identifying  those  people  and  institutions  that  have  an  interest  in  the 
successful  planning  and  execution  of  the  project  including  special  interest  groups.  These 
include those:  
• 
• 
• 
Project Implementing Agencies (funding agencies, executing agencies, partners) 
Directly and/or indirectly project-affected people (PAPs) and  
Interested  parties  (Social  and  labour  regulatory  authorities,  Contractors,  Media 
society, and Civil Society etc) 
2.2      KEY STAKEHOLDERS 
Stakeholders of this project shall be defined as all those people and institutions that have an 
interest in the successful planning and execution of the project. This includes those likely to 
be positively and negatively affected by the project.: 
The key stakeholders to be continuously engaged could include: 
1.  Rwanda Government Departments: 
•  MINALOC, Ministry of Local Government 
•  RAB, Rwanda Agriculture Board 
•  MINAFFET, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation 
•  MIGEPROF,  
•  BDF, Business Development Fund 
•  Rwanda Standards Board (RSB),  
•  Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), and  
•  HCoE.  
2.  Other Stakeholders 
•  Rural Entrepreneurs Tea and coffee 
•  Farmers Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations  
•  Service Providers  
•  BRD, Rwanda Development Bank  
•  Farmers/farmers groups or Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations, 
•  Women and Youth Councils /Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations  
The list above is not exhaustive. As the Programme gets underway, the NAEB will develop a 
detailed PCP identifying all possible stakeholders, their specific information needs and the 
appropriate modes of consultation as well as feedback mechanisms. 
2.3     SOCIO-CULTURAL AND LAND ASSESSMENTS. 
The sociocultural and land tenure aspects in the project areas are very important in making 
decisions and follow up actions regard PSAC. It will thus be essential to carry out assessments 
on the sociocultural and land tenure conditions of the project areas as a priority activity by 
the  beginning  of  PSAC  implementation  and  before  any  investment  is  made  at  community 
level. The socio-cultural and land tenure assessments will establish: 
•  The  community  stakeholders,  landowners  and  users  in  the  sub-project  areas  who 
might be affected and who can gain more rights through careful  sub-project design 
based on the FPIC process, and who have the right to give or withhold consent. 
•  Customary  laws,  informal  rules  and  organizing  practices,  and  claims  on  land 
ownership, occupation and use. 
•  Types of livelihoods and resources communities depend upon. 
•  Land  use  mapping  indicating  existing  land  use  and  land  use  as  proposed  by  the 
communities to accommodate the project. 
Institutions, governance systems and decision-making roles. 
• 
•  Existing dimensions of traditional leadership (roles and status) and traditional mutual 
support and solidarity/reciprocity mechanisms etc. 
•  Social, economic, cultural and spiritual relations with lands and, 
•  Possible consequences for local communities resulting from the change on the status 
of land, and resources emerging from the proposed sub-projects. 
Participatory mapping can be a useful tool in the preparation of the socio-cultural and land 
tenure assessment.  
3. 
PARTICIPATION, CONSULTATION AND FPIC PROCESSES 
3.0      INTRODUCTION 
The  purpose  of  the  present  FPIC  Implementation  Plan  is,  among  others,  to  provide 
information on how the FPIC Process will be conducted throughout the course of the project 
and which methods will be used as part of the process; as well as to outline the responsibilities 
of MINAGRI AND NAEB. 
3.1      IDENTIFICATION OF DECISION-MAKING INSTITUTIONS AND REPRESENTATIVES 
The key institutional actors involved with issues of resettlement, property and land rights, 
access to resources, etc, are the local government departments both at National level and 
District level. The implementing agency will be the MINAGRI through the NAEB.  
NAEB’s  Environmental  and  Social  Specialists  will  work  very  closely  with  the  Rwanda 
Environmental  Management  Authority  (REMA),  Local  Government  officials  and  District 
Council  Officials  to  facilitate  consultations  leading  to  FPIC  with  concerned  communities 
/project affected persons (PAPs).  
The  practical  timing  for  identifying  decision-making  institutions  and  representatives  at 
community  level  would  be  at  the  beginning  of  PSAC  implementation,  during  preliminary 
consultations  with  the  communities  undertaken  for  the  site  specific  ESMPs  for  newly 
proposed sub-projects as well as during the preparation of any ESIA studies or can be done in 
tandem with the socio-cultural and land tenure assessment.  
3.2      CONSULTATIONS LEADING TO FPIC 
Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of  key 
decision-making institutions, consultations will be held with the sub-project communities and 
plantations Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations during programme implementation – 
when site specific ESMPs and designs are being updated or prepared, as  the case may be. 
Consultations will be conducted by the  PSAC Environmental and Social Specialist, or by an 
independent facilitator/advisor hired by NAEB. 
The use of participatory mapping will be instrumental for the consultation process leading to 
FPIC.  This  is  because  of  the  advantages  of  participatory  mapping  and  accompanying 
participatory enquiry techniques which allow the assessment of ownership, occupation and 
use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (e.g., movements and relationships 
among the different social groups) and right holders.  
Given that the sub-projects are initiated by the communities and proposed to the NAEB the 
consultations will:  
• 
• 
Confirm that the sub-project is a community-driven initiative. 
Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  the  proposed  sub-project  with  the 
communities/Cooperatives  /Cooperatives  /Associations  directly  or  through  their 
representatives (existing or elected by the communities in the process). 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
inform 
the  Cooperatives  /Cooperatives  /Associations/communities' 
Clearly 
representatives  on  the  actors  financing  and  implementing  the  project  and  their 
respective responsibilities. 
Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project. 
Share the findings of the socio-cultural, land tenure and environmental assessment 
and reality check/confirmation of findings. 
Engage  selected  Association/community  members  or  their  representatives  in  the 
resources and social mapping activities, in order to assess ownership, occupation and 
use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (relationships among the 
different social groups). 
Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  the  mapping  exercise  with  the  Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives /Associations/communities. 
inclusive  participation  -  men,  women,  young  people,  the  elderly, 
Ensure 
land  and 
representatives  of  different  communities  present  on  the  same 
neighbouring villages - and provide for multiple maps by the different Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives /Associations/communities. 
Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and, 
Formalise ownership of the land use maps by the communities that have developed 
them. 
It is important that: 
•  Where  there  is  universal  consent  to  the  proposed  sub-project,  Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives /Associations/communities’ consent is formalized through a consent 
agreement  between  the  Cooperatives  /Cooperatives  /Associations/communities 
and the PSAC. The consent agreement will be the outcome of the collective decision-
making process by the local Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations/communities. 
The process will be adequately documented. 
• 
/Associations/communities 
•  Where  there  are  doubts  on  consent,  or  where  concerns  are  raised  during 
consultations,  these  doubts  and  concerns  are  documented,  and  the  Cooperatives 
/Cooperatives 
propose 
means/solutions to overcome concerns. 
Feedback  is  provided  to  the  sub-project  design  team  and  project  staff  on 
concerns/doubts 
/Cooperatives 
raised 
/Associations/communities. 
Feedback is provided to the Cooperatives /Cooperatives /Associations/communities 
on how their concerns have been accommodated in the sub-project design. 
Cooperatives 
requested 
the 
are 
by 
to 
• 
The usual practice for  IFAD-funded projects is to use independent, qualified1 facilitators to 
support the FPIC process. Where NAEB teams are not familiar with consultations leading to 
FPIC, the facilitator will have a double role, in facilitating the process and building capacity, 
while applying relevant provisions, hence supporting the local and national governments to 
fulfil the requirements of internal and external policies. If the right people to facilitate these 
1  Minimum  requirement  for  the  facilitator  is  rights  sensitivity  and  knowledge  of  the  cultural  context  they  will  operate, 
together  with  technical  knowledge  of  the  issues  under  consideration.  The  facilitator  must  be  neutral,  trustworthy  and 
mutually accountable to IFAD, the borrower government and the community. 
exercises  are  selected,  they  can  play  a  role  as  facilitators  and  at  the  same  time  build  the 
capacities  of  project  staff,  as  well  as  of  communities.  Communities’  representatives  who 
participate in the mapping should be identified by the communities as their representatives 
in the FPIC process. 
3.3      ONGOING STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 
3.3.1    On-going Stakeholder Engagement 
A  variety  of  engagement  techniques  were  used  to  build  relationships  with  stakeholders, 
gather  information  from  stakeholders,  consult  with  stakeholders,  and  disseminate  project 
information to stakeholders. This engagement process will provide a framework for achieving 
effective stakeholder involvement and promoting greater awareness and understanding of 
issues so that the project is carried out effectively. 
For the proposed PSAC, the public consultations with the local communities, and all other 
interested/affected parties were conducted as part of the PDR development process. These 
consultations  were  aimed  at  briefing  the  communities  and  other  stakeholders  about  the 
project activities, how the activities will be carried out and what sectors of the environment 
are likely to be impacted. The public consultations were done in a participatory manner to 
encourage the communities to contribute to the screening process. 
Throughout  the  project  life,  the  engagement  techniques  that  will  be  used  will  take  into 
consideration  the  cultural  appropriateness  and  the  purpose  for  engaging  with  the 
stakeholders. Thus prior to any engagement event the following actions will occur: 
• 
• 
• 
Selection of individual stakeholders with whom engagement will occur, 
Selection of methods for disclosure of information (including such topics as format, 
language, and timing), 
Selection of location and timing for engagement event(s) (avoiding busy work times, 
which may be seasonal, and days/times when special events may be occurring), 
•  Agreeing on mechanisms for ensuring stakeholder attendance at engagement 
event(s) (if required), 
Identification and implementation of feedback mechanisms to be employed. 
• 
3.4      CONSIDERATIONS FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
The following considerations were made and should be carried out throughout the project 
life: 
3.4.1    Resourcing Stakeholder Engagement: 
FPIC  Consultations  require  resources  as  they  take  time  to  develop  and  build  trust-based 
relationships with stakeholders. Relationships with stakeholders should develop, grow, and 
be  sustained.  This  becomes  a  continuous  process  as  additional  stakeholders  might  be 
identified that will also need to be engaged.  
This was done through initial outreach meetings with various stakeholders to, among other 
things, introduce the project, educate some stakeholders about the concept of engagement 
itself, as well as on the complex issues requiring specialised and technical knowledge. 
3.4.2    Managing expectations: 
Stakeholders can have unrealistically high expectations of benefits that may accrue to them 
from  a  project  and  as  such  NAEB  must  be  clear  on  what  the  PSAC  can  and  cannot  do, 
establishing  a  clear  understanding  of  their  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  engagement 
processes  at  PDR  stage  enabled  the  project  team  to  develop  these  relationships  with 
stakeholders and potential project partners.  
3.4.3    Securing stakeholder participation: 
Cultural  norms  and  values  can  prevent  stakeholders  from  freely  participating  in  meetings. 
Often there are conflicting demands within project beneficiaries, and it can be challenging for 
a project to identify stakeholders who are representative of common interests. The design 
team  took  advantage  of  the  presence  of  local  officers  who  were  sensitive  to  local  power 
dynamics. 
3.5      PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE 
Information and data that will be shared will be information about the project description 
that will include among many other issues, the project background, the theory of change and 
the summarized presentation of each of the project components and subcomponents. The 
selection of project beneficiaries will also be outlined.  
The information will largely be shared at the early stages of the project. This will be presented 
in a document format, distributed to the district offices who will present it to lower levels, 
i.e.,  the  beneficiaries.  The  documents  will  also  be  published  in  the  Government  of 
Rwanda/MINAGRI  website  as  well  as  the  NAEB  website.  There  will  also  be  public 
presentations  and  discussions  over  scheduled  radio  and  television  platforms.  Ministry 
Officials responsible for implementation, management and coordination of project activities 
will make presentations about the project as well as the progress update while engaging with 
the public and responding to arising questions, concerns and comments. 
The  MINAGRI/NAEB  will  also  use  the  following  platforms  to  reach  more  stakeholders  and 
widen ease of access to information: 
•  Media briefing 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Website, social media. 
Newspapers, posters, radio, television, 
Information centres and exhibitions or other visual displays, 
Brochures, leaflets, posters, nontechnical summary documents and reports, 
Official correspondence, meetings, 
The strategy will also include means to consult with project-affected stakeholders if there are 
significant changes to the project resulting in additional risks and impacts. The most critical 
aspect of the strategy is leveraging on village level leadership engagement, coordination with 
the District Administrator’s Offices, project affected people and NAEB. 
3.6      PROPOSED STRATEGY FOR CONSULTATION 
MINAGRI/NAEB have earlier identified groups of stakeholders under  in the tea, coffee and 
horticulture  sectors.  These  include  members  of  the  community  governance  structures, 
District  Administration  Structures,  Ministry  Officials,  tea,  coffee  and  horticulture  Farmer 
groups/Cooperatives  /Associations,  tea,  coffee  and  horticulture  value  chain  players  which 
include  MSMEs 
inputs  suppliers,  the  market 
brokers/agents,  and  the  general  public.  NAEB  will  be  responsible  for  coordination  of  all 
project events and will keep a schedule of implementation of all outreach activities and will 
report on progress. 
in  coffee/tea  production 
Industry, 
The identified stakeholder groups will be engaged using various platforms including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Interviews  
Surveys, polls, and questionnaires for beneficiary feedback  
Public meetings, workshops, and/or focus groups on specific topic. 
Participatory methods 
Other  traditional  and  non-traditional  mechanisms  for  consultation  and  decision 
making. 
Table 3-1      Stakeholder engagement techniques 
ENGAGEMENT 
TECHNIQUE 
Correspondences (Phone, 
Emails) 
One-on-one meetings 
Formal meetings 
Public 
(following 
guidelines)  
meetings 
COVID-19 
Focus group meetings 
Project website 
Project leaflet 
Surveys 
Workshops/Webinars  
APPROPRIATE APPLICATION OF THE TECHNIQUE 
•  Distribute 
information 
to  Government  officials,  NGOs, 
Local  Government, 
and 
organisations/agencies 
Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up 
• 
•  Seeking views and opinions 
•  Enable stakeholder to speak freely about sensitive issues 
•  Build personal relationships 
•  Record meetings 
•  Present the Project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow group to comment – opinions and views 
•  Build impersonal relation with high level stakeholders 
•  Disseminate technical information 
•  Record discussions 
•  Present Project information to a large group of stakeholders, especially communities 
•  Allow the group to provide their views and opinions 
•  Build relationship with the communities, especially those impacted 
•  Distribute non-technical information 
•  Facilitate meetings with presentations, PowerPoint, posters etc. 
•  Record discussions, comments, questions. 
•  Present Project information to a group of stakeholders (8- 15 people groups) 
•  Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline information 
•  Build relationships with communities 
•  Record responses 
•  Present project information and progress updates 
•  Disclose SEP, GRM and other relevant project documentation 
•  Brief project information to provide regular update 
•  Site specific project information. 
•  Gathering opinions and views from individual stakeholders 
•  Gather baseline data 
•  Record data 
•  Develop a baseline database for monitoring impacts 
•  Present project information to a group of stakeholders 
•  Allow a group of stakeholders to provide their views and opinions 
•  Use participatory exercises to facilitate group discussions, brainstorm issues, analyse information, 
and develop recommendations and strategies 
•  Record responses 
3.7      FORMALISINGE THE CONSENT AGREEMENT 
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPIC agreement are identified, this will be 
formalised  in  a  written  form  in  English  as  well  as  in  Kinyarwanda.  The  effective  time  the 
consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed upon during the consultation process 
and needs to be formalised before any investment is made. 
The consent agreement will be prepared by the PSAC District Teams. The format for a consent 
agreement would, among others, include: 
•  Project activities on which consent is provided, 
•  Respective expectations, 
•  Proposed project duration, expected results and activities, 
•  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures, 
• 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms, 
•  Terms of withdrawal of consent, 
•  Record  of process  through  means  and  languages  accessible  to  all  stakeholders  and 
parties involved. 
The  FPIC  agreement  and  record  of  process  will  be  made  available  through  means  and 
languages that are accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved. 
3.8      DISCLOSURE 
The FPIC Implementation Plan will be disclosed together with the Programme Design Report 
(PDR),  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management  Framework  (ESCMF),  and  other 
documents to be submitted to the Executive Board (and Evaluation Committee). 
3.9      DOCUMENTING THE FPIC PROCESS 
FPIC  process  will  be  documented  through  minutes  of  consultations,  mapping  documents 
prepared  by  the  Cooperatives /Associations/communities,  videos  where  feasible,  and  FPIC 
agreements/formalisation documents. 
4. 
THE PSAC FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
4.1      PSAC FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
The following is a summary of the PSAC FPIC implementation Plan: 
Table 4-1      Summarised PSAC FPIC Implementation Plan  
No. 
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY 
RESPONSIBLE 
TIMEFRAME 
1.0 
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment: 
Identify:  
• 
Customary laws, informal rules and organizing practices 
on land ownership. 
Institutions and governance systems. 
Types of livelihoods. 
• 
• 
•  Mutual support and solidarity mechanisms. 
• 
Cooperatives /Associations/Community stakeholders, 
land users and assess who has the right to give or 
withhold the consent. 
District offices of the NAEB 
(who may hire consultants 
to carry out the sub-project 
specific socio-cultural/land 
tenure assessments. 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase.  
This could be part of 
the participatory 
mapping exercise. 
Assess:  
•  Consequences from the proposed project that may 
result in the change of the status of the lands, and 
resources 
2.0 
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Conduct preliminary consultations with the 
Cooperatives /Associations/community and explain the 
nature of the proposed project. 
Allow time for Cooperatives/Associations/communities 
to discuss and decide on their representatives for the 
consultation process leading to FPIC 
Clarify responsibilities of representatives  
Agree on the process leading to FPIC 
Identify signatory parties for the consent agreement. 
District offices of the NAEB, 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part 
of project implementation 
support, as required. 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase 
(this could be done in 
tandem with the socio-
cultural and land 
tenure assessment and 
mapping exercise)  
3.0 
Capacitate the implementors and the stakeholders 
Conduct various capacity building workshops for both the 
implementing partners and the stakeholders so that they 
are all on the same page and will make informed decisions 
(See Section 5 for Details): 
•  Training  of  implementing  partners  on  background  of 
project:  Environmental  and  Social  Risks  and  Impacts  of 
PSAC. 
•  Training  of  Extension  staff  on  background  of  project: 
Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  of  the 
Projects: 
•  MINAGRI 
•  National Aids Council 
(NAC) 
•  Ministry of 
Environment 
•  Private Consultant 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
before individual sub-
projects start begins 
and throughout the 
project cycle 
• 
•  Cascading  training  to  lower  levels  on  background  of 
project: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of 
the Projects: 
Training  of  Stakeholder  on  Gender,  HIV/AIDS 
awareness:  
Training of Stakeholder on land issues: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Land Tenure and rights 
Land rights 
Use of land 
Pollution and degradation. 
• 
No. 
DESCRIPTION/ACTIVITY 
RESPONSIBLE 
TIMEFRAME 
4.0 
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific component/activities 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Share objective and scope of the project with the 
representatives identified by the communities and 
identify project component(s) requiring FPIC. 
Inform them on the actors financing and implementing 
the project and their respective responsibilities. 
Provide clear and transparent information on the 
benefits and risks of the project. 
Share the findings of the sociocultural, land tenure and 
environmental assessment 
Formalize consent agreement. 
5.0 
Formalize the consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement (written or in other form if 
so, requested by the community) 
The format for a consent agreement would include: 
• 
• 
Respective expectations  
Proposed project duration, expected results and 
activities 
Participatory monitoring and verification plan and 
procedures  
Identification of grievances procedures and 
mechanisms  
Terms of withdrawal of consent  
• 
• 
• 
District offices of the NAEB 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part 
of project implementation 
support, as required. 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase 
and before individual 
sub-projects start. 
District offices of the NAEB 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part 
of project implementation 
support, as required. 
Programme 
implementation phase. 
Timing agreed upon 
during the consultation 
process and before 
individual sub-projects 
starts. 
Record the process through means and languages accessible 
to all stakeholders and parties involved 
Annex the FPIC agreement and documented process to the 
PDR. 
6.0 
FPIC implementation 
Implement the FPIC agreements throughout the project life.  
MINAGRI, NAEB, IFAD 
implementation support 
and joint supervision 
missions 
7.0  Monitoring the FPIC implementation 
Assess FPIC implementation as part of the M&E exercise 
during the project life.  
Appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards 
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and 
linked with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement 
MINAGRI, NAEB, IFAD 
implementation support 
and joint supervision 
missions 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
before individual sub-
projects start begins 
and throughout the 
project cycle 
Programme 
implementation phase - 
before individual sub-
projects start begins 
and throughout the 
project cycle 
5. 
CAPACITY SUPPORT 
5.1     TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 
The Successful implementation of the PSAC FPIC programme activities will require that the 
stakeholders and the implementing partners are on the same page. This entails a series of 
training  workshops  to  sensitise  both  parties  so  that  they  will  be  able  to  make  informed 
decisions through the FPIC process. The following (Table 5-1) is an outline of the regular short 
and tailor-made training courses and seminars that will be offered to reinforce the capacity 
and skills of the stakeholders and farmers during the entire project period:  
Table 5-1      Capacity Building for FPIC Implementation. 
TRAINING ACTIVITY 
TARGET GROUP / 
TRAINER 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
COST ESTIMATES 
•  4 Ministries,  
•  REMA,  
•  NAEB coordinator and 
•  30 high level decision 
makers, managers, 
coordinators trained 
(Two  sessions  during 
the 
project 
period) 
entire 
No. 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Training of implementing partners on 
background of project: 
Environmental  and  Social  Risks  and 
Impacts of PSAC. 
- 
PSAC and linkage to SECAP 
policies. 
Typical issues. 
- 
-  Mitigation requirements. 
-  Management plans. 
-  Monitoring requirements. 
-  Management review. 
- 
Budgeting for E&S risk 
management. 
staff  on 
Training  of  Extension 
background of project: 
Environmental  and  Social 
Assessment of the Projects: 
- 
Screening process. 
-  Use of checklists. 
- 
- 
- 
Preparation of terms of reference. 
Identification of Impacts. 
ESIA report preparation and 
processing. 
Policies and laws in Rwanda. 
IFAD safeguard policies. 
- 
- 
Cascading  training  to  lower  levels  on 
background of project: 
Environmental  and  Social 
Assessment of the Projects: 
- 
Screening process. 
-  Use of checklists. 
- 
- 
- 
Preparation of terms of reference. 
Identification of Impacts. 
ESIA report preparation and 
processing. 
Policies and laws in Rwanda. 
IFAD SECAP policies. 
Impact 
- 
- 
management 
•  Sub-project 
management 
•  Other collaborating 
institutions. 
TRAINER: 
  REMA  OR 
PRIVATE 
CONSULTANT 
•  District Agriculture 
Office Team. 
Impact 
•  District Environment 
Units. 
•  Extension workers in 
project impact areas. 
TRAINER: 
  REMA  OR 
PRIVATE 
CONSULTANT 
o  Tea 
and 
Coffee 
Horticulture Farmers/ 
and 
Coffee 
o  Tea 
Horticulture 
Cooperatives/Associat
ion members 
o  Farmers 
TRAINER:  REMA 
$  9,000.00  one  session 
during the entire project 
period) 
Length: 1 day 
Total cost: $ 18,000.00 
(Three  sessions  during 
the 
project 
period) 
entire 
Length:  5  days  per 
session 
Total cost: $ 30,000.00 
•  10 members of 
District Forestry 
Office Team are 
trained. 
•  10 District 
Environment Units 
members are trained. 
•  10 Extension workers 
in project impact 
areas trained. 
•  30 members Tea 
Coffee and 
Horticulture Farmers 
committee 
•  30 Tea Coffee and 
Horticulture 
Cooperative/Associat
ion members 
•  10 Farmers  
(Four  sessions  during 
project 
the 
period) 
entire 
Venue: In project areas  
Length:  5  days  per 
session 
Total cost:  $20,000.00 
No. 
4.0 
TRAINING ACTIVITY 
TARGET GROUP / 
TRAINER 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
COST ESTIMATES 
Training  of  Stakeholder  on  Gender, 
HIV/AIDS awareness:  
• 
Impacts of HIV/AIDS on social 
wellbeing, livelihood, and projects 
•  Extension workers in 
project impact areas 
•  Cooperative 
members/Farmers. 
•  10 Extension workers 
in project impact 
areas trained: 
o  30  Tea  Coffee  and 
USE 
NAC 
TO 
RESOURCES 
 (Two  sessions  during 
entire project period) 
Venue:  
Length: 5 days 
15,000.00 
(Three  sessions  for  the 
entire project period) 
Venue: Farms 
Horticulture 
Farmers/ 
o  30 Tea Coffee and 
Horticulture 
Cooperative/Associ
ation members 
•  10 members of sub-
projects Procurement 
Committees Trained 
•  10 Extension Workers 
•  30 Cooperative 
members/Farmers 
trained  
Length:  5  days  per 
session 
Total cost:  $30,000.00 
•  Mitigation measures 
•  Care of victims 
5.0 
Training of Stakeholder on land issues: 
•  Land Tenure and rights: 
o  Land Act 
o  Land rights 
o  Women and land 
o  Communal lands, grazing areas 
and rangelands 
•  For  Agricultural 
activities 
- 
Pesticide Management 
Pesticide Types and Use 
Packaging, labelling, and Handling 
Storage, Stacking and Release 
Pesticides Record Maintenance 
- 
- 
- 
- 
•  Pesticides 
Disposal  
o  Types and Handling of 
Application 
and 
TRAINER:    National  Aids 
Council,  
•  Storekeepers 
•  Pesticide Transporters 
•  Pesticide Users 
•  Agro dealers 
•  All Farmers 
•  Trial Farm 
Management 
Committee 
•  Agro facilities, e.g., 
warehouses, etc. 
TRAINER: 
  MINAGRI, 
Local 
Ministry 
of 
Government. 
Equipment 
o  Pesticides Toxicity 
o  Safety of Applicators (OSHA) 
o  First Aid 
o  Care, Cleaning and Disposal of 
Pesticides and Equipment 
•  Agro-facility Management: 
o  disposal of wastes,  
o  biosafety,  
o  security,  
o  emergency response. 
6.0 
TOTAL ESTIMATED BUDGET 
113,000.00  
5.2     PROPOSED APPROACH IN EXECUTING THE CAPACITY BUILDING 
PSAC will adopt a strategy of running workshops and refresher courses to disseminate the 
SECAP FPIC related studies and reports. It will also use the training of trainers and community 
exchange visits approach. 
It will be important that key decision makers, the NAEB coordinator and management staff 
and other high-level persons are sensitized in the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts  due  to  the  proposed  PSAC  activities.  This  training  may  be  conducted  by  a  private 
consultant or by the EIA Department of REMA.  
5.3      FUNDING REQUIREMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL TRAINING 
The proposed FPIC related training activities for the programme will be funded directly by the 
programme resources in accordance with the proposed plan laid out in Table 5-1 above.  
6. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
6.1      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISMS ON LAND ISSUES 
In  an  agricultural  project  like  PSAC  the  potential  complaints  and  grievances  that  can  be 
generated by the project include objections to the use of someone’s land, encroachment on 
private land, theft of properties within the land, harassment of women, marginalization in 
distribution  of  material  assistance,  dissatisfaction  with  the  amount  of  compensation  and 
dissatisfaction with size and nature of land replacement. 
Such  complaints  and  grievances  are  likely  to  crop  up  in  one  way  or  another  in  the 
implementation of the agricultural activities to be funded from PSAC. It should be pointed out 
that  since  the  implementation  of  the  agricultural  activities  will  be  community  based, 
negotiation and agreement by consensus will provide the first avenue to iron out and resolve 
any grievances expressed by the individuals, the landowners or households whose land and 
properties  might  be  affected.  The  communities  will  ensure  that  resettlement  related 
grievances should be addressed during the identification and appraisal of sites.  
In this context, proper channels of grievance redress mechanisms will be put in place, and the 
project affected people sensitised to make use of them. Normally, the channels have to be in 
line with norms of the communities as well as laws of the country.  
IFAD’s  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  allows  affected  complainants  to  have  their  concerns 
resolved in a fair and timely manner through an independent process. IFAD’s GRM requires i) 
working  proactively  with  the  affected  parties  to  resolve  complaints;  ii)  ensuring  that  the 
complaints procedure is responsive and operates effectively; and iii) maintaining records of 
all complaints and their resolutions.  
The principles of a good GRM are2:  
•  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities.  
•  Designed  to  take  into  account  culturally  appropriate  ways  of  handling  community 
concerns.  
•  A  clear  and  understandable  mechanism  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
affected communities at no cost.  
•  Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders. 
•  A  mechanism  that  prevents  retribution  and  does  not  impede  access  to  other 
remedies. 
The key steps for grievance management are3:  
i.  Publicising grievance management procedures so that the mechanism is accessible 
to everyone.  
ii.  Receiving (i.e., collecting, recording, and registering) and keeping track of grievances.  
2 IFC (2009); Good Practice Note – Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities, Guidance for 
Projects and Companies on Designing Grievance Mechanisms  
3 ibid  
iii.  Reviewing  and  investigating  grievances  to  assess  the  nature  of  the  grievance,  its 
severity and legitimacy.  
iv.  Developing  resolution  options  commensurate  with  the  nature  of  grievances  and 
preparing  and  communicating  a  clear  response  and  closing  out  cases  when 
agreement with the complainants is reached. 
v.  Monitoring  grievances  through  tracking  to  ascertain  effectiveness,  adapting  the 
mechanism to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and 
lessons learned. 
6.2      GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR PSAC 
Common  disputes  and  disagreements  may  be  related  to  land  property  boundaries, 
destruction of land resources following valuation processes including standing crops, amount 
of monies to be compensated and delay in disbursement of agreed compensation.  
Mostly PSAC interventions will be delivered to community beneficiaries through cooperatives, 
who  manage  grievances  and  conflicts  through  internal  committees.  The communities have 
confidence in these cooperative grievance redress mechanisms. Once an aggrieved person is 
not satisfied at any level, there is room for escalating the grievance to higher levels. 
Figure 6-1 depicts the pathways the grievance redress process may follow. It may follow either 
the Abunzi system if the aggrieved party is not a member of the cooperative concerned, or it 
would- follow the resolution mechanism typically used by the cooperatives as stipulated in 
the provisions of Law N° 48/2013 of 28/06/2013 establishing the Rwanda Cooperative Agency 
(RCA). 
Figure 6-1      Grievance Redress Mechanism for PSAC. 
The  RCA  requires  that  cooperatives  request  arbitration  on  unresolved  grievances 
registered  by  their  members.  RCA  evokes  its  grievance  redress  mechanism,  failure  at 
which the grievance is escalated to the national court system. Aggrieved parties who are 
not members of a cooperative would register grievances in the Abunzi system or directly 
in the national courts, depending on the gravity of the grievance as defined by the law. 
This mechanism is also proposed at Project operation level as the GRM for resettlement 
requirements before Project commencement is provided for by law.  
6.2      OPERATION OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
The GRM consists of a small number of components: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The access point for impacted/concerned people 
Grievance log 
Acknowledgement stage 
Assessment stage 
Passing of resolution 
Response  
Room for appeal 
Case closure 
The components are summarized in the process flow diagram in Figure 6-2. 
6.2.1    The Process of the GRM 
i)       Receive, classify & log 
All  potential  issues  must  be  captured  and  classified  for  escalation,  review  and  action  as 
required. 
a)       Receiving the Grievance: 
The  access  points  will  be  as  close  to  the  users  as  possible.  An  easily  accessible  and  well 
publicized focal point or user-facing ‘help desk’ is the first step. This will be established at 
each sub-project, and PSAC Offices so that it will be seen as credible and accessible. The main 
issues for the access point include the following: 
•  Uptake channels should include some or all of the following: 
o 
phone hotline,  
o 
email,  
o  mail,  
o 
SMS,  
o  webpage,  
o 
or face-to-face. 
•  The  uptake  channels  will  be  publicized  and  advertised  via  local  media  and  the 
implementing agency.  
•  Verbal complaints should be recorded by staff for them to be considered.  
•  Many complaints may be resolved ‘on the spot’ and informally by the PSAC staff but 
should also be logged in order to (i) encourage responsiveness; and (ii) ensure that 
repeated or low-level grievances are being noted in the system.  
•  The GRM should have the ability to handle anonymous complaints. 
Typically, the complainant will be provided with a receipt and ‘roadmap’ telling him/her how 
the complaint process works and when to expect further information. 
3.2.1    Process Overview 
The following key steps must be followed for all complaints received by PSAC staff: 
Receive, 
classify& log 
Acknowledge 
Assess and Investigate 
Resolve & 
Confirm 
Respond to Complainant 
Appeal &Follow up 
QA & Close 
Figure 6-2      The GRM Process Overview. 
The requirements for each of these steps is detailed below 
b)       Logging and classifying: 
Any complaint, issue or negative stakeholder interaction (whether this is formally logged by 
the complainant or not), must be logged and classified for action. 
All of these complaints must be formally logged using the standard forms and all complaints 
must be prioritized as follows: 
•  Priority  1  –  urgent,  potential  high  health  and  high  business  impact.  This  requires  a 
response to the Complainant within three (3) working days.  
o  This should be used (sparingly) for major health issues where the complaint may have 
disastrous impacts on either human, the environment or PSAC itself. 
o  Also, this could be used in a situation where the complainant may be in a position to 
influence or make public statements that would impact upon the PSAC reputation. 
•  Priority 2, - non-urgent, lower health environmental and social impact. This requires a 
response to the complainant within 2 working weeks.  
o  This should be used for most complaints with individual stakeholders, as this allows a 
reasonable time to collect information and produce a balanced response. 
•  Discretion and flexibility should be exercised in prioritizing all complaints 
  The staff member logging the complaint should review the complaint and its priority 
with the Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager before proceeding to the next step.  
  The Sub-project/ PSAC Project Manager will decide on the appropriate person(s) to 
carry out subsequent steps, including the investigation. 
  All  Priority  1  complaints  must  be  escalated  immediately  to  the  PSAC  Project 
Manager. 
ii)      Acknowledge 
Ensure  that  every  complaint  receives  a  formal  written  acknowledgement,  containing  an 
expectation of when they will receive a response, and the person dealing with it. 
•  All complaints, regardless of priority, should receive a pro forma acknowledgement sent 
out 1st class mail on the day of receipt. 
iii)     Assess &Investigate 
Follow up all aspects of the complaint, both internal and external, to ensure that the key facts 
are identified and clarified. 
•  The priority of the complaint will drive the timescale for completion (3 days for urgent or 
2 weeks for non-urgent). 
•  All  areas  of  interaction  and  communication  should  be  established  (who,  what,  where, 
when, why, etc.) and documented where possible. 
iv)      Resolve & Confirm  
Ensure  that  the  final  resolution  is  clear  and  fair.  Also  confirm  the  proposed  action  and 
resolution with another senior person (PSAC Management). 
•  Ensure  that  the  proposed  resolution  meets  corporate  guidelines  and  does  not 
prejudice PSAC in any unnecessary legal or financial manner. 
•  Document the proposed action and discuss and agree with the PSAC Project Manager. 
•  Discuss and review the solution from both the corporate and complainant viewpoint 
to ensure fairness and clarity. 
•  The review should include recognition and documentation of any underlying issues 
that have contributed to the complaint and recommendations for actions to prevent 
further occurrence.  
•  This should then be reviewed as part of the bi-monthly quality assurance reviews. 
v)       Respond to Complainant  
Provide the Complainant with the resolution within the timescales promised. 
•  The  details  of  the  findings  and  proposed  resolution  should  be  clearly  explained  (in 
written  or  verbal  form  as  appropriate)  to  the  complainant-  within  the  agreed 
timescales. 
If this cannot be done on time the Complainant should be contacted by telephone to 
request further time. 
• 
vi)      Appeal & Follow 
Ensure that complaints are followed up to confirm that the complainants are satisfied with 
the response given. If not satisfied the Complainant is advised on the route for Appealing 
•  All Priority 1 complaints and 95% of priority 2 complaints must be followed up within 
a reasonable timescale. 
•  This will be carried out by PSAC Administration team / PSAC Project Manager’s office. 
•  The follow-up should identify the following  
Is the complainant satisfied with the response? 
o 
o  Did they feel that their complaint was properly and fairly handled? 
•  Any  negative  responses  to  these  questions  should  be  referred  to  PSAC  Project 
Managers for action and direct follow up with the complainant. 
•  The complainant is given room for appealing to the MINAGRI or Courts of Law, if he is 
not satisfied. 
vii)     QA & Close 
Ensure that the PSAC as a whole is aware of the complaints and any underlying issues. Plan 
actions to remove these and prevent future recurrence. 
•  All  complaints  should be  reviewed  monthly  as  part of  the  quality  assurance  review 
meetings. 
•  Any complaints where action can be taken to avoid recurrence must be acted upon 
and raised with the appropriate managers/teams across the PSAC. 
7. 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
7.1      POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
The  following  is  a  description of  arrangement  responsibilities  and  mechanisms for  seeking 
FPIC,  as  well  as  the  role  of  independent,  impartial  entities  to  monitor  the  the  FPIC 
implementation process.  
The lead implementing agency for the project is MINAGRI with the assistance of NAEB. NAEB 
will be tasked with the day-to-day coordination, planning and management of select project 
activities.  
Due to the multifaced nature of PSAC, a project steering committee (PSC) will be established 
and will contribute to the project oversight. 
The  NAEB  will  spearhead  the  implementation  of  the  FPIC  process  and  will  be  assisted  by 
several key implementation ministries who have staff down to district level. The structure of 
the implementation is outlined in figure 7-1 below. 
Figure 7-1      Implementation Arrangements for FPIC. 
NAEB  staff  with  their  District  teams  comprised  of  the  staff  from  the  key  implementing 
partners will be capacitated by undergoing training as explained in section 5 of this report. 
The  target  beneficiaries  will  similarly  be  capacitated.  All  the  training  will  be  conducted  by 
designated  Ministries  or  private  consultants.  Once  capacitated  the  teams  will  start  the 
consultation  processes  leading  to  FPIC.  This  process  will  also  be  assisted  with  private 
consultants. 
7.2      ASSESS FPIC IMPLEMENTATION. 
To assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards 
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the FPIC 
agreement.  Subsequent  workshops  and  stakeholders’  reviews  of  the  FPIC  plan  may  also 
amend  the  various  indicators  to  be  established  in  the  FPIC  agreement.  Joint  supervision 
missions assessing project progress will also assess the implementation of FPIC agreements 
on  a  regular  basis.  Whenever  possible,  supervision  and  evaluation  missions  would  include 
experts of relevance. 
8. 
BUDGET AND FINANCING 
The following is an itemized budget for undertaking the FPIC activities described in this report. 
Table 8-1      Estimated Budget for FPIC Implementation (US$) 
No. 
ACTIVITY 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment 
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives 
Capacitate the implementors and the stakeholders - Environmental and 
Social Training  
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific 
component/activities 
Formalize the consent agreement 
Assess FPIC implementation: - Monitoring and evaluation purposes 
(R&D, M&E, Field Visits) 
TOTAL (US $) 
ESTIMATE (US 
$) 
50,000.00 
- 
113,000.00 
50,000.00 
5,000.00 
40,000.00 
258,000.00 
